CERTAIN ADVERTISEMENTS FOR THE GOOD OF THE CHVRCH AND COMMONWEALTH, WELL
WORTHY THE SERIOVS consideration of the most Honorable High Court of
Parliament late assembled, and hereafter to be assembled again.

EZRA 7.23. Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, let it be diligently
done for the House of the God of Heaven: For why should there be wrath against
the Realm of the King, and his Sons?

PSALM 119.46. I will speak of thy Testimonies before Kings, and will not be
ashamed.

CERTAIN ADVERTISEMENTS FOR THE GOOD OF THE CHVRCH and Common wealth, well
worthy the serious consideration of the most Honorable High Court of
Parliament late assembled and hereafter to be assembled again.
James) I am the bolder to present these my few Observations following to your
most Honorable and Christian consideration, because his most excellent
Majesty in his late gracious Speech unto you in your Upper House on March the
six and twentieth last past, has plainly in Princely and Christian manner
testified, the public good of this his Kingdom to be so precious unto him,
that no private person whatsoever (were he never so dear unto him) should be
so respected by him by many degrees, as the public good, not only of the
whole Common wealth, but even of any particular Corporation that is a Member of
it. For by this his most Princely care of the Common wealth, we cannot but in
all duty assure our selves of his like most Christian regard of, and affection
unto the Church of God: both generally within these his Majesty's Dominions,
and also as the same is particularly distributed into particular Congregations
in every Shiere, and City, and Town. And as his Majesty in his said Speech
speaks of the government of the Common wealth by comparison thereof with his
Coppices, so if it shall please him to take a view of the Churches, wherein some
have persuaded him esse omnia been, I doubt not, but that he shall find the
same in the like state that he found his Coppices, and by his Coppices the
Common wealth. As therefore by your help he has received further light then
before he had, touching the corruptions of the Common wealth, so I do humbly
crave your most Honorable and Christian aid for his Royal information of the
state and corruptions of the Church with their causes, that here I present to
your most Christian Senate, and by other that your own Christian wisdoms can
better show then any one so simple as I am.

The free passage of the Gospel.
first and principally the free passage and preaching of the Gospel without
such heavy burdens as for a long time have been imposed upon the Ministers
thereof; the which notwithstanding may as well be spared without prejudice to
any save only to the Episcopal Courts, as the paring of a man's nails. Mat.
6.33 Mat. 22.38 Luke 1.75 Tit. 2.12 1 Timothy 2.2
We are commanded, first to seek the Kingdom of God. And the first and the
great Commandment is the love of God. There can be no righteousness toward
man, without holiness and godliness toward God: and both these are the
grounds of a quiet and peaceable life. This one thing is needful: Luke 10.41
the which he that chooses, chooses the good part, which shall not be taken
away.

Ministers silenced to be well considered.
be well considered, in respect of the innocence, and integrity of their life
in all things: the matters of subscription and conformity only excepted: as
also in respect of their great pains and diligence in their Ministry: and of
the fruits thereof apparent unto all men in their several charges. They have
been indeed and daily are charged with disloyalty, Ezra 4.15 Ester 3.8 Acts
24.16
as the Jews sometimes were: yet they may truly with Paul say they endeavor
themselves to have a clear conscience toward God and toward men. And all
that they do in not subscribing and conforming they do only of conscience
toward God, and may therefore use the same protestation that the Reubenites,
Gadites, Josh. 22.22
and half Tribe of Manasses used: yea they have also manifested the same and
made it fully known by their Doctrine, 2 Timothy ^.10
manner of living, purpose, faith, long suffering, patience, persecution (by
the Prelates) and other afflictions. Some likewise being as well borne, as most
of their Adversaries, and having in their youth refused great Temporalties
offered, if they would have diuerted their Studies to the Law, have now
submitted themselves to want and poverty in their age, when they have most
need of plenty. And in all that they do in the promises, they plead
conscience far otherwise then Papists that have always showed themselves
most rebellious and traitorous.

Puritans the best Protestants
in respect of the greater opposition betwixt them and their assertions, and
betwixt the Papists and their assertions, and also of the greater hatred of
Papists against them, then against the common Protestants. And as for the
Ministers silenced for not subscribing and conforming; they are as good
Subjects as any his Majesty has: yea they do not subscribe and conform,
even in loyalty and of conscience toward his Majesty: as also in fear of
Gods displeasure as well against his Majesty, as against themselves; the
sins of Subjects provoking Gods displeasure against Princes as well as
against themselves: as it is plentifully showed by Doctor Hall in his Sermon
upon 1 Samuel 12.24, 25. 1 Samuel 12.14, 15, 24, 25. Prou. 28.2 Isa 3.1
preached on the 24 of March, 1613. The same is also further evident by other
Scriptures, as likewise by many examples of diverse that in matters apparently
of no great moment having conformed themselves to the commandment of their
Princes have provoked the Lords wrath against such Princes themselves. To omit
that of Doeg, 1 Samuel 22.18. 2 Chro. 24 21. 2 Samuel 11.15.
and that of some to Ioash (as being in deed in great matters) worthy of most
due consideration, is both the first obedience of Ioah against Vriah before he
knew the reason of David's commandment, in respect of the manifold evil
consequences thereof: and also his second obedience afterward in numbering of
the people, 2 Samuel 24
in respect of the great Plague that followed.

petitio principi^, Mat. 23.23
it having been often plentifully proved otherwise. Secondly, As small duties
are as well to be performed as great, so small sins are as well to be
refrained as great: the rather because as God blessed with good success
Mordecai in not bowing to Haman upon the Kings command, Est. 3.3, 4
the doing whereof seems a small matter, and such as might have admitted a
good excuse, so he dealt severely with Vzza for an act in show of small
account. 2 Samuel 6.4
It is sometime better loyalty not to yeald then to yeald obedience to the
command of Princes, though good and religious: as appears by the example of
Ioah before mentioned, 2 Samuel 18.3
and by them that would not suffer David to go out with them to battle
against Absalom, Cap. 21.17
and by the answer of other unto him after a great danger: Especially by them
that would not obey Readiness commandment for putting Jonathan to death, 1 Samuel
14.44.
even before Saul had ever bewraied so great wickedness as afterward he did, 1 Samuel 22.17.
as well as they that afterward refused his like command for killing the Lords
Priests. If any shall object such examples to disgrace our Christian King, as
making him like to Saul: Theodor. Hist. Eccl. L. 2. C. 16.
he may well be answered, as Liberius sometime a good Bishop of Rome (now the
Seat of Antichrist) answered a flattering Courtier Eusebius, that charged the
said Liberius for alleging the example of the three Children in Daniel to
purge himself of singularity in defending boldly Athanasius against the
Emperor Constantius, and many Bishops, that he compared the said Emperor to
Nebuchadnezzer: No said Liberius: But thou without reason do condemn a man
that has not been brought into Judgment. Even so (I say) may all such
Flatterers and pickthankes be answered, that snatch at every advantage against
such as plead for the Innocent, whereby to bring them into displeasure with
their Sovereigns: Neither also can it be justly charged to be seditiously
spoken to the encouragement of other (Papists or Atheists) not to obey just and
lawful commands: Forasmuch as by many Books, to subscribe and conform are
showed not to be lawful by diverse arguments not answered, nor answerable: and
also because the parties not subscribing and conforming do in all other things
show all allegiance, and teach all other so to do whereas the contrary is
daily seen in Papists and Atheists as they dare, and have any opportunity and
means according to their minds. Do not also the parties pleaded for submit
themselves to suffer any thing for their not subscribing and conforming? That
of Samuel, Obedience is better then sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15.22.
is spoken of obedience to God, and not of obedience unto men, as the Text
plainly shows; and it being said to the king himself, even to Saul, for his
transgressing the express commandment of God, and not for transgressing any
commandment of man. For he being the king was not subject to any man.

The tenderness of conscience.
apparent by David's heart smiting him for cutting only of a Lap of Readiness
garment: and by the great grief of John Hus in remembrance of his finenesse in
apparel whiles he was young, and of his playing at Chesse; 1 Samuel 24 6 Acts
and Mon. printed 1596. p. 580. Genesis 42.2^
and also by the accusation of the consciences of the brethren of Joseph, for
things done against Joseph, long after the doing of them. (Oh that the Prelates
would seriously consider this in time toward their brethren:) yea, also
because to oppress the conscience (being well considered) is worse then the
demand of Nahash the Ammonite for thrusting out all the right eyes of the
Inhabitants of Iabesh Gilead. 1 Samuel 11.2
For if the conscience be wounded, the whole mind is blinded: And if Ministers
be blind, how shall they give light to their people: If the light that is in
them be darkness, Matt. 6.23.
how great is their darkness? And if Ministers be so wounded in their
consciences that themselves have no comfort; Pro. 18.14.
(for a wounded spirit who can bear?) how can they comfort other? Oh that his
excellent Majesty in the Spirit of the Lord would be pleased and moved to
relieve such Ministers upon consideration hereof, as Saul in the same spirit
was moved to relieve Iabesh Gilead. 1 Samuel 11.6


A good conscience may fail in greater matters and yet stick at small.
appears by David, who notwithstanding he were in his mind troubled for that
small matter before mentioned, yet afterward many ways sinned most grievously
against Vriah, both in his adultery and also afterward. The greater also and
heavier the burden of other sins is, the more such as so feel the same have
need to take heed of increasing their burden by any other thing: 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
yea, to abstain from all appearance of evil. They also that do object the
former do most offend in greater matters themselves: as against Gods Word, so
also against the Laws of the Land: using all means daily to hinder the
proceeding of the Law against themselves: and denying the benefit of the Law
unto others: thereby bewraying that themselves would rule and reign as Lords
and Kings, subject to no Law, and seeking to have all other subject to
themselves: like to that king that Daniel said should do according to his own
will. Dan. 11.36.


Ministers refrain conformity in conscience to their Rulers.
but also in respect of their Rulers, and molesters, and that because to molest
such is a thing more dangerous, then to be molested. In such things it is worse
to be agents then patients: Though David at the first would not be dissuaded
from numbering the people, yet how woefully and dolefully afterward did he cry
out, as a child beaten laying it wholly upon himself, 2. Sam. 24.10.17.
without imputation thereof to any other: Oh that such Rulers of their brethren
would not be deceived herein. That which seems now a small thing, may
herafter be great and heavy. A Gnat is but a small thing: a flea less: yet
either of both does trouble the greatest as well as the least; the highest as
well as the lowest. Great persons have great means for solacing themselves;
but alas who (as I said before) can bear a wounded spirit? Pro. 18.14.
spirit?

The innocence of Ministers to be tried even by the Laws of the Land.
that the innocence of the Ministers before mentioned may be tried, not only
by the Word of God; but also by the Laws of the Land: and that the learned
Judges and other Lawyers may freely and at large argue their cause before his
Majesty and your Honorable Court, being by an oath of the Lord first charged
upon their allegiance, truly, plainly, and fully to deliver their judgments
touching the Laws of the Land in that behalf: as also by his excellent
Majesty being enboldned so to speak without fear of any danger to themselves
by such speaking, either for the present, or for the time to come.

The Prerogative Royal.
not only what he may do by humane Justice as he is a Prince, but also what he
may do and must do by the Word of the King of Kings, and as himself is
subject to that Word, and is a Christian, and in Christ a spiritual King, and
heir of a kingdom everlasting in Heaven: thereby having greater privileges
and prerogatives, then as according to flesh and blood, he is Royally
descended, and an earthly King of many Dominions: This I could largely
demonstrate, but that I would also have other matters to be considered.

The indignities done to Ministers.
as well far of as near at hand: at all times and seasons of the year:
whether they be young or old, strong or weak, of good ability to bear the
charges of such iournies, or poor and in want: Secondly, the restreynt of
their ministry; Thirdly, Deprivation of their livings in their old age, when
they have most need of maintenance: having especially lived plentifully all
their days before: and then also having greater charges: and having before
been distributers to other, then forced with grief of heart to take relief
of other: having before given the Bread of Life to other: and in old age
wanting themselves bread for this life: and not being able to give their
children such education as whereby to fit them for Church or Common wealth:
neither having wherewith to prefer their children in marriage: how well soever
borne, educated, or qualified. A thing whereby the miserable state of the
Israelites is sometime amplified. viz. Psalm. 78.63 Job 30.26.31. Psa. 137.2.
that their maids were not given in marriage. By all which they that before
have been means to make many glad, are now themselves made to weep, and (as
it were) to hang up their harps, etc. and even when they looked for good, then
to have evil come upon them: and when they looked for light, then to have
darkness: Iere. 8.15. and 14.19.
and when they looked for peace, then to have no good: and for a time of
health, then to have trouble. Hereto also may be referred the doleful
complaint of Jerusalem, My Priests and my Elders perished in the city, whiles
they sought for meat to refresh their souls. Lament. 1.19.
Is not this the more, because it is not by any siege of foreine enemies, but
by the rigor of them that profess themselves friends, pillars, and chief
Patrons of the Church?

Tullie against Antonie Philippi the 2. and of Vlpianus a Civil Lawyer in his
description of a Testament Tit. 20. So are such Ministers made more vile then
notorious malefactors in common gaoles, that without any contradiction enjoy
whatsoever is given unto them by the last Will and Testament of any deceased.

The effects of indignities done to Ministers.
or nothing so sufficient as they that were deprived, God himself is shortened
of many excellent duties before performed in such places, and highly dishonored
by many great sins and outrages before restreyned: and that publicly and on
those days that should be most religiously sanctified, no man saying to any
that do so dishonor the Lord, why do ye so?

His Majesty falsely informed of silenced Ministers sufficient maintenance.
as when they enjoyed their places, this might be easily and plentifully
answered if this place permitted the same; and too lamentable experience
teaches the contrary. Howsoever also at the first some perhaps were somewhat
regarded, yet as light burdens far carried are heavy; so by that charge long
continued men are wearied. Are not diverse also gathered to their fathers, that
whiles they lived were bountiful? Are not also the states of men changeable,
and their minds mutable? And what comfort is in such vncerteynties? Lastly
this objection seems to be of such as never think any thing enough for
themselves, but every thing too much for other.

which are better then great riches, Ministers wronged in their names.
etc. and that not only by most reprochefull and contumelious words cast upon
them every where privately and in Episcopal Courts publicly, but also by most
false, wicked, and unjust terms in their sentences of suspension,
excommunication, Prou. 22.1. Eccles. 7.2
deprivation, and degradation remaining upon public Record for all posterity,
and to the great prejudice of the posterity of such Ministers: the rather
because such sentences are begun after the Roman, and Papal manner, In Dei
nomine, Amen. And this indignity touching the names of such Ministers, is yet
the greater, because of the disgraceful terms given unto them in the preface
to the new translation of the English Bibles prefixed before the said Bibles,
and therefore to be read by every one that has or shall have the said Bibles:
by all the which means, all other do the more contumeliously use them,
Swaggerers, Blasphemers, contemners of the Word, Drunkards, etc.

None go in more personal danger.
Moreover, none go in more personal danger of bodily hurt then such Ministers.
No not the most vile persons that are, because all see authority so bent
against them: yea more against such, then against Recusant Papists,
Blasphemers, Drunkards, 1 Cor. 15.31. Lam. 4.9.
etc. So that such Ministers may truly say, They dye daily: as also complain
with the Prophet that they that are slain by the Sword, are better then they,
that dye so daily, and by so many means. These afflictions of such Ministers
are also the heavier, in respect of the joy and gain of the Papists and other
Sons of Belial in that behalf.

lies made the hearts of the righteous sad, Ezekiel. 13.22.
whom he had not made sad, how heinous is it to make the hearts of them sad,
whom the Lord has not only not made sad, but whom he has also used as
Instruments for much joy and comfort in the Lord to many other?

The wrongs of Ministers redound to other.
who are the more reproached with Puritanisme? Every one almost that
refraineth from evil makes himself a prey, and so both the name of Puritans,
and also purity it self is in detestation. Yea, by the former severity
against such Ministers for not conforming, Religion it self is every where in
the more contempt, If. 59.16. Mark. 7.12.
and by men's traditions the Word of God is made of none effect: and all
swearing, profaning of the Lords day, whoring, and drunkenness, etc. do the
more abound: and pride is to many as a Chain, and violence covers them as a
Robe. Ps. 73 6


The increase of Popery by the premises.
with their Disciples increased by the late and long restraint of preaching the
Word? Yea how has it increased in all places (oh that I could except the Court
it self) so likewise in all States? Amongst the Common people: in the Gentry:
in the Nobility? Yea are not some of the greatest Nobility deeply dyed
therewith? And whatsoever profession or show they make by going to Church, etc.
Do they not smell rankly thereof? Oh it is well if they do not: even well for
all, but especially for the Throne of Royal Majesty: Yea are not some of the
Nobility, or their Heirs Apparent, of that stamp, that descended of
Religious and Protestant Parents; some also, and diverse that have lately been
Nobilitati? Yea how do the foresaid Jesuits and Seminaries, and otherlike
Priests every where swarm, and walk their Circuits, with the great walker
and Peripatecian even the Compasser of the Earth Satan, to deceive, seduce, Job
1.7.
and make Proselytes to Rome, Mat. 23.13
and twofold more the Children of the Devil then themselves? Yea herein some
Peripatecian Jesuits have been thought to have had some Ladies for their
Curates. I will not say that such Jesuits have been, or are Vicars to such
Ladies husbands: But whether they have their deputations under such Husbands
Hands and Seals, that I leave to such Husbands themselves to enquire. I have
no Commission so to do.

darkness and in the shadow of death, Luke 1.7^
as being ignorant of their danger thereby. So also they are apt to be drawn
both into any Error, and likewise into Rebellion against his Majesty, against
his Posterity, and the whole Land. Though therefore there were twice as many
able and good Ministers, as there are, yet all were little enough.

Job said to his Friends, Job 19.21.
Have pity upon us, have pity upon us, oh ye our Honorable, and Worthy,
and Christian Friends, for the Hand of God has touched us, in suffering our
Ministers to be taken from us, or withholding such from us as we have great
need of. Ps. 69.20.
Reproach has broken our Hearts; we are full of heaviness. We looked for some
to have had pity on us, but there was none. We are exceedingly filled with
contempt. Ps. 123.3, 4
Our Soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease:
with the contempt of the proud. Yea, God has delivered us to the unjust: Job
16.11.
even to them that are unjust by the Law of God and man. Act 20.26. Job 30.28.
Our Souls are starued by keeping back our Spiritual food, We go mourning
without the Sun: by means whereof, we stand up in the Congregation, as it
were in the midst of your most Honorable Assembly, and cry unto you for
help and relief. Lam. 4.4.
The Tongue also of the sucking Children (newborn in Christ) cleaves to the
Roof of their Mouth for (Spiritual) thirst. Our (such) young Children ask
Bread (for their Souls) and there is no man (in many places) that breaks it
unto them, yea many are ready daily to take it from them. Lam. 1.16.
For these things we weep: our Eyes, our Eyes, run down with water: because
the comforters that should refresh our souls are far from us: Our children
are desolate, because our enemies (of our salvation) do prevail. Therefore
also as in this respect, many of us may thus present our doleful supplication
generally to your most Honorable Senate, so why may we not every one with the
woman of Samaria, in this our Famine of the Word cry out to his most excellent
Majesty and say, 2 Kings 6.26. Judge. 18.24.
Help my Lord oh King? If Michah made such a woeful outcry unto the Children
of Dan, as though he had lost all that he had, because they had taken away his
Jdols, and Idolatrous Priests, oh how much more may we cry out against such as
have taken away our faithful Pastors, or that will not set such over us, and
say, What have we else? For (alas) what have we, if we have none to break the
Bread of Life unto us?

Religious Assembly to take no offense at this my mournful complaint in the
person of all other, since a chief Pillar and Patron of the present Hierarchy
(Hadrianus Sarauia) has written, Praestaret nullos in Ecclesia esse Episcopos,
In prolog. de triplici Episcopo.
quam pro Episcopis habere lupos: such as most Ministers with us in these days
are, partly in respect of their ignorance, partly in respect of their
idleness: partly in respect of their extreme avarice, always crying, Give,
give, and never saying, It is enough: Pro. 30.15
and partly in respect of their pride, intemperance, luxury, and other their
inordinate, loose, and lascivious conversation. And with these things, it is
not unworthy your wisdoms to consider a little the state of the Universities;
as being the Seminaries of the Ministry. First, In that by subscription urged
to all sorts in taking degrees, and even to young ones that know not whereto
they do subscribe, neither are able to judge of the matters, as also that
never are like to enter into the Ministry, many of great hope are
discouraged, and do rather leave their present preferments, and betake
themselves to some other state of life in the Country, then they will so
burden their consciences. Secondly, In regard of the contempt that all sober
well minded and well disposed young Students are in: of what towardness soever
and hope they be for Learning: yea how learned soever already. Thirdly, In
respect of the excessive pride and bravery of the most, though never so
soberly brought up before, and never so unable to maintain the same. Fourthly,
For their great excess in drinking and tobaccoing, in chambring and
wantonness: and in gaming, carding, and dising, and in all manner of luxury,
and lasciviousness: yea also for their common swearing, swaggering, and almost
all manner of prophannesse: having sometimes the Masters of the Colleges to be
presidents unto them, in some of those things.

Many discouraged from the Ministry.
and the restraint of the preaching of the Gospel, as though there were no need
thereof, how many worthy men are thereby discouraged from the Ministry? How
many have no use of their gifts? How many are turned Lawyers and Phisicians? or
at least are such that otherwise would have been Ministers? They cannot be
charged to hide their gifts in a Napkin, Mat. 25.18 and 5.15.
neither to put their light under a Bushel, for who may enter into the Church
without a calling? or who may buy an Ecclesiastical calling with the least
sin? Or who for any such calling may give the least wound to his conscience?
Romans 3.8.
Who also do most object the hiding of their gifts to other? Even such as
either have no gifts at all themselves, or that do never or seldom employ
them.

Great contention by conformity
may it please your most Honorable Court to consider of the great division and
contention made by them, that have so much striuen and contended for
subscription and conformity, with them that only of conscience have not
subscribed and conformed, and that have sufficiently testified their conscience
in that behalf, so as before has been showed. Touching this division and
contention, where is it not? Betwixt whom is it not? The opposition of them
that have done the former wrongs unto such Ministers, is still such, that
although they had what they would from the said Ministers (to their skin in a
manner) yet still they envy them, and as some have accounted them as gangrens,
and therefore to be cut off, never having written such bitter things against
the bloody brood of the Papists, so some other are of the same mind, and
would do accordingly, did not the Princely grace and clemency of his Majesty
restrain them. This their mind they daily bewray by their continual most
bitter inuectiues against them. This contention is so hot, that young
striplings (in a manner) having gotten orders (as they speak) fear not to
disgrace and contumeliously to use grave Divines that were Preachers of the
Word before their Fathers were borne: and that not only publicly in Preaching,
thinking they never preach well without railing: but also privately in all
meetings wrangling with them, and audaciously vpbraiding them with want of
Learning, so sometime also tanting them, as if they were not worthy to hold
Book unto them: and that because themselves may say any thing without
controlment, but the other nothing without danger.



Est. 3.9.
Some with Haman thinking it not enough to lay hands on Mordecai at home,
except they do also by word and writing strike through the sides of worthy
Divines in other Countries. As the Papists also searched the very Graves for
the bones of the Protestants long before dead, so it were to be wished that
some of our great Masters and Patrons of our Hierarchy and Ceremonies had not
disgracefully traduced the honorable names of Calvin and Beza, and in them of
diverse other, long since at rest with the Lord, and that for their Judgments
in their Books against the said Hierarchy and Ceremonies.

The former contention not justly to be imputed to ministers not conforming,
but to the vrgers of conformity.
by the Judgment of our best new Writers, our own and other, that the
foresaid contentions are not to be charged upon the foresaid Ministers, but
upon them that urge subscription and conformity: namely, out of Doctor Morton
in the first part of his Catholic Apology, Lib. 2. of the Notes of the
Church, chap. 5. note 7. page 37. and that out of a Papist even Cassander, a
kind of Mediator betwixt Papists and Protestants, pleading for a kind of
reformation of some things in the Romish Church, Lib. Consult. Articl. 7 as
also of diverse other, even maintaining the said Hierarchy and Ceremonies. The
same is the Judgment of Peter Martyr, as elsewhere, so also in his Book
against Richard Smith de calibatu and votis, in his answer to the fourth
Objection of the said Smith for the single life and vows of Priests. The same
is the Judgment of honorable Philip Mornaeus, lib. de Ecclesia, cap. 2. The
like say many other, that affirm them to be contentious and Schismatikes,
which are the occasions of such contentions and Schisms, by imposing things
that they ought not to impose, and that cannot be yielded unto with peace of
conscience. And that such Ministers, as subscribe not and conform, cannot be
justly charged as Schismatikes, and causers of contention. Master Parker one of
the said Ministers has learnedly, soundly, and plentifully showed and proved
this in his Book of Symbolizing Ceremonies, part. 2. cap. 9. sect. 3. page 116.

Abimelech for a small injury to Abraham ignorantly committed by Abimelech,
Evil to be feared. Genesis 20 3. 1 Samuel 15.3 2 King. 1.9
in respect that Abraham was a Prophet: and against the Amalekits for stopping
the way, or withstanding the entrance of the Israelites into the earthly
Canaan, and that 400 years after they had so done: and against the two
Captains and their Fifties for coming only by the Kings commandment to fetch
Elijah unto the King; 2 Chr. 24.23, 24. 2 Chr. 36.16.
and against Ioash King of Judah for putting Zechariah the Son of Iehoiadah to
death: and upon all the Jews for their manifold contumelies, and other great
injuries against the Prophets from time to time, so the Ministers of the Gospel
being greater then the Prophets, may we not fear some great Judgment of God
against us for all the former hard dealing against them? Mat. 23.37 Mat. 11.9.
Doubtless we may fear the more, because God spared not good King Asa for
imprisoning Hanani the Seer, for the word of the Lord delivered by him against
Asa, 2. Chron. 16.7. etc.
for his relying upon the king of Syria.

Athanasius by the first Synod of Antiochia: Socra. hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap.
7. compared with Sozomen Lib. 3. cap. 5. Theodor. lib. 5. C. 34 Sozomen lib. 8.
C. 27 Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 17.
as also the like after for the like injury done unto Chrysostom. And although
upon the same he were recalled home and restored to his place, yet not long
after for the like cause, being again bannished, the Lord pleaded his cause by
a very extraordinary hayle, and by the speedy death of the Empress Eudoxia,
who had much exasperated the Emperor Honorius against him, and finally that
that is written of diverse strange accidents after the death and martyrdom of
William Gardener (though but a merchant) mentioned in our own book of Acts
and Monuments. In all which, so honorable, wise, and judicious a Court need
not any admonition to take heed of such flatterers as shall say no such thing
is now to be feared. For ye all know them that heretofore in like cases were
wont to cry peace, peace, Iere 6.14 and 8.11 Ezekiel. 13.18.
and to heal the Lords people with sweet words, to have been accounted false
Prophets, as also woe was denounced against all them that did sow pillowes to
the armeholes, and that did sing a requiem to their own souls, Amos 6.3.
Psalm. 10.14.
putting far away the day of the Lord: as likewise that the Lord is now the
same God in justice against the same sins that ever he has been, and the
same beholder of mischiefs and wrongs, and the same revenger of injuries done
unto his Ambassadors that ever he was. Yea, ye also know, that although the
Ministers hitherto mentioned, by their adversaries have been accounted no
better then Asses, yet as the Angel of the Lord rebuked Balaam, Balaam and his
Ass. Number. 22.23. etc.
for smiting his Ass when she turned first out of the way, wherein he would
have had her to go, and then for lying down under him, so the time may come,
when the Lord will take their cause into his hands, and rebuke their riders the
more for all the blows they have given them, because ever since they have
been called to the Ministry, they have done as good service to the Church as
ever Balaams Ass had done unto him. In the mean time they think they may as
well complain of the manifold blows wherewith they have been often smitten,
as Balaams Ass having her mouth opened by the Lord complained of the stripes
that Balaam had given her. Yea it seems they may the more complain in that
behalf, because they have never so crushed the foot of their riders, as Balaams
Ass had crushed his foot. If they have, it has been because their riders
have gone that way, for going wherein the Lord was angry with them: or
because the said Ministers being ridden in such a way as where they could not
turn, have, (as it were) lain down, and not gone so far as their riders
would have had them: as also because they have smitten such Ministers with
their staff, and threatened to have killed them, if they had had a sword. In
all which notwithstanding they have pleaded the sight of the Angel of the Lord
standing in the way with a sword ready drawn in his hand, which they have
more feared then the staff or sword of their riders.

Judah for their hard dealings with their servants. Ier. 34.16.
Even so much the more seems such wrath to be feared, because the Lord has
not only dignified his said Ministers with many great titles, and with the
preaching of the best liberty, but also with the isntrumental effecting of
such liberty, Galat. 5.1.
wherewith Christ has made men free, and charged them not again to be
entangled with that yoke of bondage, that sometime God himself had made, much
less with the yoke of bondage made only by men, yea, at the first by the man
of sin, and adversary of Christ himself. The chief Captain feared to
proceed against Paul because he was free of Rome. Acts 22.24
Is nothing then to be feared for proceeding so far and so long against so
many Ministers of the Gospel that are free of Heaven it self, and have (as I
said) been the means to make other also free thereof? How many fearful
things also followed all the Jews for the hard dealing of their Clergy
against Jeremiah, notwithstanding the Princes of Judah took his part and
pleaded for him (as many Nobles of this kingdom have done for such Ministers)
as well as for other common sins of that time?

viz. which the Lord commanded both to be written, Exo. 17.14 1 Samuel 15.2
Ierem. 4.19 2 Kings 22.11.
and also to be executed without any compassion against Amalek, neither to
speak of the bitter complaynt of Jeremiah in the foresight of judgments
coming, my bowels, my bowels, 2. Chron. 34.19.24. Amos 6.1. etc.
etc. neither also of his doleful lamentation in that behalf afterward in his
Book of Lamentations, nor of the tears and sackcloth of Josiah at finding the
Book of the Law discovering such future evils for the transgressions
thereof, and to omit the woe threatened to them that were at ease in Zion and
that lived in pleasures, without remorse of the afflictions of Joseph, as both
generally we do now in England, and particularly many of the Prelates, not
regarding either the heavy distresses of the Churches in France, or the hard
state of the most Noble and renowned Prince, and Princes Palatine though by
nature as well as by religion we are bound unto them, and as we love the
kingdom of Christ Jesus, ought to help them against their enemies least we
incur the curse, Judge. 5.23. Judgments already executed.
even the bitter curse of the Angel of the Lord against Meroz, and the
inhabitants thereof for the very like cause. To omit (I say) all the former
things, Oh that your most Honorable, and Christian Senate would be pleased to
remember and consider the manifold judgments of God already executed since
the restreint of the Word: the arming of all the four elements against us: of
the fire not only often on some few houses, but also on many great towns, to
almost the utter consuming of them, of the aier, by great death of many
thousands, almost in all parts of the Kingdom through the contagious
pestilence from the infection thereof: of the water by many inundations to the
drowning of many whole Parishes, especially in the West country: of the winds
being of a fiery and aierie complexion and efficacy, and exercising their
force (as before so in this) by many late tempests both upon the land, and also
upon the seas to the breaking down of come, the scorching and casting down of
trees, the overthrowing of buildings, the loss of many great ships, to the
great hindrance (if not undoing) of many merchants and other, and that
according to the Lords like displeasure against most worthy King Iehoshaphat
for his too much communion with Ahaziah king of Israel: 1 Kings 22 48. 2 Chronicles.
20.37. Zeph. 1.3.
lastly of the earth with the waters, by extreme frosts, and snow to the
destruction as of some men, so also of many beasts, and fowls of heaven, and
fish of the sea, and other waters; with all which may be considered many
unseasonable times in other respects, and the extreme heat of some summers,
such as in some countries, men have fallen down stark dead, as they have
followed their cattle, and as they have labored in hay time, and harvest. Oh
will some man say, these are old things, now past and gone, yea and forgotten
also, as though they never had been. But alas, should they so be? Wherefore
then does the Holy Ghost remember us of the drowning of the whole world; of
Sodom and Gomorrha consumed by fire from heaven, and many other the like? Yea,
of the Lords not sparing the Angels that kept not their standing, but casting
them down to hell, and binding them there with chains, which was a thing much
more ancient then all the former? And for reviving the memory of those
judgments above mentioned, Has not the Lord this present year, and these
last years 1621 and 1622, done great things upon the seas and upon the Land,
by the seas and other waters. Oh how many merchants ships have been taken by
the Turkish pirates, and otherwise lost upon the seas, to the undoing of many
thousands, and the great impouerishing of the whole Land? How much cattle also
has been lost in diverse quarters by great and extraordinary tides of the seas
and like floods of other waters? Finally how many houses also have by the same
means been clean carried away?

Henry? Much more, much more then David and all Israel had so to mourn for
the death of Abner as they did: 2 Samuel 3.3^
yea many may say Prince Henry, Prince Henry, would God we had dyed for
thee, Prince Henry, Prince Henry; Had not the Lord remembered mercy in
judgment, by leaving us most hopeful Prince Charles, we might yet mourn for
the death of Prince Henry. The greater the graces were of the late young Lord
Harrington (as Master Stock has noted them in his Sermon at his Funeral, and
as many other could and can yet testify) the greater was the loss of the
whole Kingdom, by his death also: yet this was nothing to the former. May not
also the death of our late Queen be reckoned amongst other judgments? The
greater Gods mercy has been to his Majesty, and to the whole Land, in
giving and yet leaving such a remnant of Royal seed by her, Prince Charles at
home, and most virtuous Princess Elizabeth abroad (in many things resembling
our late most blessed Queen Elizabeth, whose renown will never die) as also
in giving so gracious and rich a seed unto her, the greater judgment
(doubtless) we may account the death of Queen Anne her self to have been.
Neither are we here altogether to forget the deadness of all Trades, and also
the great poverty of most sorts of People daily increasing thereby. In respect
whereof though there have been such a glut and plenty of Corn as has not
been known this many years, yet the same is not to be accounted so great a
mercy, because it has been more hard for most Housekeepers to maintain
their charges then when Wheat was at a Noble a Bushel, and all other Grain of
price according.

The former judgments to be principally imputed to the restraint of the Gospel.
As the former Judgments cannot be denied to be for many great sins, every
where abounding; so also the restraint of the Word, and the hard usage of the
Ministers thereof, whereby themselves and their Doctrine are in the more
contempt and disgrace with all sorts of men, being a principal and maine cause
of all other sins, must be acknowledged, to have had a great attractiue virtue
in drawing down the said Judgments upon us. In all former Ages upon which the
Lord inflicted his Judgments, there were many other sins provoking the same:
yet were such Judgments chiefly ascribed, 2 Chr. 36.16. Mat. 23.37
to the mocking of his Ministers, despising of his Word, and misusing his
Prophets: and to the killing his Prophets and stoning them that were sent unto
them. There always also have been many great and heinous sins in the Land;
but there were never so unknown and new sins, and so outrageous abominations
before, as have been since this master and capital sin of suppressing the
Word, and contempt of the Ministers thereof. Moreover though other sins were
also before, yet who can show so many Judgments to have been in so short a
time as have been since this mother sin of the restraint of the Word? A
mother sin also it may well be called, in respect of many great Errors
hatched thereby, that either were not broached before, or that by all sound
Divines, Bishops, public Divinity Readers in the University, and other were
condemned. These new Errors to be still maintained by some great Prelates
(even Bishops) is the greater sin, because we have sent some Divines to the
last Synod at Dort for suppressing the same. By these, how may future Ages be
feared to be corrupted? And how shall such actual and mental sins be
restrained? How shall all virtue and righteousness flourish? Pro. 14.16 and
22.3. Pro. 29.18.
How shall men be prudent to hide themselves from evils to come, but by the
preaching of the word? Do not the People perish where there is no Vision?
Though human policy and carnal wisdom, by carnal and Machiuilian men for
State matters and preventing of evils to come, be as much magnified, and (as it
were) adored, Act. 8.11. and 19.28. Romans 8.6, 7 Ierem. 8.9. Ephesians. 5.17.
as Simon Magus in Samaria, and Diana in Ephesus, yet all true Christians know,
such wisdom to be death to men, and enmity to God, and no wisdom at all:
yea, mere foolishness, and no better then madness. Yea, it is the best
policy to maintain and support such Ministers as being not only faithful
and loyal Subjects themselves, but also the teachers of all other to be: and
the Chariots and Horsemen of the Kingdom. 2 Kin. 2.12 and 13.14.
For certainly howsoever they be lightly esteemed by their adversaries, yet
they cannot be denied to have done much good by their Ministry: yea many of
their adversaries (I doubt not) will acknowledge it. The Congregations over
which they have been set, and many other cannot but confess it. I dare also
boldly say, that many of your Christian Court to which I direct these my
Aduertisements, will testify it for themseues, for their Children, for their
Servants. I think also I may safely say, that his most excellent Majesty,
will grant those Princely graces wherewith God has enriched and beautified his
Royal heart to have been especially wrought by such Ministers in his Kingdom
of Scotland as now are pleaded for, rather then by such as do most oppugn
them.

Laban and Nabal were both Birds of a Feather, and Brethren (as it were) in
evil, of the same conditions, Laban and Nabal.
like to two Raine-bowes representing one another in color, the one by
reflection having the same that the other, as the Letters of the one backward
make the name of the other forward: yet the example of the one himself, and of
the Servants of the other may provoke all true hearted Christians to respect
the slate of the Ministers before mentioned, and to do what may be for them,
especially for the better liberty of their Ministry. Laban seeing the
Jewels, Earings, and Bracelets which the Servant of Abraham had given to
Rebecca, in behalf of his Masters Son Isaac, the better to win her love to
be wife unto him, Genesis 24.31
spoke thus to the said Servant, Come in thou blessed of the Lord: Wherefore
stand thou without? For I have prepared the house: and room for the Camels.
How much more then should any in any place of authority, and that have both
seen and also received the heavenly Earings and Bracelets that those Ministers
as the Lords Servants have bestowed upon them and theirs to win them to Christ,
and to make them fit for Christ, labor to bring such Ministers in again whom
others have cast out with their Wives and Children? And that, as those whom the
Lord has blessed, and made Instruments likewise to make others blessed. The
Servants likewise of Nabal having heard the churlish, currish, and clownish
words of their Master to David's Servants sent for some relief unto him,
reporting the same to their Mistress, pleaded also for David, 1 Samuel 25.^5, 16.
and for his Servants, saying, they had been very good unto them, so long as
they had been conversant with them when they were in the Fields: yea, that they
had been a wall unto them by day and by night to defend them all the while they
had been with them keeping Sheep. How much more then may the Ministers
hitherto spoken of be pleaded for, in respect that they have never in truth
done any hurt unto any with whom they have been conversant, but have been a
wall unto them for their defense against principallities and powers, putting
into their hands (yea into their hearts) the Sword of the Spirit; Ephesians. 6.17.
the Word of God: and furnishing them (instrumentally) with all other parts of
the Christian Armor? Yea touching Nabal himself, though he were so hard and
ungrateful toward David, yet to his own Sheepe-shearers he made a great
Feast, a royal Feast, 1 Samuel 25.36.
a feast like a King. Is it not therefore the more lamentable, that they should
be so hardly dealt with, and brought to a morsel of Bread, Ioh. 6.27
that have ministered unto men the meat that perishes not, but abides to
eternal Life? And that have made a Feast to the Princes of the great King of
Heaven and Earth, not of an hundredth and four skore days only like to the
most royal Feast of Ahashuerosh, or of Belshazzar, Est. 1.3 Dan. 5.3
or of any other such Monarch, but an everlasting Feast, according to the
nature of himself whose Feast it was?

Pharao showed to Joseph, and his Father and Brethren, Gen 41.3^ and 47.5
for the Interpretation of his Dreams: For have not the Ministers restrained,
deprived, etc. Interpreted as great Mysteries concerning eternal Salvation, as
Pharaoh's Dreams were for the preventing of the bodily Famine? The like may be
said of Dauid's princely grace to Barzillai for his small kindness toward him
when he fled from Absalon (which notwithstandind as a Subject he was bound in
duty to have performed) and upon his death bed given in charge to be remembered
by Solomon to the Sons of the said Barzillai after the death of David. 2 Samuel
19.31.33
1 Kin. 2.17 2 Kin. 3.15
The great bounty also offered by Naaman the Syrian unto Elisha for directing
him to do that whereby he was cured of his bobily Leprosy may here be well
remembered. The particular application of both which examples, I leave to your
wise considerations.

Many conformable Ministers wish the remove of the Ceremonies.
that many conformable Ministers submitting themselves to subscription and
conformity by the severity of other, because otherwise they can have neither
imploiment of their gifts, nor maintenance, would be as glad of the removing
the things now hindering the free passage of the Gospel, as the Ministers
silenced, and otherwise molested. For though they yield for the reasons
premised, and in a desire to do good, yet they are of the same mind that other
are of, and would testify the same upon assurance they might so do without
prejudice to themselves. Ioh. 12.42
As many among the chief Rulers of the Jews believed in Christ, but because
of the Pharisees they did not confess him, least they should be put out of the
Syndgogue (or rather) the Congregation; that is, least they should be
excommunicated, Ioh. 9.22.
because the Jews had made such a general Canon against any man that should
confess Jesus to be Christ, so do many worthy men consent with the Ministers
silenced, but fear of some Bishops (unmerciful indeed, as some are in
signification of their name) they dare not bewray their Judgments for fear of
the said danger. Yea, I am persuaded that some of the most reverend Bishops
themselves, do unfeignedly desire the reformation of some things that are the
causes of the former troubles. Yea, I say more, that I knew a very learned,
reverend, and renowned Bishop (not long since deceassed) that said to a
silenced and deprived Minister of his Diocese suing unto him for some
enlargement of his Ministry that he would willingly grant his request, but he
durst not, because he was a man under authority and must obey. But said he, I
will pray for you, that those things may be removed that do hinder you, that
we may all join together against the common Adversary, for it is high time.

The remove of Ceremonies concerns the whole Land. Can. 27. Est. 3.2.
and to remove the hindrances thereof, does concern your selves and yours, and
the whole Land, and not such Ministers only, and that in respect of diverse
Canons. Such is the Canon of kneeling at the celebration of the Lords Supper
(in the very act of receiving the Bread and Wine) not much unlike the
commandment of Ahashuerosh for bowing the knee to Haman whereunto Mordecai
would not yield, though thereby he hazarded his own state and the state of all
the Jews: and though for his yielding he might have pleaded that he neither
did it religiously according to the manner of the People, Exodus 17.14. Deuteronomy.
25.17. Est. 3.1. and 10. and 9.24 Can. 98.
nor in contempt of Gods Commandment for war and hatred on the part of the
Jews against the Amalekits, whereof Haman was one (even an Agagite, of the
Kings Stock) but only ciuilly in respect of the Kings command, still keeping
hatred against the Amalekits, though he gave that civil outward reverence unto
Haman. The like is the Canon against Appeals to any Judge ad quem, in any case
whatsoever, if the Adversary may with any color plead the other party to be
a Schismatike. Such is the Canon touching Diuorcement. Can. 4.6.7.8.
Such is the Canon for Excommunication ipso facto, of every one that shall
speak any thing against any of the Canons, or against any rights and
ceremonies established whereby men may be disabled from making their Will, or
their Wills may be frustrated, or at least their Executors much molested. Such
is the Canon or severity used for restraining the People from seeking the Word
elsewhere, though they have no preaching at all in their own Parishes, or
such only as would grieve any Christian heart to hear it. Can. 18.
Such is the Canon for the superstitious and ridiculous bowing of the knee at
the name of Jesus, to the disturbance of the whole Congregation, and the
hinderance, both of the Speaker or Reader, and also of the hearer: whereas no
such thing is inioined at the name of God the Father, or of Christ, or of the
Lord, or of our Savior, though this be all one with the name of Jesus, and the
very meaning thereof. The like may be said of diverse other canons: Many Canons
contrary to our Laws.
and although such Canons may be said, even iure humano not to be lawful, and
therefore cannot be pleaded in any of his Majesty's Temporal Courts, yet
herein every man is not able to wage Law against their Adversaries. Although
also some of the said Canons were not perhaps agreed upon by the greater part
of the Convocation, but only hatched by some few great Prelates and carried out
by strong and boisterous hand, yet who may make question of these things? Much
trouble has been and daily is by such Canons, and more will be, if by your
worthy Senate it be not prevented.

Many wicked men have more liberty then ministers of the Gospel.
Of the restraint also of the before pleaded for Ministers from all benefit of
the Law may not unfitly be said that of Joel, touching the Famine of his time,
Hear ye this o Elders, and hearken all ye Inhabitants of the Land, whether
such a thing has been in your days or yet in the days of your forefathers,
etc. Shall all blasphemers, contemners of all goodness, drunkards, etc. have
the benefit of the Law, and shall such Ministers only be so vile, as to be
debarred from it? The lewdest man that is cannot be so easily dispossessed of a
poor Cottage of twenty shillings a year, as many worthy Ministers have been
ciected with their Wives and Children from a Living of more then an hundred
pound by the year: and that sometimes for not observing a Book, neither
established by Law, nor enjoined by Canon, neither ever tendered unto them; yea
also without any presentment in that behalf. The old saying, viuat Rex, currat
Lex, imports the safety of Kings and Kingdoms to consist much in the
execution of Justice; Pro. 20.28. and 29.14.39
the which also agrees with the wisdom of Solomon.

debacchari against all sorts, and disgrace the greatest Peers in the Land:
yea sometimes also being bold with his high Majesty, upon their Stages, much
more with any Ministers that they shall hear to speak against their roguerie:
and that such learned and godly Ministers, no way scandalous in their life,
should have their mouths stopped? Most strange especially is it, that his
excellent Majesty, should enlarge all Papists, and discharge them from
Imprisonment and other penalties for any former offenses, and that without any
submission to our Religion, and that yet the hearts of the Prelates should be so
hardened against their Brethren, as not to enlarge them, and discharge them from
all punishments for their supposed offenses: but still to continue their
severity against them.

Examples to move the Parliament Ier. 26.16 Ier. 38.9
your said most Honorable Court, may the more boldly do the more for the
enlargement of the Gospel, and such Ministers thereof, because of many other
examples doing the like: Of the Princes and People of Juda pleading for
Jeremiah against the Clergy of Jerusalem: Of Ebedmelech petitioning earnestly
for him to the King, and prevailing with the King, though a wicked King, Ier.
39.26.
and therefore graciously rewarded by the Lord with grace for his deliverance
from the Babylonians, otherwise to all other merciless: Of Nehemiah, Neh. 2.
Est. 5.2. Joseph. de Ant. Iud. li. 12. cap. 2 Acts and Monum. printed 1596.
page 554. Ibid. p. 38^.
of Ester with great danger of her life, of Aristaeus petitioning unto, and
prevailing with Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt for setting at liberty an
hundred and twenty thousand Captive Jews, of the Nobles of Bohemia
supplicating both twice to the Council of Constance, and also to the Emperor
Sigismund for John Hus, as also of the four and fifty Nobles of Morauia after
the death of the said John Hus and Jerome of Prage, writing an excellent Letter
to the said Council of Constance in defense of the said two Martyrs: so
likewise of the four and twenty Nobles of Austria to Ferdinando King of
Bohemia, Sleidan lib. 14.
humbly supplicating for the free preaching of the Gospel, and in their said
Supplication pleading many excellent things, well worthy the observation of all
other of like place and state: Sleidan li. 25. and 26
the like may be said of their further importunity twelve or thirteen years
after for about two hundred banished Ministers. Above all, most worthy
observation is the example of our own most Noble King himself, both in
writing his royal and gracious Letters while he was King only of Scotland to
our late renowned Queen, Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, for Master
Cartwright, and Master Vdal, in the same cause for which the Ministers hitherto
mentioned have been restrained, etc. (as Master Cartwright himself testifies
in his Epistle dedicatorie to his Majesty before his Metaphrase and Homilies
upon Ecclesiastes) both (I say) in writing his said Letter, and also in writing
lately to the provoking of all Christian Princes against the Pope, to whom and
to whose Superstitions from the greatest to the least, none are more absolute
adversaries then the Ministers whose liberty hitherto has been showed to be
so necessary. Has not his Majesty also written to the States of the
Low Country for the repressing of Vorstius and all his Errors? The more we
wish and desire his said writings to prevail against the Pope and against
Vorstius, and his Disciples yet remaining, the more we may hope his Majesty
will enlarge the Gospel it self, the Word of Truth, Colos. 1.5.
within his own Dominions. For such as ones hatred is to Error, such is his
love to the Truth.

Ministers to be the better respected for their prayers sake.
chiefly of Ministers of the Word: tho more large promises he has made to the
prayers of such; and finally the more he has graced and magnisied such prayers
with great and glorious success for private persons; and especially for
Princes and Kingdoms (even sometimes wicked and ungodly.) The more is the
Gospel it self to be enlarged and the Ministers thereof regarded for such
prayers sake, not only in respect of the prayers of such Ministers themselves,
but also because such Ministers with other, by the Gospel preached teach all
men to pray for all men, especially for Kings and all in authority, 1 Timothy 2.2.
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.
And albeit such Ministers howsoever molested and wronged, may and ought
notwithstanding to say with Samuel, God forbid that we should sin against the
Lord and cease praying, 1 Samuel 12.23.
even for them that do most molest us; yet alas who is so simple, as not to
know, that the more kindly any are dealt with, the more they will be encouraged
to pray with all alacrity, and cheerfulness: and so the more gracious
blessing is to be hoped for by such prayers? For not only in liberality, but
also in all other duties the Lord loves cheerfulness. 2 Cor. 9.7.


The enlargment of Ministers not prejudicial to his Majesty.
and the enlargement of the Ministers restrained by the authority of his
Majesty, as many of their adversaries have pretended, will no ways be
prejudicial to the Honor of his Majesty himself, or to the credit of the
chiefest actors, in restraining either of the Gospel it self, or the Ministers
thereof. First, Because them that honor God, God himself will honor. As
length of days is in the right hand of wisdom, 1 Samuel 2.30 Prou. 3.16 Prou.
4.8.
so riches and glory are in her left hand. She will exalt them that exalt her,
she will bring them to honor that embrace her. Was not glory departed from
Israel, when the Ark of God was taken; wherein were kept the Tables of Gods
Testimonies? 1 Samuel 4.21 Exo. 25.26 1 Samuel 25.32.
Secondly, It was no dishonor but a great honor to David to revoke his words
of Indignation against Nabal, at the bare counsel of a Woman (Abigael) and
that before all his Soldiers (even four hundred) in whose hearing he had
before with great vehemency spoken his said words: Ps. 34 and 52 and 54 and 56
and 57.
though David were then a Prophet and had before that written diverse Psalms,
and were a worthy Soldier, and also known to be the Heir Apparent to Saul, as
anointed by the commandment of God, and therefore assured that he should not
by any means be intercepted of the Kingdom. Thirdly, 2 Samuel 16.4 compared
with 19.19 Est. 3.8. Est. 8.5. etc
Was it any dishonor to David, yea rather was it not a great honor unto him
to cancel the gift he had made of all the goods of Mephibosheth unto Ziba, and
to return them again unto Mephibosheth? Fourthly, Was it any great dishonor
to the great Monarch, Ahashuerosh, to reuerse all that he had done at the
request of Haman against all the Jews, and to give so large commission to the
Jews, as he did, for revenge upon all their enemies? I speak not this as
wishing the like evil to the adversaries of the said Ministers silenced and
deprived. Far be all such evil with from me, from them, and from all other
true Christians: yea, all good be unto them for Soul and Body: only if it
were no dishonor to that mighty Emperor, not only to revoke his former
Decree and Letters against the Jews, granted to one so highly in his grace;
but also to grant the like Commission against their adversaries, much less
will the enlargement of the Ministry be any dishonor to our Noble King, or
any disgrace to his Officers that have silenced and deprived them: since they
seek not for, neither desire any revenge upon any of their adversaries, but
pray for them, and wish all good unto them. The like may be said of Zedekia,
having before given power to his Princes against Jeremiah with great words,
saying, Ier. 38.5
Behold he is in your hands for the King can deny you nothing (as now the
adversaries of the said Minsters pretend they have the like power from his
Majesty to deal as they have done, having no such power by any Law) and yet
afterward upon the petition of one only (and he no natural subject) giving a
counter-commission for the saving of Jeremiah and fetching him out of prison.
Ier. 38.10. Exo. 32.10.12. Judge. 10.13 Exo. 32.11
To conclude this argument; has not God himself often denied help to his
people, and forbidden men to pray for them, or them to pray for themselves, and
yet for all that helped them? Was this any dishonor to his divine Majesty? Yea
rather, As Moses pleaded the honor of God therein; and as other being (as it
were) forsaken of the Lord, Psalm. 79.9.
craved his help, and to be delivered out of their trouble for the glory of
his name: And as Samuel assured the Israelits, being in great distress and
fear, that the Lord would not forsake them for his great names sake, etc. so
the Ministers before silenced, 1 Samuel 12.22.
and still in great distress do hope they may now plead for the free course
of the Gospel, and for comfort, and to be made glad according to all the days,
wherein they have been afflicted, Psalm. 90.15
for the greater honor of all the States of Parliament: and for the greater
glory of his gracious Majesty it self.

As hitherto in the same privilege whereby other subjects prefer their
complaints and causes, to the High and most Honorable Court of Parliament, I
have exhibited the former arguments for the enlargement both of the Gospel it
self, and of the Ministers thereof hitherto molested, and like daily so to be,
unto the grave and wise consideration of your said Court, so now I will be bold
upon the same freedom and liberty of other subjects, to exhibit also some
other things to your said Court, which much likewise concern Gods glory, and
the common good, both of Church and Commonwealth within his Majesty's
Kingdoms.

Reasons for suppressing or converting of Papists.
as having mentioned them before. Now because they are of diverse stamps, some
plain Recusants and some Church Papists, some obstinat, some ignorant, and
such as are Papists, rather to please some other, then of any conscience. May
is please your Honorable Court to consider of all these accordingly. Open
Recusants, and Church Papists, are not much unlike one to another. Psalm. 55.20
21. Prou. 26.18 23.24.15 2 Samuel 3.27 and 20.10. Mat. 26 49 Luke 22.47 48. Ier.
41.2
Only as a secret enemy is more dangerous then an open one, as is manifest by
diverse sentences and examples of the Scripture. Abner and Amasa, being both
unawares slain by a false kiss, of Ioab: as also our Savior by the like of
Judas: and Gedaliah with all his company, being put to the sword by the
pretended friendship of Ishmael; As (I say) secret enemies are more dangerous
then open, so are Church Papists more dangerous then open Recusants, because
under color of coming to Church they are more hardly discerned.
Notwithstanding they that are wise may know them. How secret Papists may be
known.
First by being from Recusants suddenly converted to come to our Churches and
exercises of Religion; because the kingdom of God is not like to Jonas his
Gourd, but to a grain of mustard seed: Jonas 4.6 Matthew. 13.31.
and having been converted only by some private persuasions, or by present or
hoped for kindnesses of men, etc. and not by any public Ministry. Secondly,
By their late and slack coming to the Word, and by their loose attention
thereunto, whiles it is preached, but spending the time in talking and
whispering with other, or in reading of prayers, or of some Popish Book. For
he that is of God hears Gods Word: Ioh. 8.47 1 Pet. 2.2
he that is borne again desires the sincere Milk of the Word. Thirdly, By
their private speeches either for Popery, or against the truth or the lovers of
it, as some of the Ephraimits were known not to be Gileadits by their tongues.
Fourthly, Judge. 12.6.
By their Farmers, and Servants and company; For Noscitur ex comite qui non
cognoscitur ex se, and birds of a feather will fly together. Fifthly, By
their coldness in speaking or doing any thing publicly for the truth. Luke
7.47
For as to whom a little is forgiven he loves little, so to whom much is
forgiven he loves much. Sixthly and lastly, (if they be great persons) By
their preferment of Papists to such preferments as are in their power.

All Papists dangerous.
All grounded Papists, Recusant and other are so much the more dangerous,
because as Satan by little sins preuayleth with men for greater, so do they
by insinuation into Princes for small matters oftentimes bring their purposes
to pass for greater. As no humane Laws also will reclayme Papists without the
liberty of the Word, so neither will any clemency of Princes do them any good
without severity. They can no more live without treachery, then without
eating, drinking, and breathing. Frendshippe does rather harden then mollify
them. These things are manifest by their continual treasonable practices
against our late most Noble Queen, and against our present dread Sovereign,
as likewise against other Princes in other Countries. The more favor has
been showed them, the more they have lifted up their heels, against such
their favorers. The more that other are for peace and speak thereof, Psalm.
120.7
the more they are for war. Many good Laws have been already made against
them, and are yet in force. But what difference is there betwixt no Laws at
all, and no execution of Laws? Little, but this, that where there is no Law,
there cannot in Justice be any punishment: but where there are Laws, there may
be execution when God shall give the Magistrates hearts so to do. Some of the
Laws already are for death of some offenders in that kind. Other are but
pecuniarie, whether these also are not to be made capital I leave to the
wisdom of your Court to consider by the express Law of God in that behalf,
Deuteronomy. 13.1 etc. Exo. 21.16 Deu. 14.19 and 20.18. and 24.7
against all intisers to Idolatry: as also by other Laws for death against
less transgressions both of the First, and also of the Second Table. And
touching that place, Deuteronomy. 24.7. against men stealers, and makers of
merchandise of them, who do so highly offend in this kind as Papists, that
steal men from God, from their Sovereigns and make merchandise of their
Souls to the Devil? Do they not also rob men of their temporal goods, to
enrich their Pope and Jesuits, whereby the kingdom of darkness may be the
stronger against all other kings and kingdoms? Are not such Papists murderers
oftentimes of Princes, even of their own Religion? As also repentance of other
sins punishable with death, will not free men from death, The Laws of
Denmark and Sweden, as also the due execution and good effect thereof, are
worthy to be considered in this case.
so it is worthy consideration whether repentance of Popish idolatry, be
sufficient to discharge men from the punishment of death. Yea, there may be
question, whether they do truly repent of such Idolatry, that do not testify
the same by willing submission of themselves to Gods Law for death in that
behalf. Yet for the time to come, death may be prevented, and increase of
Popery suppressed, if some sharp Law in the mean time be made for
restreyning both of men and women from going beyond the Seas, and there
becoming Jesuits and Iesuitesses: as also of all here at home from yielding
any mayntenance unto them in those places.



discerned and shunned of all men; so also further, of taking their Children of
above a certain age from them to have Christian education with kind usage
where their Popish parents or otherlike friends may have no access unto them,
neither the children themselves know, where their parents are, and yet to have
sufficient allowance from their parents according to their state, such parents
also themselves to have mayntenance out of their own demeanes: but the
overplus to be converted to the Kings use, till the full age of such children,
and their open renowncing of Popery.

to be unequally yoaked with unbelievers, Against marriage with Papists. 2 Cor.
6.14 Exo. 34.16 Deuteronomy. 7.3 Genesis 6.2 etc. Ezr. 10.14 Neh. 13.26 1 Kings 16
29.30.31 2 Chr. 21.3 1 Kings 11 1.4 Deu. 22.10 Matthew. 7.6 cha. 15.26. 2. Pet.
2.22 P.M. in 1. King. 3.1. and 11.1. and loci com. class. 2. p. 149. Call.
Epist. 103.104.299.
and the Israelits were often forbidden to make marriages for themselves or for
their children with any of the Heathen Nations bordering upon them, and that
all other sins, for which the Lord drowned the whole world, but eight
persons, are attributed to the marriages of the sons of God (that is
professors of the worship of God) with the daughters of men, that is of the
Heathen and Idolaters: Forasmuch further, as for this sin Nehemiah caused
such of the Jews as had made such marriages, and had also children by such
marriages, to put away their wives: as also that some kings of Israel are
condemned for marying with Heathen women: and so likewise of the kings of Judah
for like marriages with the daughters of the kings of Israel: and that the fall
of Solomon himself is ascribed to the like cause, not only by Nehemiah in the
place before alleged, but also elsewhere. And again, forasmuch as the
Israelits might not plowe with an Ox and an Ass together, and therefore much
less Christians may join themselves in marriage with Idolaters, such as all
Papists are in the highest degree: And yet again, forasmuch as we may not give
holy things unto Dogs, nor cast our pearls before Swine, and therefore much
less give our selves to such as are called Dogs and Swine: And further,
forasmuch as Peter Martyr, and Master Calvin, with other sound Divines and
diverse both ancient Fathers and also Councels have written and determined much
against marriages of Protestants with Papists, Is it not well beseeming the
wisdom of your most Honorable Court by some severe Law to restreyne such
marriages for ever hereafter within this his Majesty's Dominion, that so there
may be the less fear of such increase of Popery for the times to come as
lately has been?

Mungrill Papists.
may it please your Honorable Court herein also to consider of Mungrill
Papists, half fish, half flesh; neither fish nor flesh, nor (as we speak)
good red herring: which sometime indeed come to Church to avoid the pennaltie
of former Laws, but never come to the Supper of the Lord, but at such times as
men are specially enjoined thereunto, do flutter up and down, and shuffle from
place to place, where they may best lurk, and so receive not in seven years
together, if ever at any time: pretending for themselves (being any where
called into question) some fuites of Law, or some other such sleeuelesse
excuse. Neither also are the familiar acquaintance of such Papists altogether
to be forgotten: what also if it should please your Christian wisdoms to make
some Act for the frustrating of the last Wills and Testaments of such as having
pretended themselves Protestants in their health, in their sickness unto death
shall profess themselves Roman Catholics, as also make void what soever
former Act they had made for disposing of their states, or any part thereof:
and their said states to be either confiscate to his Majesty, or translated to
their next kindred, that had given good Testimony of their being sound
Protestants: with this Prou so notwithstanding, that upon their reuolting to
Popery, every such Act to be void? for the bodies also of such so deceassing
to be buried in some ignominious manner, and in some place of reproach?
Forasmuch likewise as many Pursiuants sent to search the houses of such
Papists, seem at the first much to bluster, till they meet with some Silver
drops for calming their tempests, were it not meet that this should be
prevented?

a King maintayneth his country, Prou. 29.4.
it being a special part of a wise King to scatter the wicked, and to cause
the wheel to go over them: Prou. 21.3. 1 Samuel 15.22. 1 Kings 2.46. Josh. 7. 2 Samuel 21.1, etc.
and the doing of such justice being more acceptable to the Lord then
sacrifices: and the throne of Solomon being then said to be established in the
hands of Solomon, when he had executed justice, even upon his brother Adoniiah,
and upon Ioab, and Shimei. Did not Israel also fall before little Aie, till
justice was done upon Achan for his sin secretly committed? And was there not
a famine in all Israel till David had granted justice against seven sons of
Saul, for his sin against the Gibeonits, which had been the cause of the
said three years famine? How was the Lord displeased with Saul for his mercy
to Agag? 1. Sam. 15. 1. Kings 20 42. Number. 33.55. Josh. 23.13 Judge. 2.3.
And with Ahab for letting Benhadad a king of another Nation go out of his
hands, whom he had appointed to die? Were not the Canaanites also contrary to
Gods commandment suffered by the Israelites, pricks in their Eyes, and
thorns in their sides? O right Honorable, I humbly beseech you to consider
that the Amalekites withstanding only the Israelites as they were going to the
earthly Canaan, and the Aramites that oppugned only their outward state, and
the other before mentioned were not such adversaries as the Papists be, that
are all members of the Man of Sin, 2 These. 2.3 Apoc. 18.20.21. Apoc. 19.1 etc.
the Child of Perdition, who cannot escape that horrible destruction that the
Lord has threatened, wherein men and Angels shall rejoice; and which are enemies
to the everlasting salvation of all Gods people. Severity therefore against
obstinate Papists, is no cruelty, but great honor to God, and great mercy to
our Sovereign, to his Royal Posterity, to all his Kingdoms, and to all
ignorant Papists themselves. Worthy of everlasting remembrance is the gracious
promise of God unto Iehu for that that he had done to Iezabel and the rest of
the house of Ahab, and their adherents, 2 Kings 10 36.
and to all Baals Priests, Because thou have diligently executed that which was
right in mine Eyes, and have done to that house of Ahab according to all that
was in my heart, therefore shall thy sons sit on the throne of Israel to the
fourth generation. O the flourishing state of this Kingdom, and the great
honor of Queen Elizabeth in all other Kingdoms, with her admirable
prosperity, that would not vouchsafe a good countenance to any known Papists.
Many curses she had from the Father of Papists at Rome, and from his Imps here
at home, but the same being causeless came not to pass: Prou. 26.2
so did not their practices against her: Yea, she and her people prospered the
better at home, and against all foreign Enemies.

The insolency of Papists since the Powder Treason.
By the hellish Powder treasons which should have destroyed good and bad (that
Hell it self does not) a man, a mere reasonable man, much more a man
instructed in the Word of God, would have thought, that all Popery and
Papists, would here and elsewhere throughout the Christian World, as also with
the Heathen themselves, have been had in perpetual detestation, and
everlasting execration. But it is one of the greatest wonders of the World,
that ever since Popery has the more increased: and that, not amongst persons
only of low degree, but of high and Noble rank: as also that Papists old and
new have been more insolent, and lifted up their horns higher then ever since
the bitter days of the late bitter Queen Mary: as if by the said most
devilish Conspiracy, both Popery and Papists had prevailed with his most
excellent Majesty, and won grace and favor with him; the which God forbid
that any true hearted Christian, and loyal Subject, should ever have cause to
think, or imagine. The former insolency likewise of the Papists (or at least
of some of that faction) is now grown to that height, that such true
Christians and loyal Subjects, as before I mentioned, may now fear the
company of any whom they know not, either traveling by the Highway, or in
any other place. Not long since, a lusty young gallant, of no small place (if
persons and state may be judged by Apparel, and Attendance) falling into
company of a mean man in the way, yet of good understanding, and religiously
affected, and by speech finding hint so to be, for a while soothed him up,
speaking as he spoke, and commending preaching as he did: but at last he
unmasked himself, and by diverse words showed himself in his colors to be a
friend of Popery; and not only an adversary, but an enemy to the Gospel, and
of the preaching thereof: very roughly breaking forth into these bloody
words, suitable to the bloody Religion of the Scarlet Whore, and saying, It
were a good deed to sheath my Sword in thy body. O right Honorable do not
such things presage some further fore to be breeding? Is it not time to look
to such? And have not all well affected to the Gospel, to his Majesty, and to
his Kingdoms need to pray much, and to look to themselves, and to be wise as
Serpents, and in their travels and elsewhere to beware of such Crocodils?

Why nothing has been spoken against toleration.
especially known to have Masses in their Houses for the time to come, or to
go to Masses elsewhere, I have spoken nothing against tolleration: First,
Because if the premises shall take place, there needs nothing in that
behalf. Secondly, Because his Majesty has heretofore by the Lord Chancellor
then being publicly and graciously in his Court of Star Chamber signified
his Princely resolution to the contrary: and that if he knew his Princely
Son would incline that way, he would do his best endeavor to disinherit him.
Thirdly, Because he has not long since, but even lately almost, caused
certain Divines to signify as much in their public Sermons at Paules-Crosse
in London. Fourthly and principally, Because the same is testified by that most
learned and reverend Bishop now Prelat of the Garter, in his learned answer
(entitled Tortura Torti) to a Book of one that called himself Mattheus
Tortus, who wrote his Book against the Apology of our Kings most excellent
Majesty. In the end of page 81 and beginning of page 82.
In this answer to the said Book of the said pretended M. Tortus, the said
reverend and learned Father writes thus verbatim, word for word, Nec in eo
Regi audiendus, quod consilium dat, de Religione libere habenda. Integrum hoc
iam illi non est. Nam (quod eum ea qua decet reuerentia dictum volo) non semel
periurus sit, quin bis si te audiat. Qua enim (si qua est fidei bis datae
conscientia) vel conscientia, vel fide ferret in regnis suis ritus vestros vel
vsum eorum publicum, qui suscepta primum Scotiae, suscepta dein Angliae corona
regia, vtrobique solenni ritu deo iusturandum praestitit, de conseruanda in
statu suo illa colendi Dei formula, nec alia, quam quae in regnis suis tum
public recepta, and vtriusque gentis legitus stabilita esset. Quarum etiam se
tum legum quoque non minus quam religionis sanctissime in se suscepit
defensorem fore. Eo autem consilium hoc ^uum tendit vt nouator sit, vt
periurus, vt vterque sit. Esset enim vterque, si vtroque hoc tam graui crimine,
vel coronae suae, vel etiam vitae securitatem redimeret. Hoc vero quam a
ratione prorsus alienum, tu lector iudica: Regi nostro praesertim, cui nulla
hic apud nos periurij dispensatio speranda: cui nulla de Pontifice opinio, quod
tam sit omnipotens, vt suscepti eum bis iuramenti religione possit exoluere.
These are the very Words of the same most worthy Writer: the English whereof,
I leave to the Learned of your most Honorable Court. The premised Testimony
considered, What loyal Subject, can so basely, or wickedly conceive of h s
Majesty, as that he should ever yield to a toleration of that damnable
Religion, against which he has so often written, protested, and sworn? So
much the less, are all true Subjects to conceive any such thing, because by a
toleration, as things now stand, not only the Kings Majesty himself should
be guilty of the crimes mentioned in the former testimony; but also all the
Judges of the Land, who are all sworn to the execution of the Laws already
enacted against Popery and Papists: neither so only, but also all other
Justices of the Peace in the Country; all Majors, Bailifes, and other chief
Magistrates in all Cities and other Towns Incorporate. The form also of
Justice in administration of Oaths, to Jurors, etc. should be changed. Alas,
alas, What a confusion would this make? And what might all the Land fear for
such doing? If the Lord will not hold him guiltless that any way takes his
Name in vain, What may be feared when all the Magistrates of an whole Kingdom
shall be guilty of the same in the highest degree?

Ignorant Papists.
Touching ignorant Papists, oh that some order might be taken for the reclaiming
of them, by loving, kind, and diligent instruction by men of discretion, and
wisdom well fitted so to do. Certainly the neglect hereof has been great,
and somewhat scandalous to the State. Many have been greedy of their Money,
and ready to beg the pecuniarie mulct of absence from Church. But alas who
has by good instruction labored to bring them to Church, and to the saving
knowledge of the Truth? Something likewise might have been inserted for
disarming of Papists: but because somewhat has been done in this kind,
therefore I say the less, only order would be taken for renewing thereof
yearly, and for better search of their houses in that behalf without any
foreknowledge of any such matter, whereby to convey their Armor to their
Farmers, or other Friends, or hide them in the Ground, or put them into
Hogsheads, or Pipes, as if the said Vessels were full of Wine or Beer.

Against Oaths.
The abounding of Oaths and Blasphemies in this Land, notwithstanding the
manifold Commandments and fearful threatenings of God against these sins,
and also the pride that men take in these sins, Hos. 4.1.2. Zech. 5.2. Ier.
23.10.
would require some thing to be spoken of them, least we partake of the
Judgments belonging unto them. But hearing some speech to have been already
for some order to be taken for repressing of them, I will forbear all further
speech in that behalf. Only touching the Oath Ex officio, The Oathe Ex officio
and the Oath tendered to Churchwardens, and Sidemen, as the first has been
largely declared by diverse learned judicious Lawyers to be against the Laws of
the Land, especially by that renowned Gentleman, Master Morris, late Attorney
in the Court of Wards: and is known so to be to many of your Honorable Court:
as also the same has been condemned openly in Westminster Hall, by the Judges
of his Majesty's most Honorable Bench, even to be against Law, Reason,
Religion, and Conscience, none but Time-seruers daring to deny the same, so
touching the other, Master Lambert of Kent, a learned Lawyer, and Justice of
Peace, by the authority of that ancient Judge, Master Fitz-Harbert, in his
Natura breui, has in his directions for Justices of Peace in giving their
Charges at Quarter Sessions, set it down for a special Article to be
enquired, whether any Ordinaries in their Courts do impose the same. viz. Any
Oathe to any of the Kings Lay people in any causes save only in matters
Testamentarie, and Matrimonial. The same also to be contrary to Law is
further evident by the express words of the Register, that has the grounds of
our Law, and the form of all Writs for Law. The daily imposition
notwithstanding of this Oath in all Ecclesiastical Courts by all Ordinaries,
being troublesome to many tender consciences, if it might please your most
Honorable Court to take some order therein, it would doubtless be a means of
much peace, and great comfort to many good Christian Souls. That some object
Churchwardens and Sidemen not to be mere Lay men, many Lawyers can easily
answer. And how can they be but Lay men (as things now stand) that are never
accounted of the Clergy, that have no Ecclesiastical ordination, that enjoy
no benefit of the Clergy, but only that which every one that can but read
enjoys in some cases of Felony. The taking of this Oath is the more
troublesome, because the Articles are so many, and variable according to the
variety of Ordinaries, of Times, of Diocesses. For sometime one and the same
Ordinaries do differ in their own Articles. The custom also of men's
swearing, and forswearing themselves herein makes them the readier to periure
themselves in other matters. To this point of the Oath Ex officio, especially
ministered unto Churchwardens, may be referred all such Articles as concern
matters not belonging to Ecclesiastical Courts. Such is the Article for not
paying rates to the Poor. The which notwithstanding some Ecclesiastical
Judges have acknowledged not to belong to their Courts, yet some poor men
being presented by virtue of that Oath for not paying have been much molested,
and at the last also excommunicated. The like may be said of some other
Articles thoroughly examined.

Against Witches.
Against those that are called good Witches, some order to be taken were the
better, because by ignorant and irreligious people, they are not shunned, but
rather honored. Those that are accounted evil Witches, are punished, but
these are recompensed as if they were indeed, Act. 8.10.
as Simon Magus was esteemed to be in Samaria. The other by the Devil bewitch
the bodies and goods of men: these by the same Devil bewitching the minds and
souls of men, do more hurt then the other. They use good words, but without
understanding, and such as are not appointed for working such good works. Such
good Witches also for the most part are void of all other good works, and most
profane, irreligious, and ignorant of Gods Word: and contemners of all
exercises of Religion. In their works also they respect not Gods glory, but
their own gain: working also either without any other means, then only
words, or by such means as have no virtue in them for working such things: but
rather the contrary, yet be used by them only to cloak their wickedness, and
to bleare the peoples eyes. There is also another kind of Witchcraft more
secret then the former, and yet much worse and more dangerous, very hard also
to be discerned, yet I doubt not, but such as may be found by your wisdoms
seriously applied to the searching of it, and the effects whereby it may be
discerned. This is that enchanting of the mind such as it seems Simon Magus
used in making the Samaritans think, he was the great power of God: such as
whereto Paul seems to allude when he says, Gal. 3.1.
O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you. God indeed rules the heart: yet
by this means sometimes in his Justice, as well as by other: giving the Devil
power as well to work upon the mind as upon the body: Was it not he to whom
the Lord gave power, both to enter into Ahabs false Prophets to lie unto him; 1
King. 22.^2.
and also into Ahab himself, to believe the said false Prophets? Who but he,
first bewitched (as it were) our first Mother Ene (having no inward evil of
her self) to Genesis 3.6.
eat of the forbidden Fruit? If he had not had some secret footing within, he
could never have so prevailed by all his outward temptations. 1 Chro. 21.1. etc.
How also did Satan provoke David to number Israel, but by his secret working
inwardly? It is also reported of Cyprian that before his conversion he tried by
Magike to draw a young Virgin to have committed filthiness with him, though
the Devil himself confessed he could not prevail because of her Faith.
Neither he by the Devil, nor the Devil at his request would have attempted it;
but that both thought it might be done. And no doubt, but that by this means
marriages are made of some, the one party without such means utterly abhorring
the other, and after marriage showing that they never married in any true love.
Here I beseech you give me leave to remember you of that, that Master Tyndal
writes in his Practice of Prelates, of Charles Maine King of France, and
created Emperor of Rome by Pope Adrian. This Charles so doted in his old age
upon an old Harlot, by means of an enchanted Ring upon her finger, that he
could never endure her out of his sight. Yea, she dying, he embalmed her, and
carried her in a Coffin with him whithersoeuer he went. At last his Lords being
weary thereof, and suspecting somewhat, opened the Coffin, and found the Ring
upon her finger: which one of the Lords took off and put on his own finger.
After this, Charles left his dotage upon her, and doted as much upon that Lord:
but the Lord being in time weary thereof, doubted some evil to be in the
Ring, and therefore took it off, and threw it into a Well, at Acon in
Douchland, in a foul Marish; where notwithstanding the said Charles always
after remained, and built a goodly Monastery in worship (as they use to
speak) of our Lady. Pardon me (I humbly beseech you) if herein I have been
too tedious. For it is well worthy your grave consideration, as the which may
be a thing dangerous, not only to some private and mean persons, but also to
other of great eminency, and therefore also in them to whole Countries. In
which respect, if by your wisdoms ye shall take some order to prevent it, ye
may do greater good thereby, then many can conceive, and for the which many
may have the more cause to bless God for you. Though such shallow heads as
mine own and some others, cannot easily see how it may be prevented, yet I
doubt not but that your wisdoms will by deep consideration of it see some
means either to prevent it, or so severely to punish it being made evident,
that afterward none shall so dare to offend in this kind as before. Exo. 22.18
Deu. 10.11
Surely that wise and just God that has so often and straightly commanded no
Witches to be suffered to live, has also given wisdom to some for finding
these out.

For the religious observation of the Lords day.
For the Religious observation of the Lords day, many good motions have
heretofore been made in Parliaments which always (as has been reported) have
been most hindered by such as should most have furthered them: and that because
they have more loved their own ease and pleasure in eating, drinking, and
playing, then the glory of God, or Salvation of his People. Therefore such
have pleaded for liberty, in walking, bowling, carding, and tabling, more then
for preaching or hearing Gods Word. Oh therefore that your Honorable Court
would now at the last take some order for reformation of all abuses of this
day, by gaming, buying, and selling, traveling, especially of common Cariers
by Horse, and by Wagons, or Carts, etc. The neglect of this day is the neglect
of all duties, and plainly argues a profane man. This day cannot be thoroughly
sanctified without diligent preaching forenoon and afternoon: or at least a
profitable Sermon in one part of the day, and good catechizing, and plain
teaching the Principles of Religion in the other part: the extreme ignorance
of all sorts and of all ages necessarily requiring the same. Such as plead one
Sermon enough to be meditated on all the day, may as well say that one is
enough for med tation of an whole year. A second Sermon, or the afternoones
catechizing in good manner, will not hinder, but further the preaching of the
forenoone. It restrains also the people from vain exercises, from drinking,
and gusling, and the like.

Against Nonresidencie.
The abuses of this day cannot be reformed, neither can there be such preaching
and catechizing without suppression of nonresidencie and plurality of living.
It is as truly as commonly said by sound divines, that they that teach by
Vicars and Curats, and not in their own persons, shall go to heaven by Vicars
and Curats, and not in their own persons. De pontif. Romano cont. 4. q 4.
Qui vicaria opera (says Doctor Whitaker) vtuntur, ij non nisi vicariorum
mercedem and salutem expectare possunt. So say other divines against whom no
exception can be taken. D. Morton Apol. part. 1. cap. 20.
Qui per alium munere suo praedicandi defungitur, habebit salutem vicariam, sed
poenam personariam. Ibit ille in gehennam per se, in Paradisum per alium. The
same is to be said of plurality of livings: because pluralists cannot but be
Nonresidents, and teachers by other. Neither is the reformation of these enough
for the better sanctifying of the Lords day, and for the better instructing of
Gods people without the reformation of Ministers themselves touching their
lives and conversation: whereby oftentimes they do more hurt then good by their
Ministry, how sound and diligent soever. And in respect of these enormities
of Ministers, such people as live under them may well complain as the woman of
the Shunems son did being sick unto death, My head, my head. 2 Kin. 4.13
The sufferance of all these nonresidents, pluralists, and scandalous Ministers
is a great blemish to our Church, and the bane of many souls: yea also, the
ruin of learning; though pluralities be maynteyned as means for preferment of
learning. For whiles one has much or too much, an other has nothing. To serve
the cures also of such nonresidents and pluralists, many young scholars not
grounded in learning, are taken from the Universities, and so cannot stay till
they be fit to do good in the country. By these means also the Ministry is
brought into great contempt, whiles Nonresidents themselves go for Masters,
and their Curats be accounted but Servants, and are so called. Some also of
such great Masters make their Seruing-men Ministers to serve their Cures, and
account that a great reward of their good service. If any have able Curats, and
such as take pains in teaching, what iniquity and injustice is it for them to
suffer other to take such pains for a small stipend, and themselves living
idly to have all the gains? And that sometimes when their Curats have a
greater charge of children then themselves? Some of these great Masters also
will not suffer their said Curats to preach twice in a Lords day. The
inscription of some of their own canons seems more to condemn these
enormities, then the canons themselves.

Able Ministers may have sufficient maintenance without pluralities.
I mean sufficient in sober sort without prodigality to maynteyne himself
and his charge, able notwithstanding to keep convenient hospitality, and yet
to leave some thing to his children. Such mayntenance may be provided by
uniting diverse small Churches, as especially in cities and towns, so sometimes
also in the country: which is the more necessary, because many Parishes have
not a convenient auditorie. For as the Orator said of an Orator. Quemadmodum
tibicen sine tibiis canere non potest, ita nec Oraton sine multitudine eloquens
esse potest, so may it be said of the Ministers of the word, that the paucitie
of some auditories does much discourage them, and cool their zeal: but full
congregations do put life into them. And were not a man of good gifts better to
employ them upon some good company, then to spend his time and strength upon a
few? From some livings also that are now very great, and yet have but a few
people, somewhat might be detracted to the supply of other. Are there not many
Impropriations worth 400 or 500 yea 600. li. per annum, where the Minister has
but 10. li. stipend (perhaps also his diet to live in slavish manner in some
Gentleman's House, as a Fellow to other Seruingmen) or some other small
maintenance? Ye are wise to whom I now speak, more largely to consider of these
things. Moreover, how might the Lands of Cathedral Churches now chiefly
employed for maintenance of idle Singingmen, Quiresters, Organ plaiers, Canons,
and petty Canons (as they call them) Virgerers, Doorekeepers, and such like,
be converted to the maintenance of preaching the Gospel? The Temple of
Jerusalem being defaced, wherein such singing and Music was only commanded,
why should God now be served in one place more then in another? Is he not
every where the same, and in the same manner to be worshipped? Why also may not
all the Males of an whole Diocesses, be enioined at sometimes every year to
appear in such Cathedral Churches as all the Israelites were commanded at
sometimes to worship in the Temple at Jerusalem, as well as to have God so to
be worshipped in Cathedral Churches, and not in all other? May not the Lord
well say, Isa. 1.12.
Who has required this at your hands? So likewise to use the holy Scripture in
this time of the Gospel, as in such chanting they are used, without
understanding or edifying of other, Is it not a plain abuse of them? Were it
not also much better for Prebends (if they still enjoy their places) to take
pains in some particular Pastoral charge (especially where there is but small
maintenance otherwise) then to live lurking idly in Cathedral Churches? Diverse
rich men also in diverse Corporat Towns, and elsewhere, having great tradings,
now paying nothing, but two pence a year, or some other small matter for their
Easter offering, as also other that have no Trades but live idly of their Lands
(like Gentlemen as they say, but rather like loiterers) might be constrained to
yield some maintenance to the Ministers that labor in the Word, and watch for
their Souls. Gal. 6.6. Heb. 13.17.
Why should their poor Farmers that perhaps occupy a Farm but of ten pound a
year, and at a dear rate, and having nothing else to live of, and yet have
great charges, pay thirty or forty shillings a year to the Ministers, and
they that have diverse Farms, for which they receive rents, pay nothing? Yea
they have the more need so to do, Mark 10 23.25.
because it is harder for rich men to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, then
for other. Should not Soiourners also, yea and Servants, especially having good
wages, being partakers of the Word, communicate to him that teaches? The
Apostles before mentioned general precept in this behalf is without any
exception.



Persons indebted not to be arrested on the Lords day.
were it not meet for persons indebted pleading fear of arresting to restrain
them from coming to Church, and that sometimes in truth, having cruel
creditours, and yet being ex animo desirous of the Word, were it not (I say)
meet for such to have some security by Law on those days, except (bewraying
their Hypocrisy) they shall be found in some Inn, Tavern, or Alehouse in the
places where they dwell?

Holy days to be abolished.
so why may not all the rest yet remaining be abolished for the better
sanctification of the Lords day. The diversity of commodities of one sort
though never so bad, does hinder the estimation and sale of the best of that
kind. So do these Holy days (their difference from the Lords days by the
common sort not discerned) prejudice the religious observation of the Lords
days themselves. Secondly, The retaining of these (being at least five and
twenty every year) cannot but greatly hinder the Common wealth of the Land.
For let the loss of the labor of so many thousand Trades men, and Laboring
men of all Occupations as this Land affords be well considered, to how great
a Mass will the whole loss amount. Thirdly, On such days many spend more
riotously in drinking and playing then they get in two days before or after.
Fourthly, On those days how many quarrels, and other outrages, are ordinarily
and yet most disorderly committed. Fifthly, How many Gentlemen and other great
men having buildings or other great works in hand, by the absence of their
Workmen on those days (in what case soever their buildings or other works
for the present are) do sustain great damage? Sometime also such Workmen
do so mispend the Holy days in glousing and drunkenness, that they are not
fit for labor, either the next day, or two or three after. Sixthly, Few
Masters on such days can contain their Servants from breaking out, and
distempering themselves so, that they are the worse the whole week following:
yea, sometimes for their whole life after. Seventhly, Some of the said days by
public authority are more solemnly to be kept then the Lords days: and in
respect of them the Lords days with many do vilescere. Eighthly, That time
that is commonly called Christide is more profaned then half the year
besides. More likewise in those twelve days is lauishly spent then in half of
the year after. In some places also some poor men loose more time and spend
more money in gaming, then twenty times so many dinners and suppers are worth
as they have in such great Houses: When likewise men are in such Houses
rioting, their Wives and Children are in great want at home: yea now and then
also in danger of their lives at their return either by distemper of drink,
or by mad grief with themselves for that which they have lost. Ninthly, How
many Apparitors and Sumners on such days sneake up and down, and prole here
and there, seeking work for themselves, and for their masters, by finding some
whom they may present, for their work or absence from Church: themselves
neither on those days, nor on the Lords days being at Church any where, but
keeping their Church betwixt two Churches, and sometimes in some blind and
filthy Alehouses. Many other the like abuses and inconveniences might be
alleged of these days, Col. 2 16. Gal 4.10.
but these may serve for a taste, God having abolished some days that himself
had ordained, and the Apostles having found fault with observation of such
days, etc. shall men think themselves bound to observe such days as
ignorantly have been instituted only by men, at least of more inconsiderate
zeal at the first, then of any sound Judgment? Illud est verius quod prius;
Tert. cont. Mar. lib. 4. Idem de virgin. velandis. Cyp. Ep. 63 ad Caecilium.
illud prius quod ab initio. Id ab initio quod ab Apostolis. And again,
Veritati nemo praescribere potest, non spacium temporum, etc. Dominus noster
Christus veritatem se non consuetudinem cognominauit, etc. And Cyprian, Si
solus Christus audiendus est, non debemus attendere, quid alius ante nos
faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit. Neque
n. hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet. sed dei veritatem, etc. For some
moderate recreation of Servants at some times, your most Honorable Court can
in your wisdoms take order, though Holy days be disanulled, and that
although some Masters should be merciless in that behalf. To conclude all for
the sanctifying of this day, may it please your Honorable Court, to consider
as of many other places of Scripture. Isai. 58.13. etc. and the like: Ier.
17.42. Ezekiel. 20.13. and 24 and 23.38. Neh. 13.15
so especially of the zeal of Nehemiah in that behalf. The greater the work
of Redemption is then the work of the first Creation, the more is the Lords
day, for remembrance whereof our Lord rested from the said work, to be
regarded. This further will I add, that some order may be taken for instruction
of poor prisoners, both on that day, and also at other times: either in the
Prison where they are, or in some more public place: and that in such places,
and at such times, as where and when their presence may be the less offensive
and noisome to other.

Lent.
touching the time of Lent, because though it be no holier then any other time
of the year, yet by some of the vulgar sort, yea also by some of better regard
it is called the Holy time of Lent. Touching this I do not plead for the
abolishing of it altogether touching abstinence from Flesh: but only I refer
the consideration of these things unto your wisdoms: First, whether it were
not better to be at some other time of the year when fresh Fish is more
plentiful, and easily to be had, then to be continued still as it is, at such
time as when there is almost none at all? Eus. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 23.
Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21. Sozomen. lib. 7. ca. 19
The rather, because it is not unknown to diverse Learned in your Honorable
Court that there have been diverse times of Lent observed in diverse Countries:
yea also, that there have been in some one Country diverse Lents observed in
one year: though for shorter time then ours is: yet all called by the name of
Quadragesima, but wherefore I confess I know not. Secondly, I do refer to
your wisdoms, whether it were not fit for some mitigation of the usual
strictness thereof: and that some liberty might be granted for the eating of
Fowls (as some were wont to eat of Water Fowls) and of Conies, and some
greater meats, the eating whereof might not be prejudicial to the State of the
Commonwealth? Because some not well able to purchase License to eat Flesh are
of weak bodies, not able to feed of Fish, neither is Fish wholesome for them.
Neither would this hinder the preservation of Calves and Lambs, but rather
further the same: because there being more liberty of other things men would
be the better content to forbear them. Thirdly, even touching this thing also,
were it not better for some liberty to be given to some poor men, that cannot
well bring up their Calves, or keep them long (especially having but two, or
three, or four) and them that have many to be more strictly tied to the
bringing up of a certain number every year. If it be objected that the
former strict obsernation of Lent is necessary for the better maintenance of
the Navy, to omit other answers that many of your Honorable Court can make to
this objection, may it please you to consider whether for help hereof, the
obstinate Papists being suffered still to live (though their life may be our
death, and mercy showed to them may be cruelty to the whole Land) then
forasmuch as they attribute such holiness to Fish (as not having perished in
the Flood) it were not very fit for such and other Papists so remaining, to be
restrained all the year long from Flesh and to feed only of Fish? I doubt not
but that the restraint of them all the year from Flesh, would be as good for
maintenance of the Navy, as the restraint of all sorts, only for a time. And
oh how holy would such Papists be by this means? Especially if also of their
own accord they would forbear all Fruit, and all things made of Fruit, Figs,
etc. Marmalads, etc. Wine, and Beer, etc. as they which also perished in the
Flood?

Choice of Parliament men to be free.
and as his Majesty in his late most gracious Proclamation forbad all choice
of Knights and Burgesses to be made of any Bankrupts, and other greatly
indebted, as likewise of any suspected not to be sound in Religion, and as your
Parliament has already taken some order for the present in such things, and
ye have most worthily acquitted your selves in dismissing of some unlawfully
chosen by Letters, or otherwise, so all posterity shall have cause to bless
God, for some certain Law now to be made for preventing of such evils for ever
hereafter: and for making all incapable of any place in that High Court that
shall use any such means for a place. None under age to be of the Parliament
Why also should any Young men whose Sons soever be admitted into so great a
Council for making of Laws for the whole Kingdom, that cannot well govern
themselves; and that are so young, as their Bills or Bonds for payment of money
are not good in Law? Is it not a Judgment threatened by the Lord, viz. that be
would appoint Children to be their Princes, Isai. 3.4.
and Babes to rule over them? If none be admitted into your Upper House, but
such as are of Age (except perhaps to see the order thereof, and to be the
fitter for future times) why should any of young years be otherwise admitted
into the Nether House? The longer these grieuances have hitherto been
tolerated, the more high time it is now for them to be reformed. The like may
be said for preventing of confusion in Election of Burgesses, especially of
Knights for your most Honorable House. This evil may easily be avoided, if
Election be made by a kind of Scrutinie, some principal, wise, grave, and
religious Knights and Gentlemen for Shieres, and other for Towns being
appointed to take every man's voice in writing, and sworn first to deal
faithfully therein.

Public and private Fasts.
as occasion shall require the same. By Gods gracious blessing heretofore upon
such Fasts (as in the year of the Earthquake this last Easter one and forty
years: and in the year 1588, and at other times) we may the more desire the
same now and hereafter. For certainly all Gods Judgments being well
considered, the security of all sorts in this behalf, may be well thought to
be the greatest Judgment of all other. Did not David command all his people to
rent their Clothes, to gird themselves with Sackcloth, 2 Samuel 3.3^ 38.
and to mourn for Abner, because a Prince and a great man was that day fallen
in Israel? Alas therefore that we having seen the fall of some of greater
worth then Abner, and had many other Judgments besides, should think of no
such thing. Nay rather, the performance of such exercises has been accounted
as petty Treason. Many may meet and sit days and nights, eating, drinking,
playing, and being drunk, and committing many outrages, and yet be in no
danger, in no fear: But (woe is me that I may say so much) for some to meet
either to fast and pray, or to help one another by repetition of Sermons; or
to confer only privately of such things, as they have heard publicly taught,
etc. these meetings are accounted and condemned as conuenticles. What a strange
thing is it also, that all other Churches of other Nations both abroad, and
here in our Kingdom, should have prayers and fasting for the Prince and
Princess Palatine, and yet we should neglect the same, that in the Bond of
loiall love to his Majesty should be most forward in such duties? Alas also,
that in these present great distresses and persecutions in France, and in the
troubles of almost all other Countries, we should neither help them otherwise
nor in this kind. Oh, the Lord keep us, from that curse (before spoken of)
that the Angel of the Lord inioined against Meroz, Judge. 5.23.
and the Inhabitants thereof. Especially the Lord keep us from such Traitors
against his Majesty, against his Princely Son, against the Prince and
Princess Palatine, and their Offspring, and against all his Majesty's
Kingdoms, as shall secretly and underhand persuade any not only to neglect
this holy duty of fasting for them, but also condemn the same altogether in
these days of the Gospel, as unlawful, and no way tolerable, but to be
seditious and dangerous. Doubtless there are too many such amongst us, as
under pretext of loialtie, are most pernicious and pest ferous Traitors. And
such are not all they only, that do utterly cry down and forbid fasting; and
thereby that help from Heaven (as much as in them lies) that the said Prince
and Princess Palatine need abroad (and consequently our King and his most
Noble Son also, and therefore likewise all their Kingdoms, the good of the
one being the good of the other.) Such (I say) are not only all they, that so
oppugn fasting, but they also that do what they can to withold all and of
man from them: neither so only, but that also be Instruments for sending over
more help to their Enemies, Number. 33.55. Judge. 2.3.
Spinola, and other, Thorns in the sides of the Church, that bestur their
stumps what they can for vp-holding the cursed Kingdom of the Roman
Antichrist, the Man of Sin, the Child of Perdition, now drawing toward his
end, and therefore gasping, striving, and struggling for life: and that with all
their might oppugn the Kingdom of Christ Jesus: and underhand also the
Kingdoms of all other Princes, above whom the said Antichrist exalts
himself. 2 These. 2.4 Ps 118.12. Act. 9.5.
So they compass the little Flock of Christ about like Bees, not knowing for
all that, that they shall all ( Spinola and his Mates) be quenched as the Fire
of Thorns: because it is as hard for them as before it was for Saul to kick
against the pricks.

Fraies and quarrels. Preu. 14.28.
and Murders within and without the Land, I shall not need to say any thing for
more severity for preventing the like, though the honor of a King consist
much in the multitude of the people, and by the want of people destruction
comes to a Prince: because his Majesty by public Proclamation has
signified his Princely indignation against the same, since which we have not
heard of so many such things as before: yet a Law being more certain and
memorable then a Proclamation, it were better to make some more severe Law
against such outrages, Hose 6.6.
because as mercy is better then sacrifice; so cruelty, especially sheading
of Innocent blood, is more odious to God, then ever was the neglect of such
sacrifices. Blood touching blood, Hose 4.2.
may we not fear a controversy of the Lord with the whole Land? I have
credibly heard of six strange Murders tried at one Summer Assizes at Exceter,
anno 1613. First, Of an Husband poisoning his Wife. Second, Of a Wife murdering
her Husband. Third, Of a Father killing his Son. Fourth, Of a Son killing
his Father. Fifth, Of a Master killing his Servant. Sixth, Of a Servant killing
his Master. How strange also was that threefold Murder at Halsworth in
Suffolk, committed four or five years since, but discovered the last year?
Two of the Murderers were executed the last Summer 1620, and the third repriued
for a longer time. As by every Murder God is bereaved of one of his principal
Creatures, and the King of a Subject; so also many times a Father loses his
Child, the Husband a Wife, or the Wife her Husband, a Brother and Sister, a
Brother or Sister: many Children their Father or Mother, many Friends and
Neighbors, a Friend and a Neighbor, and sometimes the Church a good Minister,
and the Common wealth a good Magistrate, or Officer. Can there therefore be too
much care for preventing of such mischiefs? All such persons as commit the
same do manifestly bewray themselves to have no fear of God in them. Genesis
20.11.
Many times also some wilful Murders are cleard under the name, either of
chancemedly, or at least of manslaughter.

Against Adultery. Number. 25.7, 8. 1 Cor. 5.6. Heb. 12.15 16.
has not your Honorable Court need to be put in mind of making a Law without
further delay for punishing Adultery with death? Who of any zeal can but
burn to hear, and (almost) to see as much as Phineas saw? If one Incestuous
person, and one Fornicatour be dangerous for a whole Church, oh how much more
dangerous are many? The more we profess, and some of us boast of the
profession of the Gospel, and of the glorious state of our Church, the more
need we have to purge our Land of such evils. As death according to Gods
Commandment is the punishment of Adultery in most other Countries, and so
ought to be by the judgment of most Divines (none almost being so bold as to
write to the contrary) so why should it not be in this Kingdom? Our Laws
inflict death upon some transgressions of the eighth Commandment, why
therefore should Adultery be so lightly punished? By the order of the
Commandments and by the testimony of Solomon, Prou. 6.30.
Adultery plainly appears to be greater then Theft. If the pronenesse of our
Nation to Theft, do require the greater punishment of Theft, are not the
people as prone also to Adultery and other carnal uncleanness? Oh let us
take need, that as now we say, that no man shall keep his goods in safety,
were not the punishment of Theft so severe as it is, so the time come not if
further severity prevent it not, when no man shall keep his Wife, or his
Daughter, or Maid-seruant from the violence of other. The Lord that gave the
Moral Law, and appointed punishment for every transgression, 1 Samuel 2.3.
being a God of knowledge, knew before the inclination of all Nations to one
sin as well as to another. And is not our Nation as much inclined to all
breaches of the seventh Commandment, as unto Theft? At least to such Theft as
by our Law is punishable with death? Alas the poor chiefly do offend in this
kind: but all sorts, especially the greater are most prone to the other.
Moreover by the sin of Adultery the eighth Commandment is broken in the
highest degree: Genesis 2.24.
For first of all the heart of a man's Wife, that is one Flesh with her Husband
is stolen. Mat. 19.6.
Is not the Wife more then any goods? Secondly, by this sin the whole state,
and the name it self of a man, yea sometimes of Noble Houses, is derived to
another, even of most base state and degree. Thirdly, Are not many Noble Houses
and Families ruinated thereby? Genesis 34.2 19.
The example of Schechem the Son of Hamor, and Solomon himself do testify
these things. Hamor was a chief Ruler, and the Lord of the Country where he
dwelt. And of what King were there ever so great things spoken as of Solomon?
Yet the Fornication of Schechem was the ruin of all the Schechemites: and the
love of many Wives by Solomon was the desolation of his Kingdom in his Sons
days. 1 Kin. 11.1 11.30, 31.
How many troubles also followed David's one Adultery with Bathsheba? Even to
the endangering of the loss of his life and whole Kingdom?

Mal. 2.13.
and by the interpretation of the first institution of Marriage by our Savior
himself. Mat. 19.4. Mark. 10.5.
It does the more also concern your most Honorable Court to have regard
hereof for the better preserving of your own posterity from this sin, that
so their Names, Lands, and Inheritances may descend to them, to whom of most
right the same appertain. Shall any fear that if this motion should take
place, then themselves or theirs shall first feel the smart thereof? Absit.
What hope then can there be of the restraint of this sin hereafter? Every
Generation to come may be feared to be more adulterous then other. Such fear
also seeming to come from a guilty conscience, is nothing else but the fruit
of the former lenity toward this sin. Had this severity been before
enacted, men would never have been so hardened in this sin, as to fear the
danger of this Law. I will not here be so uncharitable, as to think any man
will object the former danger of alienation of Names and Inheritances may be
avoided by having chaste Wives for the nights, though they have their Mistresses
on whom to satisfy their lusts at other time. This were a deuillish speech.
And they that are unchaste themselves may fear that which Job wished might
befall to himself, Job 31.9.10.
if at any time he had offended in this kind. Job at that time by the course of
Nature was not past the danger of that sin: in as much as long after he begat
Sons and Daughters. Job 42.13.
Neither spoke he that for the time only present, but also to testify his
innocence for the time past. Does not the Lord also in Justice give an
incontinent Wife, to such an incontinent Husband? Yea, does he not also for the
like sin of the Husband, take away his grace from the Wife giving her over to
incontinencie, in revenge of the incontinencie of the Husband? Yea, does he not
sometimes suffer chaste Wines to be against their wills defiled by other for the
sin in that kind by the Husband? The example of David does plentifully
testify the truth hereof. That our Savior condemned not the Woman taken in
Adultery does nothing prejudice my former plea. 2 Samuel 12.11, 12. compared
with 16.22 John 8.11 Luke 12.14
First, Because Christ was no Judge in such causes. Secondly, Because if he had
been a Judge, yet her accusers whiles he stooped down, and wrote on the ground
having all forsaken her, he could not have proceeded against her. 1 Cor. 5.4 5.
Paul also commanded not death to be inflicted on the incestuous person, as
because himself was no civil Magistrate, so also because the Church it self
had then no civil jurisdiction amongst them.

Bastard: so likewise against men sinning in the same kind. Against common
Harlots
By the present impunitie, some have had three, some four, some five, some
six or seven, and that by several men or boys. The like may be said of
diverse men by their servants or other filthy queanes, and yet still such
persons continue in their filthiness, as they have any opportunity to act the
same: The common penance they set not a rush by, but rather make a May Game of
it: neither is it hastily enjoined, where there is no money to discharge the
Courts. Standing in a white sheet they think as good an ornament for them, as
the Surplice is for the Minister. They no whit fear Excommunication, because
they had rather be out of the Church then in it: as also because they see the
same not only executed for every trifle, but also sometime against the best
disposed people; even for righteousness, Ioh. 9.22.34 Ioh. 16.2. Judge. 19.30
as it was by the Scribes and Pharisecs in our Saviors time: and as our
Savior foretells it should be afterward. Of these things I do most humbly
beseech your renowned Court to consider, consult, and give sentence.

Against drunkenness.
Against drunkenness more severity is yet necessary, because it does daily
increase, and more and more abounds: and is the very chief and principal
Foines of the former beastliness. In drunkenness also men may fall into the
deepest kind of uncleanness, and never discern the same, and be ready to
swear they never did any such thing. Genesis 19.33. etc. 2 Pet. 2.7
This is most evident by the example of Lot, though otherwise a just man. Yea,
what sin is there, either before named or other, that comes not out of this
sink? This sin makes a man a beast for the time, and yet for a man to be
made a beast is recorded for one of the most remarkable Judgments that ever
were. Yea, Dan 4.33.
the Drunkard in his mad drunkenness is worse then ever was Nebuchadnezzer in
his beastly condition. For all the while he so continued we never read that he
committed any other sins. Romans 3.14 Psalm. 73.9. Psalm. 12.4.
But the mouth of the Drunkard is full of eursing and bitterness. They set
their mouth against Heaven, and their tongue walks through the earth. They
especially say, with our tongues will we prevail, our lips are our own, who
is Lord over us. As it is said of an Orator, Ex eius ore verba magno impetu
atque aestu erumpebant, non secus ac seruentes aquae ebulliunt and exiliunt, so
may it be said of him that is given to drink, whiles drike is in him, and he
in drink, Ex eius ore nefanda omnis generis iuramenta, blasphemiae,
imprecationes, conuitia, maledicta, stultiloquium, turpiloquium, obscaeni
sermones, and eius farinae reliqua omnia mala, non secus ac feruentes aquae
ebulliunt and exiliunt. It is said by one, The proud man has no God, the
ennious man has no Neighbor, the angry man has not himself; but the
drunkard may truly be said, Deu. 21.21
not to be himself. For drunkenness natural Parents must bring forth their
own Son that will not be reclaimed from it, to the Magistrate to be stoned
to death by all the people of the place where such an one dwells. I could
discourse of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.37, 38.
becoming upon report made by Abigail of dangers like to have befallen him, 2 Samuel 13.28.
but yet escaped, becoming (I say) like a stone, and fearfully dying: of
Amnon, David's Son, in drunkenness being murdered: of Benhadad, 1 Kings 20 16.
and two and thirty Kings with him in their drunkenness subdued by the
Jsraelites: 1 Kin. 16.9 10.
of Elah before that in his drunkenness slain by his Servant Zimri: Dan.
^5.30, 31.
of Belshazzar the same night after his drinking and glousing loosing both life
and Kingdom. But to omit all these the Magdeburgenses in their Centuries,
Centur. 11 cap. 6. page 346.
record out of our own Histories, that our own Nation having spent all a night
in drunkenness was the very next day overcome by the Normans. What shall I
say more? Hose 4.11.
Whordome and Wine, and new Wine, take away the heart, so stupifying and
brawning the same, that no threatenings, or execution of Judgments, neither any
exhortations to repentance will pierce it, or at least prevail against it. All
these things cry in the ears of the Lord of Host, and I hope will so cry in
your Christian cares, that they will be heard and prevail against this foul
Monster. Yea, so prevail, that as Amnon hated Thamar with a greater hatred
then ever his love had been wherewith he loved her, 2 Samuel 13.15.
and commanded his Servant to shut her out, and to lock or bolt the door upon
her, that she might not return, so such order shall now be taken against this
sin, that all men shall hate it more, then ever they loved it, and so shut
the door of this whole kingdom upon it, that it shall never prevail as it
has done. I prescribe no particular punishment: but leave it altogether to
your wisdoms. Only I wish some order to be taken who shall be punished for a
drunkard: and that for as much as rich men care not for five shillings (though
they will hardly give two pence to a poor man) and yet will be drunk as well
as other, that therefore some greater matter be enacted.

Other excessive drinkings. 1. Pet. 4.3. Isai. 5.11.
the Apostle having not only distinguished drunkenness from drinkings, but also
reckoned the one and the other for sins of the heathen: and the Prophet
having denounced a woe as well to that as to drunkenness it self: and that
heathen Emperor Ahashuerosh in his Royal and magn ficent feast of 180. days
having left so noble a president against immoderat drinking, and of all so
brietie in drinking, commanding that all their drinking should be in order, and
none might compel. Oh how does this condemn many feastmakers among
Christians, that think it their glory, or honor, or worship, to urge men to
drink unto drunkenness? This is so foul a thing that in the most corrupt age
of the Church, a Council held at Rome it self anno 1215. in which were
Ambassadors or Orators at Rome, from Constantinople, France, England, Hungary,
Jerusalem, Cyprus, and Arrogan with 412 Bishops, and Abbots and Priors above
800. Centur. 13. cap. 13 p. 806.
and in all of Prelates about 1315. the Pope himself sitting for President,
even this Council (I say) Can. 15. after sentence against drunkenness in the
Clergy, says vnde illum abusum decernimus penitus esse abolendum, etc.
Wherefore we decree that abuse to be altogether abolished, whereby in certain
quarters the drinkers do bind themselves to drink equal portions, and he by
the judgment of such drinkers is most commended, that makes most drunk, and
that draws dry the fullest cups. Page 940.
The like Canon is afterward by a Council of Colon against the same abuse.
Such drinking is called drinking of health, and it is accounted a great
indignity therefore not to pledge one drinking to the health of his Majesty:
but alas, it is no health, either to soul or body: but sickness and death to
both: to plead a secret comprecation of health in such drinking, is an
abomination to God, inter plena pocula to mix comprecations. Such drinkers also
do seldom or never pray (at feast as they ought) either for the health of
them to whom they do so drink, or for their own health. We are commanded to
pray for the health of other, but never to drink. Some of the ancient Fathers
have greatly condemned drinking to the health of the Emperor, and have highly
commended praying in that behalf. What health can there be for soul or body,
when some in such drinking have fallen down stark dead? Sometime also such
drinkers drink themselves in time out of all bodily fashion, out of money, out
of wit, out of grace: having no more money in their purses, no more wit in
their heads, no more grace in their hearts then they leave wine, ale, or beer
in their cups, when they have drunk ad imum, turning the bottomes of such
cups, and the heels of themselves upward. O the commonnesse of this sin in
these days, not only in base places, but in many great houses: yea sometimes
in the houses of religious great persons: where servants think it a disgrace
to themselves, and a discurtesie to other great men's servants, if they drink
them not drunk: yea so drunk that they can do no service to their masters
homeward: yea, it were well if some great persons themselves, yea very great
persons did not glory in this which for all that is their great shame. In
common Schools Potations are but once a year: in Lent: and in the
afternoones: but these wretches, these sots make their Potations every month,
every week, every day as soon as they are out of their beds, in the
forenoones, as well as in the afternoones even in the night till they be so
oppressed with drink that they be forced edormire crapulam. Is it not therefore
high time to repress this evil? More then time. If reformation hereof begin
in the houses of Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen, as also of the most dignified
Prelates, it will be the more easily enlarged further. For how can ministry
or magistracy be well executed, Isai. 28.7. Leuit. 10.9 1. Tim. 3.3. Tit. 1.7.
Pro. 31.4. Isai. 5.25. 1. Maccab. 16.15.
by them that are culpable in this kind? Examples of Magistrates ye have seen
before. Touching Prelates etc. That of Simon the Priest with his two sons
Mattathia and Judah (though it be Apocrypha) is not altogether to be despised.
For they all three having drunk largely by the policy of Ptolomaeus the son
of ^^ubush, were slain by the said Ptolomaeus. Now here also is to be
considered the foul abuse of Tobacco. I call it abuse, because it may be that
for Physike there is some use of it: but Quorum non est vsus eorum non est
abusus. And this abuse is even in the Universities themselves: yea in all other
places. Even such is the abuse hereof, that thereby more smoke comes out of
some men's noses then out of many chimnies of some great houses: even of such
men as do most abuse the said Tobacco. Hereby also the former sins of
drunkennsse and excessive drinkings are the more nourished. Finally hereby,
though many chimnies are clean swept, yet the bodies of some men deceassed
being opened have been found as foul and black, as chimnies are by much soot.

Against multitude of Innes Tauernes and Alehouses.
Tauernes, and Alehouses in all places. Yea, for making some Act for the
stinting of the number of them in every Parrish of every Town, and in every
Village of the country; and that the number so stinted may not be increased
afterward by any whosoever. Yea also that none be authorized to keep Inn,
Tavern, or Alehouse, but such as are of good fame and name for their own
sober carriage and behavior. As likewise sufficient to undergo the penalty
by you appointed in case they shall offend by suffering any disorder in their
houses contrary to Law. But because ye have already begun to take some order
in that behalf, I shall not need to speak much. Notwithstanding there is the
more need to be had for the lessening of the number of them in all places, and
for reformation of the great resort unto them, especially by such as have
houses of their own in the same Parrishes: and chiefly of the great abuses in
them by the former sins of drunkenness and excessive drinkings, by playing
at unlawful games, by swearing, by singing filthy songs, and by many other the
like disorders. In respect of all these there is the more care to be had for
redress of the premises: because such houses are the chief bane of many men's
children, the spoil of many Servants: the ruin of many young Heirs; the
means of much whoredom, and of many quarrelings and murders: the harbors of
many Thieves to contriue their Robberies: and the places whither to bring their
these stolen goods: and finally the boothes of all other iniquities. Some of
them sometimes by some Justices, yea at quarter Sessions for a time are
represt; but how soon after be they erected again? Such Alehouses also are
most dangerous, that are in blind corners, far remote from other houses: so
also such as are the more needles, because they are near, to Market Towns
that abound with them: and both these are the more dangerous, because
Constables and other neighbors cannot daily see the behauiours in them: the one
to inform the other to reform whatsoever is amiss: yea, also touching all
Alehouses, Innes, and Tauernes, for the better repressing of them, and
redressing of all abuses in them, it is to be wished that no known riotous
persons, and such as are given to play, and drunkenness, specially men
servants, and sons of parents known, might be suffered to run upon the
score, and to take more then they presently pay for and that therefore all such
ale or beer sellers, Innekeepers, or Tauerners as should suffer any such
Servants or men's sons, of age or under age so to do, should have no benefit
of Law for recovery of any such wilful debts. Finally, may it please you to
consider how convenient it were for all Tauerners, Innekeepers, Vinteners,
Brewers and the like in all Cities and Towns corporate to be restrained from
bearing any chief magistracy in any such places My reason of this short
motion I leave to your Honorable wisdoms to conceive.

Laws still in force they have been condemned, Play, and Players.
the more I hope ye will now this once more so strike and wound them, that
Cities, Towns, and Villages shall never hereafter be so troubled and robbed by
them, as hitherto they have been, and yet yearly are, notwithstanding all
former Laws against them: the rather because of that intolerable insolency
of them that before has been touched, even against the greatest States in the
Land, as also against worthy Preachers of the Word in such places, as where
they have been suffered to play. And who do most resort to such companions,
but their like (for the most part) in all profaneness? The poorest also, and
most beggarly persons will spare a penny or two to see and hear their foul
sports, that have not so much more in their purses, to buy necessary food for
their Families: yea, such for the most part do most eagerly resort to such
exercises, as never care for any exercises of Religion private or public.

Bankrupts, etc.
have the more need of your severe animaduersion, because by such many are
undone, and themselves pretending decay grow rich: and when they have
compounded with their creditors for the third, or fourth, or eighth part
sometime of their debt, they have enough left for themselves and for their
Children afterward. This is much greater robbery, then (without Murder) to
take Purses by the highway. These vermin are the more dangerous, because many
times when they are nearest breaking, and intend to break, then to deceive men
the more, they make the greatest show of wealth, by building, by costly
apparel, by feasting, and the like. With these may be joined those that upon
their second* marriages make Ioynters to their second Wives, having before
conuaied their states to their Children by their first Wives. So likewise they
that sell annuities out of their Lands, which before they have secretly
conuaied. Against ingrocing of Farms, Ingrocers. Prou. 23.4.
I hope these last years, have made men to cease (as Solomon speaks in like
case) from their such wisdom: and taught them that have many to desire to be
rid of them: yea, Landlords to abate rents.
I hope also that these years of plenty will teach great persons that are
Lords of many Farms, to mittigate their rents of their own accord, without any
further order to constrain them so to do, lest if they do not, their Farmers
run away, leaving them and their Lands in the lurch: to their as great loss as
before they had gain by their hard rents: in the hardness of their hearts
looking for their rents, but never caring with what difficulty, and grief of
heart their Farmers labor to maintain themselves and their Families: Ps.
127.2.
rising early, and sitting up late, and eating the bread of sorrows, while
their Landlords live in ease and pleasures. Notwithstanding the woe of such
Landlords will be greater in the end, then the present grief of their poor
Tenants. Isa. 3.15. Psalm. 14.5. Amos 8.6, 7. Amos 4.2.
For they beat the Lords people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor:
and eat them up as men eat bread: yea, they sallow them up, and buy them for
silver: and sell them for shoes. Will the Lord always bear this? No, no: He
has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, that certainly he will never forget
such works, and by his own holiness, that the days shall come upon such
when he will take them away with hooks: that is, he will destroy them
suddenly, and unawares, as the Fish is taken with the hook (Will the Lord be
forsworn?) Yea, he threatens further, that although such great ones build
houses of hewn stones, Amos. 5.11
they shall not dwell in them: and though also they plant pleasant Vineyards,
they shall not drink Wine of them. Yea further which is heauiest of all, Amos
8.7.
the Lord threatens never to forget them: and to bring such a plague upon
them, as out of the which they shall never pluck their neck: Mich. 2.3. Mich.
3.4.
and that although they cry unto the Lord, yet he will not hear them. Will the
Lord deal thus with them that oppress the bodies of men? Oh then, how will he
deal with them that are cruel to men's Souls? Because also some Executors of
last Wills and Testaments of the dead are as great oppressors as the former by
wasting Orphans goods in suit of Law (sometime against such as to whom in
nature they are most bound) in building, purehasing of Lands in their own
names, and in so renewing of Leases, left to their trust for such Orphans, and
in living riotously, and other like ways, so that such Orphans coming to age,
are frustrated of that which their Parents left them, may it please you to
consider of doing some thing, according to your godly wisdoms for preventing
hereafter of this great evil: the father because Executors may die, and often
do die, before such Orphans be of age. The same I wish concerning some that
have ingroced some sums of money into their hands, and therewith purchased
Lands, and then most wickedly laid violent hands upon themselves, to leave the
said land to their heirs, because lands pay no debts. Such I have known, and
therefore I do the rather commend the same to your Honorable Court, to be
prevented for the time to come. Touching oppression by Ecclesiastical Courts,
in taking greater fees for probat of Wills, Letters of Administration, for
Excommunications, and Absolutions, for Citations, and appearances according to
such Citations (just or unjust) enforcing also men to buy their Books of
Articles, and to pay ten or twelve pence for a Book of them (dear of two
pence) and other such ways: as ye have begun a little to pry into them, so
hoping ye will sift such things further, I will spare all further speech of
them: as also of the extortion of some Bishops themselves in taking much more
then they ought for Letters of Orders, for Institution, Induction, and the like.

Against Symonie.
by any Ministers themselves, or by any their friends in their behalf, for
Benefices or any other Ecclesiastical preferments, to such as do more love to
see money then to see God: Exodus 23.8 Dan. 16.19
and that by such seeing of money have their eyes so blinded, and their words
so perverted (though before they seemed righteous) that they can neither see
that that is right, nor (like a drunken man) speak a right word. This is the
more worthy your wise consideration, because although the Laws already
against the said corruption enacted be so strickt, that a man would wonder how
that foul and monstrous sin should be still continued, yet such is the
wicked wit of man, that it has ways and wiles enough to elude all already
done therein: and so to beguile their own Souls, that Symonie to many
Patrons, or to their Wives, or to their Children, or to their Servants, or to
their Friends, is still as common, as rife, as usual, as if there were no Law
at all against it. And albeit a man would think that no more severity could
be devised to repress the same, yet if ye shall be pleased to entertain this
further motion, I doubt not but that your wisdoms will find out somewhat
more then yet has been for the curbing and restraining, both giver and taker
for the time to come from all such corruption. The same I do likewise commend
to your wisdoms for restraint of the like evil in the collating of
Academicall preferments, especially Schollerships and Fellowships in the
Universities. For it is lamentable, and very lamentable, to see the great
change of those places, as in other things so also in this, from that they were
forty or fifty years past, when there was no such corruption almost known.
It may be some were chosen of favor, or by friendship, and Letters of great
persons that were not so worthy as some other that were past over: but as for
money corruption it was not so much as talked of. Afterward also, for
resignation of a Fellowship it may be the Resigner had some twenty Nobles, or
ten pound at the most. But now alas it is come to that pass that Masters of
Houses take sometimes forty pound, sometimes fifty pound, sometimes an
hundred Marks, sometimes an hundred pounds, and more also for a poor
Fellowship, to the great prejudice of Learning, the hindrance of the Poor, the
disgrace of the Gospel, and to such shame and reproach of such takers
themselves, that Libels are cast out against them for the same. If some Masters
and late made Fellows were upon their Oaths hereof examined, they could not
if they have any fear of God, or any conscience deny it. Neither (I am
persuaded) would they, being especially assured of pardon for their offense
past in that kind. But for the time to come, were it not fit that all such
takers and giuers, as also all friends that shall give any thing for any in
such respect, should be severely punished by your wisdoms: as likewise that
all that could detect such dealing, should be well rewarded?

Against riotous gaming and unlawful pastimes.
Oh that ye would be pleased to take some order against such things as Solomon
there means. I mean against all riot in gaming, in lavish and costly fare,
in rich and curious apparel, beyond ability, above calling, not beseeming
their sex, whereby also is to be understood all excess in Hunting, Pro. 21.17
Hawking, and the like. The which exercises are in themselves lawful, but not
convenient for all sorts of persons: yea sometimes, they be made unlawful
being immoderately used. And by these things how quickly do many waste their
whole states, and bring themselves to be hired out for bread? 1 Samuel 2.5
Yea such as were borne to great Inheritances. In some Countries I have heard,
young men prodigally given to be confined for their expenses. Why may it not be
so with us? Prodigal persons to be confined to their expenses.
Why also should there not a Law be made for all great men no longer to enjoy
their Titles and Dignities, then whiles they have means to maintain the same?
As also for some in every Country to be appointed to have power for a time,
every year, or every two or three years to call Noble men's heirs and other
great persons to account after they be of age, and to examine them of their
expenses: and then upon finding them lavish, Christianly to admonish them:
finding them frugall to encourage them: and if they shall not regard the second
or third admonition, such to be degraded of their Dignity, and deprived of
their other privileges, which before they held by their places. If also some
ancient Civil Laws were revived for recovery of money lost by any under age,
and that for fifty years after; or for the bestowing of such money lost after
age upon the poor (the winners thereof being forced to make restitution to the
Magistrates) that so the loosers may be loosers, and the winners no gainers: If
such Laws (I say) were revived, what a goodly restraint would they make of
riotous gaming? In a little Book also De Moribus Turcorum, with a Preface of
Luther prefixed thereto, I read, that such as lost money by play, being found
were punished with many ignominies. I could allege many testimonies out of
Justinian, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Bastingius, and diverse of the Fathers and
Councels, as also of Heathen men, Tully, and other against playing and wasting
of men's states by playing. But I doubt not but that some of your Honorable
Senate, can speak more then my self can in this Theme, or then is fit for me
to write. That that I have written herein, I have written without curiosity,
or any pride in meddling with greater matters then belong unto me, but only in
regard of the good of the Commonwealth, and in love to such as I see by such
means vainly to consume their Patrimony, to their own and their Childrens
misery, and to the ruin of their Noble or Worshipful Houses. All also that I
write I do humbly submit to your Honorable wisdoms,

Excess of apparel.
and all good duties besides to God and men: and thereby sufficiently speaks
against it self. Neither is to be condemned in those respects for the
costlinesse only thereof: but also for the strange and variable fashions every
year changed, no man or woman almost knowing how they may go. Isa. 3 16. etc.
Zeph. 1.8. 2 Kings 9.30.
Does not the Lord threaten severely to punish such things, by whomsoever used?
Or were his such threatenings only for those times? The Scripture records
Iezabel for a Monster of that Age. But these times cry down her pride, and
commend her to have been sober and modest. Touching our late newfound
Monsters, I mean Women that have clean cut off their Hair, and gone like
Boys or Young Men (it may be that they might be so taken as Pope Ioane was) as
his Majesty has let some of them see his frowning countenance, and hear his
words of Princely indignation against them, whereby that foul fashion was a
while repressed, so I have wished his Majesty would likewise have been
pleased, to have committed them to Bridewell or Bedlem, and commanded them
there to have been kept till their Hair were fully grown again, 2 Samuel
10.15.
as David commanded his Ambassadors abused by Hanun and the Princes of Ammon
by shauing of half their Beards, to tarry at Jericho till there beards were
grown, because they were ashamed. Were not this so much the more just, because
these impudent Women sin against the light of Nature, and yet are not ashamed,
but glory in their shame? Yea both such Women, and also men offending in the
contrary by wearing Woman-like long Hair, do give Paul and the Holy Ghost
the lie in so doing. 1 Cor. 11.14.15.
For Paul by the Holy Ghost has said, Does not nature it self teach you,
that for a man to have long hair it is a shame? But for a woman to have long
hair it is a glory to her. Do not therefore such men, and such women say nay
to all that, and speak the clean contrary, viz. That it is very comely for
men to wear long hair, and a great ornament for women to cut off their hair,
and to become Tomboyes? Oh how do these cry to men for reformation, and
without reformation to God for Judgment.

Multiplicitie of Faires.
and pelting Parrishes: as the which are only means to maintain Rogues and
Vagabonds, and such drunkenness and drinkings, as whereof before I have
spoken: and whereby likewise, there is much more detriment to the
Commonwealth, then any benefit. Yea alas, how is God dishonored many ways by
occasion of such Faires? Yea also, how well may most Faires in great Towns be
spared: except only some special Faires, as Bartholmew Fair at London,
Sturbridge Fair by Cambridge, Lyn Mart, and the like: and excepted likewise
great Cattle Faires in diverse Countries? Other Faires for the most part are
more prejudicial to Trades men in such great Towns, then beneficial to any,
but only to Alehouse-keepers, Inholders, and Tauerners.

London, Great persons to keep house in the Country. Romans 12.12. Hebr. 13.2 1
Pet. 4.9. Genesis 18.3. and 19.2. Job 31.17. Neh. 5.17.18.
and other Cities and Towns from their chief Mansion Houses in the Country,
as they do, and to enjoin them to keep House in the Country, Hospitality
being both often commanded, and also commended by many worthy examples of
Abraham, of Lot, of Job, of Nehemiah. Is it not the more necessary in these
days for the more refreshing of the poor, all Trades being now so dead as
they are, and many men not knowing almost how to line? Yea in the same respect
it is likewise the more needful, by Justice the better to keep men in order,
and from using unlawful shifts for helping of themselves. Yea, at all times it
is needful for repressing of sins, by the authority of such great men,
meaner Justices not being of such account as the greater. The old excuse of the
great price of things hindering Housekeeping in the Country has lately been
removed by the great plenty of the late years, especially for such great
persons more easy Housekeeping. Before also it might have been the more
eased by the more moderation of expenses in building, gaming, apparel, and
other rioting. By this means also every other Gentleman's burden would be the
less. As many hands make quick work, so many shoulders make light burdens.
Exodus 18.17. etc.
Hereby likewise love would be greatly increased, and the hearts of the Common
people gained to love and honor such great persons the more; and be the readier
for any good service of the Country. If such likewise would so wisely and
religiously govern their houses, that it might be said of them as it was said
of Cornelius, that they feared God and all their households with them, Act. 10.2
Oh what light of life and godliness would it give to other? Finally, this
motion is the more reasonable, because commonly such great persons chief Lands
lie where their chief Houses are: there also they have the more services
performed to them by the people of such parts; and therefore there they are the
more bound in all equity to do good.

Abuse of his Majesty's Letters Patents.
and go up and down with Briefes of them: as also for repressing of Rogues and
Vagabonds, as much every where now swarming as if their were no Law against
them, and thereby robbing the Countries where they travel, and be otherwise
very dangerous, and commit many evils, let it be only sufficient by mentioning
them to put you in mind of them, for some more severe Law to be made to
restrain them. Wracks also seem very hard, if not altogether unjust and
unrighteous, viz. that one should be enriched with the loss and vndoings of
many: and that the principal owners should not only lose their Ships, with
many men's lives for the most part, but also their goods. These things
considered, and so amplified as by your wisdoms they may be, what heart so
flintie as not to be moved with compassion in that behalf?

endeavor to keep a good conscience in all things toward God and men, Act.
24.16.
how gracious a thing were it to repress this for the time to come? The rather
because many young Christians are hereby much discouraged. Especially it
seems fit to restrain Preachers in Pulpits from all such disgraceful and
reproachful speeches. Alas it is too lamentable that many young striplings,
that had need to be confined to some places till their beards were grown, and
themselves were men (as having been born Ministers before their time) starting
up into Pulpits, having no word of exhortation, neither any sound Doctrine to
deliver; It is (I say) lamentable, that such should even in great Congregations
spend the time in such railing, and yet by profane and ignorant men, be thought
to preach excellently. I hope that if some of the most Reverend Bishops knew
this abuse, they would do some thing for reformation hereof. But a Law in this
behalf were best of all.

Diverse cases of marriage.
As that young men newly married should not be suffered presently to travel
for two or three years together: Against marriages also without consent of
Parents: at least contrary to the minds of religious Parents, that are able to
show good reasons of their contrary minds: That all Licenses for marriages
without thrice solemn asking (as they call it) should be made unlawful: That
the Wife being justly divorced for Adultery, the innocent party may have
liberty to marry without contradiction; there being no heavier thing for
strong and lusty men then to be restrained from marriage: And that the
general restraint of all persons from marriage for almost half the year,
should be utterly abolished, the same being contrary to the Word, 1 Timothy 4.3.
and a Doctrine of Devils, and being altogether Papal, and having no use but
to pay for Licenses, and being oftentimes the cause of much carnal filthiness
before marriage, and sometime the man dying before marriage, and leaving his
contracted Wife with child, to her perpetual infamy, and to the making of
the child so borne no better then a Bastard. Some good reason may be given for
celebration of marriages betwixt eight and twelve of the clock in the
forenoones: but certainly none can be given of the former: save only the
Silver benefit of Ecclesiastical Courts, and their Officers. But of these and
some other marriage cases, I dare not speak more largely, having been so ample
before, though nothing so ample as I could have been.

Yearly mustering of men etc.
for the better fitting of them for times of need: as also of good care of
Furniture for War, without any iugling to make the Furniture of one to serve
for many, the same also I say for my silence of the Ecclesiastical discipline
and government, the desire whereof has been a greater cause of the restraint
of Ministers, then their not conforming. Herein I have been the more silent,
because the same has heretofore and more lately been amply, learnedly, and
substantially laid forth by other, wherein we alone differ from all other
reformed Churches. And if it shall not please his Majesty generally to
establish it according to Gods Word; and other Churches throughout his
Kingdom; yet if he might be persuaded to tolerate it in some places,
appointed for the same by his own Princely wisdom, as I doubt not but that
they which shall enjoy the same, will bear all charges thereto belonging,
without any prejudice to any other Ministers, so I am persuaded that use
thereof would emittere such a fragrant smell, as that all other would be the
more in love therewith: thereby also would be that sweet peace, that is so
often commended in the Scripture: Yea, I doubt not, but that his Majesty would
better affect it, and the lovers thereof, then ever he has done. As the want
of any member (though never so little) makes the whole body the more impotent,
so the want of the holy Discipline makes the whole Ministry the weaker, and
less effectual. If this little hereof spoken be offenciue to any, yet let it
not (I humbly beceech you) hinder my former motions, or any of them.

no conscience of any thing: as also against so citing of men, and such
proceeding against them (even sometime, never at all cited) without regard of
age, of the season of the year, of distance of place, etc. I hope that either
some other will speak, or this short mention will be sufficient: or it may be
some other will reform such disorders.

Parliament men to meet together. Ezekiel. 46.10.
as experience has taught in the Universities, therefore as the Lord by
Ezekiel commands that in his worship, The Prince and the people should come
together thereunto, and go away together therefrom, so may it please you all
that wish well unto Zion, and love the peace of Jerusalem to do the like in
this your service of God, of his Majesty, and of the whole Kingdom, at every
Session of the Parliament, and on every day for every Session. Exodus 32.
How highly did all Israel sin (even Aaron himself) in the absence of Moses
but a few days? How effectual for Christ, Ioh. 7.51.
was one weak word of Nicodemus, even to the dissoluing of the whole Council
of the Priests and Pharisees against Christ?

The Conclusion.
for craving help of your most Honorable Court in the former Aduertisements
presented unto you, I do humbly crave the gracious pardon of his most
Excellent Majesty, of his Princely Son, and of you all of any thing wherein
for matter or manner I have erred, even with the like words (some few only
changed, according to the difference of persons to whom I speak, and of the
future Tense into the time past) even with like words (I say) (except only
before excepted) do I crave this pardon that Luther once used to the Emperor
and other Princes before whom he pleaded his cause. Sleidan, comment. lib. 3.
Si quid a me peccatum fuerit potentissime Rex, illustrissime Princeps,
nobilissimi Marchiones atque Comites, honoratissimique Barons alijque huius
Regni Proceres, vel verbis minime proprijs, neque tanto consessu dignis, vel
etiam phrasibus parum elegantibus atque decoris, totum hoc mihi peto condonari
propter vitae genus, in quo aliquam (mihi obsecro liceat interponere maximam)
aetatis partem consumpsi. For alas, I neither have lived in the Court (at least
long together) for these forty years and more, nor in the City, but in the
Country, where I have not been acquainted with Court speech, or otherwise
exercised with Learning, as some have been. Neither (I do most humbly beseech
you) let the concealing of my name be any prejudice to this my humble Petition.
Because I have spoken somewhat against Papists I have therefore concealed my
name, least being known I should fall into some of their hands. For they are a
bloody brood, a generation of vipers, yea, a generation whose teeth are as
swords, Math. 37. Pro. 30.14
and their iawe teeth as knives, to devour the poor from the earth, and the
needy from among men. The poor and needy? Yea also, the mightiest Monarkes
in the World. They eat their God and kill their Kings. And therefore as the
Elders of Samaria said among themselves of Iehu, 2 King. 10 14.
Behold two Kings could not stand before him, how then shall we stand? So say I
of them, Behold they devour their God (and so may most truly be called
Bellygods) and they murder Princes; How then can such a poor wretch as I am
stand before them? The God of grace direct you all (Nobles, Knights, and
Burgesses) by his Spirit of grace, so to go to our most Noble and gracious
King, Neh. 1.4. and 2.1. etc. Est. 4.16. and 5.1. etc.
as Nehemiah did to Artaxerxes, and Ester unto Ahashuerosh, that thereby ye may
find that grace with his most gracious Majesty, that Nehemiah found with
Artaxerxes for Jerusalem, and Ester with Ahashuerosh for her self and all the
Jews. And the same God show me and all before supplicated for, such favor
with his Majesty, and Princely Son, and you all for our selves, and for the
House of God in this his Kingdom, Ezra 7.27.
that we may say, as Ezra said, Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, which
has put such a thing as this into the Kings heart, to beautify the House of
the Lord here in England, and has extended mercy unto us before the King and
his counselors, and before all the kings mighty Princes. Amen.

1 Cor. 16.13. Quit you like men: be strong.


