Articles to be inquired of, by the Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, of
every Parish, and Precinct, within the Archdeaconate of London, according to
the special direction of certain Letters, heretofore sent to the Lord Bishop
of London, from the right Honorable Lords of the Privy Council.
INprimis, whether there be any in your Parish, either Parishioners,
Soiourners, or such as be late came out of other Countries, into your parish,
which do refuse, or neglect, to come to divine Service, to their Parish Church,
or else where: and what be their names, and Sir-names, and how long they have
refused so to do?

2 Item, how many of their wives, and Children, above the age of Sixteen
years, Servants, and other Soiourners abiding in their Houses, do likewise
refuse so to do? And what be their names, and Sir-names, and how long they
have refused so to do?

3 Item, whether there be any in your Parish, which be suspected to have been
reconciled to the Popish Religion? or to have been absolved? or any that
procured, or counseled any thereunto, and what be their names, and Sir-names?

4 Item, whether there be any in your parish, which be suspected to be
Massing Priests, Reconcilers, Jesuits, Seminaries, or other persons which have
received any orders or authority from the Romish Church, to use the like: And
what be their names and Sir-names?

5 Item, whether there be any Schoolemaisters, within your Parish, which do not
bring up their youth, in the Religion now professed, or be not themselves
diligent, in repairing to divine Service, or bringing their Scholars to it?

Observations material in this Inquiry.
IN every Parish, where any manner of person dwells, or soiourneth, which
refuses, or neglects to go to the Church, to hear divine Service; The
Minister, and Churchwardens, of the parish, ar commanded, every Month from
henceforth, to go to every such person, with the Sidemen, or else with two, or
three honest witnesses, and before those Sidemen, or witnesses, to require
every such person, to repair to the Church, to hear divine Service. And the
said Minister, and Churchwardens and Sidemen, are commanded to send a
Certificate or pretentment in writing, signed with the hands, marks, and
seals of the said Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, to their Ordinary,
always on the tenth day before Midsomer day, on the tenth day before
Michaelmas day, on the tenth day before Christmas day, and on the tenth day
before the Feast day, of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, without
further delay. So as return of such Certificate may be made in time to the
Custos Rotulorum at every Sessions, next ensuing those Feasts, testifying as
well the manner, and time of their admonishments, of such Recusants whatsoever
they be, as their answers; And when, and whether they went to Church, every
Month, after such admonition given to them as aforesaid. Or whether any such
person has wilfully withdrawn himself, from taking, or understanding such
admonition; and also declaring the names, sirnames, and abiding places, of
every one that shall offend, in any part, or clause of the above written
Articles. This every Minister, and Churchwarden, is straightly charged, to show
his diligence in, and effectually to do, as they, and every of them, shall and
will answer to the contrary, at their perils.

You shall bring your Presentment into Mr. Hulets Office at the west end of old
Fish street in London, ten days before every Quarter, at the uttermost,
specifying the proper, and Surname, title, and addition, of every person
presented, and how many Months they have refused, or neglected to come, to
hear divine Service, in their parish Church, before the day of the making of
your Presentment.


