Articles TO BE INQVIRED OF within the Diocese of Peterborough in the
visitation of the Reverend father in God, THOMAS, by the permission of God,
Lord Bishop of Peterborough this present year 1605. And presentment to be made
thereof by the Churchwardens and Sidemen for that purpose lawfully appointed,
in visitations, Synods, or elsewhere, within the Dioces aforesaid, at any other
time, when occasion shall be offered, giving in an answer to every particular
Article.

Printed by JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1605.

The tenor of the Oath to be ministered.
YOu shall swear, that all favor, hatred, malice, hope of reward, or gain,
fear of displeasure, and all other unlawful affections set aside, you shall
upon due consideration of these Articles given you in charge, present every
such person of or within your parish, as has committed or made any offense or
fault mentioned in any of these Articles, or which are vehemently suspected or
defamed of any such offense or fault, wherein you shall deal uprightly,
neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor corruptly sparing to
present any, or to conceal the truth, having in this action God before your
eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice, So help
you God in Jesus Christ, and by the contents of this book.

ARTICLES TO BE INQVIred of within the Diocese of Peterborough. Ann. Dom. 1605.
IN primis, whether is there any in your parish, that has affirmed that the
form of Gods worship in the Church of England established by law, and
contained in the book of Common prayer, and administration of Sacraments, is a
corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful worship of God, or contains any thing in
it that is repugnant to the Scriptures: or any that has affirmed, that any of
the nine and thirty Articles agreed upon by the Archbishop and Bishops of both
Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden in London, in the
year of our Lord 1562. for the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for
the establishing of consent touching true religion, are in any part
superstitious or erroneous: Or any that has affirmed that the rites and
ceremonies of the Church of England, by law established, are wicked,
Antichristian, or superstitious. And if you how or have heard say of any such
within your parish, you are to present the same.

2 Item, whether there be any in your parish that has not celebrated and kept
the Lords day, commonly called Sunday, and other holy days, according to Gods
holy will and pleasure and the orders of the Church of England prescribed in
that behalf. And if there be any such, you shall present them. Also, whether
the Common prayer has been said or sung in your parish church by your
Minister distinctly and reverently upon such days as are appointed to be kept
holy by the book of Common prayer, and their Eues, and at convenient and
usual times of those days, and in such convenient place of your church, so as
the people may be most edified: And whether your Minister has observed the
orders, rites, and ceremonies prescribed in the book of Common prayer, as well
in reading the holy scriptures, and saying of prayers, as in the administration
of the sacraments, without either diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any
other respect, or adding any thing in the matter or form thereof: And whether
the Letanie has been said or sung when, and as it set down the book of
Common prayer, by your parson, vicar, or curate, in some convenient place of
your Church; And also upon wedensdaies and frydaies weekly, though there be no
holy days, at the accustomed hours of service.

3 Item, whether is there any within your parish that has covered his head in
your church or chapel, in the time of divine service, except he have some
infirmity: And whether all manner of persons in the time of divine service
have reverently knceled upon their knees, when the general confession,
Letanie, and other prayers are read, and stood up at the saying of the Belief,
according to the book of common prayer. And likewise, when in time of divine
service, the Lord Jesus has been mentioned, due and lowly reverence has
been done, by all persons present. And whether in the time of divine service,
any have busied themselves in the Church, either in talking, or walking, or any
other way, then in quiet attendance to hear, mark, and understand that which
has been read, preached, or ministered, not departing out of the church during
the time of service and sermon, without some urgent cause. And when any idle
persons have in the churchyard or church porch during the time of divine
service and preaching, whether the Churchwardens or Questmen have not then
caused them either to come into the church, or to depart.

4 Item, whether against the time of every Communion within your parish, there
be provided by the Churchwardens a sufficient quantity of fine white bread,
and of good and wholesome wine for the number of the Communicants, and not of
bear or ale, or bear or ale and wine together. And whether your parson,
vicar, or Curate, has administered the holy communion so often and at such
times, as every parishioner may communicate at the least thrice every year,
(whereof the feast of Easter to be one.) And whether every person within your
parish, being of sufficient age, has so communicated; And whether your
Minister does deliver both the bread and the wine to every communicant
severally; And whether your parson, vicar, or curate has given warning to his
parishioners publicly in the church at morning prayer the Sunday before every
time of his Administration of that holy sacrament, that so they might the
better prepare themselves. And if you know any defect to have been in any of
these, you are to present it.

5 Item, whether your Minister have admitted to the receiving of the holy
communion, any of his cure, which be openly known to live in sin notorious
without repentance, or any who have maliciously and openly contended with their
neighbors, until they have been reconciled: or any other that are common and
notorious deprauers of the book of common prayer, and administration of the
sacraments, and of the other rites and ceremonies therein prescribed: or of any
thing that is contained in any of the Articles agreed upon in the Convocation
1562, or of any thing contained in the book of ordering Priests and Bishops,
or to any that have spoken against and depraved his Majesty's sovereign
authority in causes Ecclesiastical. And whether, when he has celebrated the
holy Communion, he has admitted any to the same but such as do kneel, did
such as come to public prayer according to the orders of the church of England.

6 Item, whether your Parson, vicar, or curate saying the public prayers, or
ministering the sacraments, or other rites of the church, has worn a decent
and comely surplisse with sleeves, and his hood, if he be a graduate agreeable
to the orders of the University: And whether in the admini^^ing of the
sacrament of Baptism, he has used the sign of the cross, according as it is
prescribed by the book of common prayer, not admit^ing any man to answer as
godfather for his own child, nor any godfa^her or godmother to make any other
answer or speech then by the book of Common prayer is prescribed in that
behalf.

7 Item, whether your Minister, being a licensed preacher, and resident upon
his living, has preached every Sunday: and if he be not a preacher, whether
has he procured sermons to be preached in his cure once in every month at the
least, by preachers lawfully licensed: and in defect thereof, whether has he
read a Homely prescribed by authority to the intents aforesaid. And if he be
not reside^t upon his benefice, whether is his charge supplied by a Curate that
is a sufficient and licensed preacher. And whether do they in their Sermons
pray for the Kings most excellent Majesty, giving his Majesty his usual
title and style, for our gracious Queen Anne, the noble prince Henry, and the
rest of the King and Queens royal issue, according to the order prescribed in
the late Canons, exhorting also the people to obedience to his Majesty.

8 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, does every Sunday and holiday,
half an hour at the least, before evening prayer, call for, hear, and
instruct all the children, apprentises, and servants of both sexes, that be of
convenient age, in the Lords prayer, the ten Commandments, and in the Articles
of belief, and diligently examine them, teaching them the Carachisme set forth
by authority. And whether for that purpose he does take the names of them all,
and by course call certain of them by name, every Sunday and holiday to come
to learn the same Catechism. And whether the Churchwardens and sworne-men do
assist the Minister, as he does prescribe them in that godly examination.

9 Item, whether your Parson, vicar, or curate have married any persons within
your parish, without the publishing of banes according to the orders of the
Church of England, or without lawful license thereunto obtained, or any within
the degrees forbidden: or whether there be any in your parish that having bind
divorced, do inhabit and keep company together, and being married that have
left their wives, any man that has two wives, any woman that has two
husbands, any that defer the solemnization of matrimony being lawfully
contracted, any that have contracted themselves without consent of parents, any
that have been married in any private house or chamber, or at any unlawful
time, but only between the hours of eight and twelve of the clock in the
forenoone, who married them, who were the parties so married, and who were
present, at the marriage, expressing their names and surnames.

10 Item, whether your Minister does every Sunday at the time appointed by the
communion book, declare to the people whether there be any holidaies or
fasting days the week following. And whether does he solemnly denounce
Recusants and excommunicate persons in the church, that so others may be
admonished thereby to refrain their company and societic. And whether does he
visit the sick and instruct them and comfort the^ in their distress,
according to the order of the communion book, if he be no preacher. And
whether does he refuse or delay to christen any child according to the form of
the book of common prayer, that is brought to him to the church upon Sundaies
or holidaies to be christened: or to bury any corpse that is brought to the
church or churchyard, in such manner and form as is prescribed in the said
book of common prayer. And if he have been defective in any of these you must
present him.

11 Item, whether you have a Register book in parchment to write in all
christenings, weddings, and burialls: and whether those christenings, weddings,
and burialls, be diligently noted therein: and whether your minister every
Sabbath day after morning or evening prayer does distinctly read in the church,
the names of all such as have been the week before either baptized, married,
or buried. And whether the Minister and churchwardens do set their hands to
every lease of this book. And whether you have a chest with three locks
wherein the said book is safely kept, the Minister keeping one key, and each
of the Churchwardens another. And whether you have a strong chest for the
poor, with three locks, and three keys to the same. And whether your Minister
does move and exhort the people to bestow their alms and charitable devotion
upon their poor neighbors.

12 Item, whether your Minister does preach, or administer the Communion in
private houses, or appoint public and private fasts or prophefies, or hold any
private conuenticles: And whether does he were such decent apparel as is
enjoined him by authority: And whether he be not a resorter to Tauernes, or
alehouses, or gives himself to base and scruile labor, or to drinking or
riot, spending his time idly by day or by night, playing at dice, cards,
tables, or any other unlawful games: a common hawker, a hunter, swearer, or
do give any evil example of life, whereby the word of God and the religion
now received may be evil spoken of.

13 Item, whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, hat bought their benefices, or
come by them by fraud, guile, deceit, or simonie: and whether he has more
benefices then he ought to have, not having sufficient dispensation thereto.
And whether does your Minister receive into his church any excommunicate person
before he bring to him a true certificate of his absolution and restoring to
the church: And whether he has received any woman delivered of child begot in
fornication to her thanksgiving in the church, before she has publicly
reconciled her self in such order as by the officer in that behalf has been
to her prescribed.

14 Item, what Schoolemasters have you within your parish, that teach either
openly or privately, in any school, gentleman's house, or else where, and whether
be they of good and sincer religion: and licensed by the Bishop of this Dioces,
or Ordinary, under his hand and seal: and whether be they diligent in
teaching and bringing up youth, and to instruct them in godliness and virtue:
and whether they teach any thing contrary to the religion now godlily
established, or do not cause their children to reside unto the church, to
hear divine service.

15 Item, whether have you in your church or chapel, the book of Common
prayer, lately explained in some few points by his Majesty's authority,
according to the laws and his Highness prerogative in that behalf, the Bible
of the largest volume, and other books allowed by authority. Whether have you
also a font of stone where baptism is to be ministered, standing in the
ancient usual place: in which only the minister shall baptize publicly: a
decent communion table in time of divine service, with a carpet of silk, or
other decent stuff: a comely and decent pulpit, standing in a convenient place.

16 Item, whether your parish Church, chapel, or chancell be well and
sufficiently repaired, and so from time to time kept and maintained, the
windows well closed, the flores paued plain and even, and all things therein
orderly and in decent sort without dust, or any thing that may be either
noisome or unseemly, as best becomes the house of God: your churchyards well
and sufficiently repaired, fenced, and maintained with walls, railes, or pales.
And whether all persons excommunicate, and so denou^ced, be kept out of your
church. And whether you have not had plays, feasts, banquets, suppers,
churchales, drinkings, comporall courts or lectes, laynaries, musters, or any
other profane usage in your church, chapel, or churchyard: and if there be
any such abuses you shall present the same.

17 Item, whether your Churchwardens have yearly given an account of the
church goods committed to their charge, and of other receipts and expenses: and
whether they have sold any bells, lead, or other church goods, without the
consent of the Ordinary first had in writing: and whether they have employed
all such goods, receipts, and sums of money to the use of the church: and
whether the Churchwardens and sworne-men in former times have of any private
corrupt affection concealed any crime or disorder done in their times, and have
not presemed the same: and what be the names of such Churchwardens, and of such
offenders.

18 Item, whether you know or have heard by common same of any that live
vitiously in fornication, adultery, incest, drunkenness, or uncleanness, common
swearers, prophaners of the Sabbath, usurers, bawdes, ribalds, harbourers,
maintainers, or receivers of any such lewd persons, or any which carry, send
away, or convey such persons before they be punished, or vehemently suspected
of any such faults: any woman which has been begotten with child or lived
incontinently before she was married, who has not yet satisfied the
congregation, or of any which sight, chide, or brawle in church or churchyard.
And what be their names.

19 Item, whether the Minister and clarke, and the Churchwardens, with certain
of the substantial men of the parish in Rogation week, walk about their
parish: and whether at their return to the Church, they make their common
prayers. Also who they be that do negligently or wilfully absent themselves
from prayers on Sondaies and holidaies, or irreverently behave themselves in
the church the time of divine service.

20 Item, whether there be any in your parish that do administer upon goods of
those that be dead without lawful authority, or any that suppress, change,
forge, or hinder the performance of the Testaments or last will of the dead, or
any executours that has not fulfilled the Testatours will, especially such as
have not discharged such legacies as were bequeathed to the church, or to
orphans, or to high ways, or to such, godly uses, and what be their names.

21 Item, whether do any Physicians, or Chirurgions practice physic or
chirurgerie within your parish that is not thereunto licensed by the Lord
Bishop of the Dioces.

22 Item, whether the Church of your parish be vacant or no, who is the patron
thereof, how long it has been void, and who does receive the tithes,
oblations, and other commodities, during the time of the vacation, and by what
authority.

23 Item, whether there be any in your parish that be suspected to be
reconciled to the Pope of Rome his religion, any massing Priests, Jesuits,
Seminaries, or other which have received authority from the Romish church: any
Papists or Recusants, or any that go about to deprave the Religion now
established, and that maintain heresy, use enchantments, witchcrafts,
sorceries, or such like.

24 Item, whether have you the Canons and Constitutions lately set forth by
authority, and for the better observation of them, whether has your Minister
read them in your parish church or chapel upon some Sondaies and holidaies,
according as it is commanded.

25 Item, whether do you know or have heard by common fame of any other crime
worthy presentment, the reformation whereof belongs to the Ecclesiastical
court: and if you do, you shall as well present them which now come to your
memory, as those which shall hereafter come to your knowledge, twice by the
year, according to the Canons lately set forth by authority, that is to say,
from henceforth at the feast of S. John Baptist, commonly called Midsommer, and
at the feast of the Nativity of our Lord, commonly called Christmas.

FINIS.

