Articles to be enquired of in the visitation of the Dioces of London, by the
Reverend Father in God, Edwyn Bishop of London.

In the thirtenth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the
grace of God Queen of England, France and Irelande defender of the faith.
etc. 1571.

Imprinted at London by William Seres.

Articles to be enquired of in the visitation of the Dioces of London. 1571.
FIrst, whether Common prayer, be said in your church or Chapel at
conueniente hours, orderly and distinctly, and whether your Minister so turn
himself, and stand in such place of your Church or Chauncell, as the people
may best hear the same, and whether the holy Sacraments be duelye and
reverently ministered as is set forth by the laws of this Realm. And whether
upon Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, the Letanie, and other prayers, be said
accordingly.

2 Whether you have in your parish Churches and Chappelles, all things
necessary and requisite for Common prayer, and administration of the
Sacraments, specially the Book of Common prayer, with the new Calendar, a
Psalter, the english Bible in the largest volume, the two Tomes of the
Homelies, a comely and decent Table, standing on a frame, for the holy
Communion, with the furniture thereto prescribed, a fayer and comely Communion
Cup of Silver, and a cover of Silver for the same, and all other things
requisite in and to the premises.

3 Whether you have in your Church or Chapel, a comely Pulpet conveniently
placed, the Paraphrases of Erasmus, translated into english, the Table of the
ten Commandments, a strong Chest or Box for the almose of the poor.

4. Whether in any Church or Chapel, if singing be there used, such parts
only of the Common prayer be song, as by the Book of Common prayer are
appointed to be song, and the rest reverently said and read with an audible
voice. And whether there be a modest and distinct song, so used concerning the
said parts of the common prayer, which be song, that the same may be as
plainly understood, as if they were read without singing, or whether any
part thereof be so abused, that thereby the common prayer is the worse
understood of the hearers.

5 Whether in your Church or Chapel, any Organs be used in the time of Common
prayer, or ministration of the Communion, otherwise than is appointed by the
said book of common prayer, or by the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, and
whether the use of them, be urged by any person or persons, as any percell or
supply of the common prayer or other divine service, appointed by the laws of
this Realm.

6 Whether the form of Commination against sinners, with certain prayers
following the same, set forth in the latter end of the book of common prayer,
to be used at diverse times in the year, be by your Minister plainly and
distinctly read in your Church or Chapel unto the people, as is prescribed,
three times at the least in the year, yt is to say, for order sake, upon one of
the three sundays next before Easter, for the first time, upon one of the two
Sundays next before the feast of Penticost, for the second time, and for the
third time, upon one of the two Sundays next before the feast of the birth of
our Lord, our and besides the accustomed reading thereof, upon the first day of
Lent.

7 Whether your Person or Vicar, have preached or cause to be duly preached in
your Church, his quarterly or monthly Sermons, as by the Queens Injunctions
he is bound, and what be the names of such, as have preached for him, and
whether he has admitted any man to preach, not having sufficient license, or
has inhibited or let any from preaching, having sufficient license.

8 Whether your Person, Vicar, or Curate do every Sunday, when there is no
Sermon, read distinctly and plainly some part of the Homelies, prescribed and
set forth by the Queens authority to be read, and every holy day, when there
is no Sermon, immediately after the Gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly,
recyte to his Parishoners, the Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, and
the ten Commandments in English, and whether any Minister not admytted by the
Ordinary, or by other lawful authority, do expound any scripture, or
matter of doctrine, by the way of exhortation, or otherwise, and thereby omit
and leave of the reading of the Homelies.

9 Whether your minister do at the least every Sunday, and every holy day
openly in the church call for, hear and instruct all the children,
apprentises, and servants of both the sexes, that be of convenient age within
your Parish, or at the least so many of them by course as the time will serve,
and as he may well hear and instruct, for half an hour at the least before
or at the Evening prayer, in the ten Commandments, the articles of the
Belief, and the Lords prayer, and diligently examine and teach them the
Cathechisme set forth in the book of common prayer: And whether for that
purpose he does take the names of them all, and by course call certain of them
by name every Sunday and holy day to come to the teaching of the same
Cathechisme.

10 Whether your Person, Vicar, or Curate, after the Gospel, have read openly
in your Church twice this year, plainly without addition or change, the
declaration of certain principal articles of Religion, set forth by both the
Archbishops, and the rest of the Bishops of this realm, for unity of
doctrine, being appointed to be read upon some Sunday within the Month next
Michaelmasse and Easter yearly.

11 Whether all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Dames of your Parish cause
their children, servants, and apprentises, both mankind and womankinde,
being above six years of age, and under twenty which have not learned the
Cathechisme, to come to the church on the Sundays and holy days at the times
to them appointed, or at the least such and so many of them as your Minister
shall appoint, and there diligently and obediently to hear, and to be ordered
by the Minister, until such time as they have learned the same Cathechisme,
and what be the names of those that do not cause their children, servants and
apprentises so to come to the church to be instructed and examined, and how
many of the said children, servants, and apprentises be in your Parish,
which being above seven years old, and under twenty years of age, cannot
say by heart the said Cathechisme: and what be their names and age, and with
whom they dwell.

12 Whether any person or persons be admitted to answer as Godfathers or
Godmothers at the christening of any child, except he or she have before
received the holy communion, and can say by heart the Articles of the christian
faith, and will recite the same before the Minister, if he or she be thereunto
required.

13 Whether your Person, Vicar, Curate or other Minister in your church or
Chapel, has admitted to the receiving of the holy communion, any open and
notorious sinner, or evil liver, by whom the congregation is offended,
without due penance first done, to the satisfaction of the congregation, or any
malicious person, that is out of charity, or that has done any open wrong to
his neighbor by word or deed, without due reconciliation first made to the
party that is wronged.

14 Whether your Person, Vicar, Curat, or Minister, has admitted to the holy
communion any of his parish, being above twenty years of age, that cannot
say by heart, the ten Commandments, the Articles of the faith, and the
Lords prayer in english, and what be their names, or being above fourteen
years, and under twenty years of age, that cannot say the Cathechisme, set
forth in the said book of common prayer. And whether he marry any persons,
which were single before, that cannot say the Cathechisme, or contents thereof.

15 Whether your Person, Vicar, Curat, or Minister, has at any time received
any that is not of his own parish to the holy Communion, and for what cause
or consideration, he has so done.

16 Whether there be any in your parish, man or woman, being of convenient age,
that has not received the holy Communion thrice at the least this year, and
namely at Easter last, or there about for once, and what there names are. And
whether both yearly before Easter, at such convenient times, and namely on
Sundaies in Lent at after noone, or such other days in the week next before
Easter, as the Person, Vicar, or Curat shall appoint, and require his
parishioners to come unto him, they do come and recite unto him the
Cathechisme, or at the least the Lords prayer, the Articles of the Christian
belief, and the ten Commandments by heart in english, and also at other
convenient times, before their receiving of the holy Communion, they come to be
examined in the premises. And if any do wilfully and stubburnly refuse to
come to such recital or examination, whether the Churchwardens and sworn men,
or any of them do assist the Minister therein, that such stubburne persons
may be rebuked and repelled from the communion at that time.

17. Whether the people of your parish, especially householders having no
lawful excuse to be absent, do faithfullye, and diligently resort with their
family to their parish Church or Chapel on the holidayes, and chiefly upon
the Sundaies, to morning and evening prayer, or upon reasonable let thereof to
some usual place, where common prayer is used, and then and there abide
orderly and soberly, during the time of common prayer, Homelies, Preachings,
and other service of God there used, reverently and devoutly giving themselves
to the hearing thereof, and occupying themselves at time convenient in private
prayer, and who they be that either negligentlye or wilfullye absent themselves
or come very late to the Church upon the Sundays especially, or that walk,
talk, or otherwise irreverently behave themselves in the Church, or use any
gaming abroad, or in any house, or sit in the streates or Churchyard, or in
any Tavern or alehouse upon the Sundaye or other Holiday in the time of common
prayer, Sermons, or reading of the Homelies, either before noone, or after
noone.

18 Whether the forfeiture of twelve pence for every such offense appointed by
a statute made in the first year of the Queens Majesty's reign be levied and
taken, according to the same statute by the Churchwardens of every person that
so offends, and by them be put to the use of the poor of the parish, and if
it be not, by whose default it is not levied, or not put to the use of the
poor aforesaid.

19 Whether there be any Inkepers, Alewiwes, vitaylers, or Tipplers, that
suffer any person or persons in their houses to eat, drink, or play at
Cards, Tables, or such like games, in time of common prayer, or Sermon on the
Sundays and Holidayes, and whether there be any shoppes open on Sundays, or
Holidayes, or any Butchers, or others that commonly use to sell meat or other
things in the time of common prayer, preaching, or reading of the Homelies. And
whether in any fayres or common markets falling upon the Sunday there be any
showing of any wares before the morning prayer be done.

20 Whether for the putting of the Churchwardens, and swornemen the better in
the remembrance of their duty, in noting such as offend in not comining to
divine service, your Minister or Reader, do openly every Sundaye after he have
read the second lesson at Morning and evening prayer, monishe the
Churchwardens and Sworn men to look to their charge in this behalf, and to
observe who contrary to the said statute offend in absenting themselves
negligently, or wilfully from their parish Church or Chapel, or irreverently
as is aforesaid use themselves in time of divine service.

21 Whether your Minister or Reader, do church any unmarried woman, which has
been gotten with child out of lawful marriage, and say for her, the form of
thanks giving of women after child birth, except such an unmarried woman have
either before her child birth, done due penance for her fault, to the
satisfaction of the congregation, or at her coming to give thanks has openly
acknowledge her fault before the congregation at the appointment of the
Minister, according to order prescribed to the said Minister by the ordinary
or his deputy, the same Churching to be had always on some Sunday or Holidaye,
and upon none other day.

22 Whether for the retayning of the perambulation of the cercuite of your
parish, the Person, Vicar or Curat, Churchwardens, and certain of the
substanciall men of your parish, in the days of the Rogations, commonly
called the gang days, walk the accustomed bounds of your parish, and whether
in the same perambulation, the Curate do use any other rite or ceremony, then
to say or sing in english, such Psalms, and recite such sentences of
scripture, as be appointed by the queens Majesty's Injunctions, with the
Letany, and Suffrages following the same, and reading one Homely, already
devised and set forth for that purpose, without wearing any Surplesses, carrying
of Banners, or handebeles, or staying at Crosses, or other such like Popish
ceremonies.

23 Whether when any christian body is in passing, the bell be tolled, and the
Minister called to comfort the sick person, and after the time of his or her
passing, there be any more ringing but one short peale before the burial, and
an other short peale after the burial. And whether on all Saints day after
Evening prayer, there be any more ringing in your Church or Chapel, or other
supersticious ceremonies used, tending to the maintenance of the Popish
Purgatory, or praying for the dead, and who they be that use or do the same.
And whether there be any ringing on Sundays or Holidaies between Morning
prayer and the Letany, or at other times contrary to good order or law.

24 Whether your Person, Vicar, or curate, does openly or secretly, teach or
maintain any erroneous or superstitious doctrine. And whether he do keep
any suspected woman in his house, or be an inconvenient person, given to
drunkenness, or idleness, or be a haunter of Tauernes, Alehouses, or
suspected places, a Punter, ^^^ker, Dicer, Carder, Tabler, Swearer, or (...)
evil example of life.

25 Whether your Persons, and Vicars, be resident and dwell continually upon
their Benifices, doing their duties, and keeping hospitality, according as
their lyuinges will extend, And whether their houses and chaunceles, be well
repaired and vpholden. And whether being not resident, they leave their cures
to an unlearned or lewd person, or do not distribute yearly among their pore
parishioners, the fourteth part of the fruits of their benefices, the same
being of the yearly value of twenty pounds or above.

26 Whether they or any of them have mo Benefices than one, how many and in
what countries they be, and what be the names thereof.

27 Whether any Person or Vicar, has come to his Benefit by Simonie or any
other unlawful means, and whether the Patron of any Benifice, has made a
gain by any color deceit, or Simoniacall pa^te, in and for the bestowing of
the same.

28 Whether there be any Lay or temporal man, not being (...) orders, or any
child that has, or enjoys any Benefice or spiritual (...).

29 Whether any Priest or Minister be come into this Dioces out of any other
Dioces, to serve any Cure here, without letters testimonial of the Ordinary,
from whence he came, to testify the cause of his departing from thence, and of
his behavior there.

30 Whether your Persons, Vicars, Curats, and Ministers, keep well their
(...), of all weddings, buryings, and christnings within your Parish, and do
present a copy of them once every year, by Indenture to the Ordinary, or
his Officers. And whether they read the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, every
quarter of a year once, or no. And whether they pray for the prosperous estate
of her Majesty, as is prescribed in the said Injunctions, or no.

31 Whether the Church of your Parish be now vacant, and destitute of an
Incumbent, or no, and if it be, how long it has been vacant, and who is the
Patron, and whether he suffers the Benefice to lie vacant, and occupyeth the
glebe land, and takes the Tithes, and other fruits to himself, during the
time of the vacation, or who else occupies and takes the same, and by what
color or title, if by Sequestration, from whom he has received his letters
of Sequestration or authority to take and gather the said fruits.

32 Whether your Church and Chauncell, be sufficiently rep^ted, and cleanly
kept, and the Mansion house of your person and (...) with the buildings
thereunto belonging, likewise repaired, and your Churchyard well fenced and
cleanly kept, and if any of the same be ruinous and in decay, through whose
default it is so. Whether the last Churchwardens were enjoined to have repaired
any part of the Church, or fenced the Churchyard, and did neglect to do the
same.

33 Whether there be any Mass books, Portesses, or other books of the latin
Popish service, Albes, Vestmentes, or other Massing gear, Images,
Candlestickes, Holywater fattes, or other Ornaments or Monumentes of
Papistrie, Superstition, or Idolatry, reserved in your Church, Chapel, or
else where, or in the hands or custody of any person, or persons, which yet
are not defaced and destroyed, and in whose custody the same is, and what be
the per(...)les thereof.

34 Whether the last Churchwardens, have given to the parish a just account of
the Church goods that were committed to their charge, according unto the
custom that has been before time, and what Church goods they have sold, and
to whom, and whether to the profit of the Church, or no. And whether any
person suppress the last Will of the dead, and perform not the Legacies
bequeathed to the Church, or to Orphans, pore Maids marriages, high ways,
schools, or any other godly use.

35 Whether ye have Collectors for the poor of your parish, whether they do
their duty in gathering and distributing the Alms of the Parishioners,
according to^ statute thereof made in the first year of the Queens Majesty's
reign, and make a just account thereof quarterlye, What sommes of money the
last Churchwardens and Swornemen have levied and delivered to the said
Collectors, of the forfeytures of such persons, as have not duly resorted to
their parish Church or Chapel, upon Sundays and Holidayes, during the time
that they were in office.

36 Whether there be any person or persons in your parish of ability, that
obstinately, or frowardly refuse to give resonably toward the help and
relief of the poor, or do wilfullye discourage others from so charitable a
deed, and what be their names, and what sommes does any of them withdraw,
which he or she before was wont to give, there being no just cause so to do.

37 Whether your Hospitales, Spittles, and Almose houses, be well and godly
used according to the foundation and ancient ordinances of the same, whether
there be any other placed in them, than poor Impotent and needy persons, that
have not wherewith, or where by to live.

38 Whether the Scholemaisters, which teach within your parish, either openly,
or privately in any Noble, or Gentlemanes house, or in any other place there, be
of good and sincere relygion, and conversation, and be diligent in teaching and
bringing up of youth, whether they be examined, allowed, and lycenced by the
Ordinary, or his officer in that behalf, whether they teach the Grammar set
forth by King Henry the eight of noble me morie, and none other, whether they
teach any thing, contrary to the order of religion now established, by
public authority. And whether they teach not their Scholars the Cathechisme
in latin, lately set forth, and such sentences of Scripture, as shall be most
expedient, and meet to moan them to the love and due reverence of Gods true
religion, now truly set forth by the Queens Majesty's authority, and to
induce them to all godliness and honest conversation, and what be the names
and surnames of all such Scholemaisters, and Teachers of youth within your
parish.

39 Whether there be any among you that is a hinderer of true religion, or a
fautor of the Romish power, or that stubburnely refuses to conform himself
to unity and godly religion, set forth by common authority, or any that
wilfully or obstinately defend or maynetaine any heresies, errors, or false
doctrine, contrary to holy Scriptures, or do keep any secret conuenticles,
preachings, lectures, or readings contrary to the law, and what be their
names.

40 Whether any in your parishes do openly or priuatlye, say, or hear Mass,
or use any other kind of service or common prayer then is set forth by the
laws of this Realm.

41 Whether any in your parishes, have in their hands, or have delivered to
other, any english books set forth of late, by Harding, Dorman, Allen,
Saunders, Stapleton, Marshall, or any of them, or by any other english Papist,
either against the Queens Majesty's supremacy in matters ecclesiastical, or
against true religion, and Catholic doctrine now received, and established by
common authority within this Reame, and what their names be.

42 Whether there be any in these parts, that have married within the degrees
of affinity, or consanguinitie, by the laws of God forbidden, or any that
being divorced, or separated for the same, do yet notwithstanding, cohabite,
and keep company still together, or any that being married without those
degrees, have unlawfully forsaken their wives, or husebandes, and marsied
others. Any man that has two wives, or any woman that has two husebandes. Any
married, that have made precontractes. Any that have made privy or secret
contractes. Any that have married without baines thrice solemnly asked. Any
cupples married, that live not together, but slanderously live aparte. Any that
have married out of the parish church, where they ought to have solemnized their
Marriage.

43 Whether there be in your Parish, any contentious person, or that gives
occasion of the breach of Christian love, and charity, among you, disturbers
of divine service, and common prayer, common swearers, or blasphemers of the
name of God, any that bruteth abroad rumors of the alteration of religion
received within this Realm, any Fornicators, Adulterers, Incestuous persons,
Baudes or receyuers of such incontinent persons, or Harbourers of women with
child, which be unmarried, conueying or suffering them to go away before they
do any penance, or make satisfaction to the congregation, or any persons
vehemently suspected of such faults, any that uses forcery, Witchcrafte,
Inchauntment, Incantations, Charms, unlawful prayers, or inuocations in
Latin, or otherwise, any common Drunkardes, Ribawdes, or other notorious
evil lyuers.

The tenor of the oath, ministered to the Churchwardens and sworn men.
YE shall swear by Almightye God, that ye shall diligently consider all and
every the Articles given to you in charge, and make a true answer unto the
same in writing, presenting all and every such person or persons, dwelling
within your parish, as have committed any offense or fault, or made any
default, mentioned in any of the same Articles, or which are vehemently
suspected or diffamed of any such offense, fault, or default, wherein ye shall
not present any person, or persons, of any evil will, malice, or hatred,
contrary to the trunth, nor shall for love, favor, meede, dread, or any
corrupt affection, spare to present any, that be offenders, suspected, or
diffamed in any of these cases, but shall do uprightly, as men having the
fear of God before your eyes, and desirous to maintain virtue, and suppress
vice. So God help you.


