Injunctions with certain Articles to be enquired of, in the Visitation of the
Reverend Father in Christ, John, by Gods providence, Bishop of Norwich, as well
to the Clargie, as to the Churchwardens and quest men of every several parish
within the dioces of Norwich, and to be put in execution, by all the
Archdeacons Commissaries and other officers exercisinge ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, under the said Bishop in their Synodes, Visitation, and Courts.

In the year of our Lord God. 1569.

Imprinted at London by John VValley. Aprilis. 15.

Injunctions. INIVNCTIONS WITH Certain Articles to be enquired of, in the
Visitation of the Reverend father in Christ, John, by gods providence, Bishop
of Norwich. etc.
For the Clargie.


Canterbury, or the Bishop of the Dioces.

that come lately out of any other Dioces, unless such persons bring with
them sufficient testimonial under the Seal of the Ordinary of the Dioces
from whence he or they shall come, testifying such person or persons to be free
and unmarried, and at their liberty to mary accordingly.

Rogation days for the bounds of your parish, you shall not use any surples
upon you, or stay at any cross, or suffer any banners, to be carried, or other
superstition to be used, but only give GOD thanks, and use such good order of
prayers and Homelies, as be appointed by the Queens majesty's authority in
that behalf.



Canterburyes grace, and the Bishop of the Dyoces.

For the Churchvvardens, Questmen and others.
Curate to serve his said benefice, unless such person shall first show his
letters of Orders, where he was made Mynister, and have also sufficient
testimonial under the Seal of the Ordinarye, from whence he comes, with
license from the Bishop to serve accordingly.





to present them and their names to the Ordinary.

Matthew, Archbishop of Canterbury, to be set up in some convenient place of
the said Church.



Articles to be enquired of.





Bible, of the largest volume, the Paraphrasis, of Erasmus in English, with the
Homelies, and all other boks requisite, for the Administration of Divine
service. And whether the Homelies be duly and distinctly read.













Catechism, and do otherwise see them brought up in the fear of God, and in
due obedience and reverence, to their parents, masters and elders.



orders set forth by authority, and do preach, teach, or minister the
Sacraments there, and by that means attempt to withdraw the people from due
obedience, and to raise and maintain scismes and sects, who they are that so
do, where they do it, and what be the articles and contents of their doctrine
and opinions.





his said benefice, and whether he or any in his name, has in ye time of the
vacation of ye church, taken the fruits and profits thereof, and by what
authority.









smaller faults.



Cathechisme, or that do not se^d their said children or youth diligently to ye
church to be instructed therein, and who they are.















Affinity, or Consanguinitie, contrary to the laws, and a ceetayne Table for
that purpose, last set forth by the most Reverend Father, Matthew,
Archbishop of Canterburye, or whether there be any that has two wives, or
woman that has two Husbands, any married where a precontract was to an other,
any deuorsed, or otherwise separated that married again, any that have made
privy or secret contracts, or have married without asking the banes not being
thereunto lawfully lycensed.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John VValley. Aprilis. 15.


