Articles to be answered of the Sworn men in the Archdeacon of London his
visitation, holden the year. 1584. the 15. and 19. of January.
INprimis, who is your Parson, or Vicar, and how long he has continued with
you, and whether you have any other, which do ordinarily preach, read,
catechize or exercise any other function Ecclesiastical amongst you, what be
their names and where they dwell.

2. Whether your Parson or Vicar can preach, and Whether he have preached his
quarterly Sermons in your Church in his own person: or if any can not preach,
or be not licenced themselves, whether they have procured their quarter Sermons
to be preached there. Item, whether beside these, they have preached or
procured their monthly Sermons or no. And whether you have suffered any to
preach, whom you have not known to have been sufficiently licensed
thereunto, or hindered or forbidden any that were licensed.

3. Whether your person, vicar, or curate, has observed in doing divine
service and ministering of Sacraments, the order set forth by act of Parliament,
without putting in any thing of their own or taking away, or has omitted the
Letany on such days as it ought to be read, or else has omitted the wearing of
the Surplesse in the time of their ministration, or no.

4. Item whether your Parsons or Vicars be resident upon their benefice, and
whether such as are not resident, give the fortith part of their benefice,
being above twenty pound a year, to the relief of the poor, or no.

5. Whether any do read, preach, or catechize with you, who do not four
times in the year, at the least, say divine service, and minister the
sacraments according to the book of common prayer, and what be their names.

6. Whether your preachers and others who be in eccleasticall orders, do at
all times wear and use such kind of apparel as is prescribed unto them by
the book of Aduertissements, and her Majesty's Injunctions. Anno primo.

7. Item whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, have given notice, and warning
in due time in their church for the due keeping of all such fish days, as are
to be kept through the year, by the Laws of this Realm, exhorting the people
to due keeping of them, not upon any opinion of relgio^ or holiness, but upon
their dutiful obedience to Princes, which by Gods law is due to them,
procuring the welfare of ye Realms and countries committed to their charge. And
also whether they have the first sondy of every month, given warning openly in
the Church to such as be of their Parishes, of what estate soever they be, to
repair to their parish Church in such sort as by the Laws of this Realm is
appointed, upon pain to be presented for the same or no.

8. Whether your Curate do serve in your Church not licensed and allowed by
the Bishop, or other ordinary, under his seal, or hand at the least, or
being beneficed else where, do serve with you as a Curat, or no.

9. Whether any Farmer of any benefice, take upon him to admit or reject any
minister, to serve or not serve where he is Farmer, without the authority of
the Ordinary, or no.

10. Item, whether since the last visitation, your parish Clarke, or any other,
not being minister, or Deacon, or not being licensed by the Ordinary, have
taken: upon them to begin or say service, or minister any Sacraments, or
distribute the Lords cup, or read the Homely in your Parish and what be
their names.

11. Item what persons you have in your parish, yt do teach and instruct
children, and what be the said scholemasters names, whether they teach
publicly or privately in any man's house, and whether such Schoolemaisters as
do teach the Latin tongue in your parish, do read unto their Scholars twice
every week at the least, an ordinary Lecture out of the Latin Catechism,
lately set forth, and allowed by public authority: And whether such as
teach youth to read English, do bring up their children in reading this
Catechism in English, and of other Books agreeable to the Queens
proceedinges. And whether they behave themselves honestly, and both repair to
Church orderly themselves and so much as lies in them, procure that their
scholars also frequent the same.

12. Item whether you do know, believe, or have heard say, that your Parson,
Vicar or Curate, does sue any of his parishioners, or any other person before
any lay Judge, contrary to the Ecclesiastical Laws of his Realm, and the
Statute made 2. Edw. 6. for any cause of thithes, or other Ecclesiastical
duties.

13. Item whether such ground as in your Chansel or Church is broken up for
burials, or otherwise, be decently made up again, and if it be not, by whose
fault it lies unmade up.

14. Whether your Churchwardens do duly account once in the years before the
Parson, Vicar or Curate, and the Parishioners, for all such Church goods and
stokes of money thereunto belonging, as has cone to their hands in the time
of their office, or no.

15. Item, whether you have a comely Communion table, with furniture there unto
belonging, that is to know, a comely joined Table, a comely Carpet thereto,
being no hearse cloth or pall for burials, a comfy table cloth, with two
handsome Communion Cups, and a de^t patent of silver, to minister the Lords
bread upon, and also two comely pots of Pewter to fetch wine to serve for the
Lords Table, reserved and kept clean to that use only, being no Tavern
pots, or no.

16 Whether there be any in your Parish, that does openly, courtely, or
guilefully, by any slight or color, detain any tithe or duty due to your
Parson, Vicar, Clearke, or any other Ecclesiastical officer, or no.

17 Item whether the bread and wine for the communions all the year be
provided by the Curate and Church(...) the charges of the parish according to
the book of common prayer and whether the same be truly collected of the
parishioners and be bestowed according to the same use of bread and wine only,
or no.

18. Item whither any parishioners taxed or rated to pay toward the said
bread or wine at the said Co^munions do at any time refuge to pay their
portions once a year unto the Churchwardens or there deputyes when yt is
demanded, or no.

19. Whether your Churchwardens do collect and gather at every Communion, the
offering of the communicants and after the Communion do put the same in the
poor men's chest as it is appointed by the book of common prayer. and whether
the said collection, or any part thereof, be employed to any other use, then to
the relief of the poor, and what the same use is.

20. Whether there be any yt do let or disturb ye Minister, in ye time of
reading the divine service, or the preacher while he is in the pulpet, or no.

21. Whether there be any in your Parish that either obstinatlye refuge or by
negligence do not frequent in holy days and Sondayes your parish Church, to
hear divine service, or has not, being of lawful age and having no other
lawful impediment received the Holy Communion thrice this year, and what be
their names.

22. Item you shall present so near as you can learn how the children of
such as refuse to come to Church, are brought up, under what Schole master or
Tutor, where and in what school. And also you shall diligently enquire of all
recusant or not recusant, as have any of their children beyo^de the seas, and
present who they be, and where their said children remain as far as you know,
believe or have heard say.

23. And whether any persons being excommunicated, and not reconciled, or young
folk that can not say the Catechism, or elderly folk that cannot say the
Lords prayer, the belief, and the ten commandments in the English tongue, or
being stained with any notorious vice, have presumed to receive the holy
Communion, and have been admitted thereunto, or no.

24. Item, whether there has or does any stranger soiorne at any Inn, or
other house in your Parish, at or about Easter, and has continued there any
long season at other times of the year, and has not resorted to your church,
and communicated there, who they be and what be their names.

25. Whether any of your Parish has detained their child or children from
Baptism in their own Parish church, or have carried the same to be baptized
in any other place, who they be, and what be their names.

26. Whether there be any bankets or common drinkings, enterludes, or plays
kept in your Church or Chapel or no.

27. Whether any Artificer has or does follow their work or science, or
handicraft on the sunday, as Goldsmith, Tailor, Clothworker or such like And
whether they or any other Artificer do so occupy themselves, their servants or
apprentices, on that day or no.

28. Item whether there be any man or woman in your Parish, that suppresseth
and fulfilleth not the last will and testament of the dead, or defeateth the
children or other of their legacies or portions: or if any executor or
executrix, administrator or administrators, do unjustly withhold any gift, or
be quest made to any poor or impotent persons to hospitalles and poor
prisoners, either of this City or else where, to poor scholars, maidens
marriages, the mending of the high ways and bridges, or to any good and godly
use and purpose or no.

29. Item whether there be any in your Parish infected with any notorious vice,
as whoredom open or secret maintainers thereof, or any that does hanntany
suspected houses, any persons married within the degrees of consanguinitie or
affinity forbidden, or any person being lawfully married that lives
slanderously a sunder or any that were married without banes three times
orderly asked, having no lawful dipensation therefore, or has married
again, their old wives or husbands being yet alive showing both the names of
them that so were married, and the minister that so married them: any
adulterers, swearers, drunkards, slaunderers of their neighbors, or any other
like vice, or no.

30. Item, whether any do use any conuenticles or meetings, handling or
expounding of scriptures in any private house or place, other then in the common
Church, who they be, where and when they own.

31. Item, whether you do know, that within your parish there is (or are) any
person or persons notoriously known or suspected by probable tokens or common
fame, to be an usurer, or does offend by any color or means directly or
indirectly in the same, if any such he, that you and every of you, by virtue of
your oath present the name or names of such offender or offenders.

32. Item whether your Bible or service books to do you common service on be
whole, not torn rent, nor blind, and whether the same be of that translation
which is authorized by consent of the Bishops of this Realm or no.

33. Item, whether you have afitte book of paper, to write in all christnings,
burials, and weddings, done in your Parish: whether your parson Vicar, or
Curat, do diligently note in that Book once in the week, the said
christnings, burials, and weddings, in the presence of the Churchwardens or of
one of them: and whether the said book be safely kept under locks and keys:
whether the Parson, Vicar, or Curat has one, and the Churchwardens another or
no.

34. Item whether any householder in your parish do suffer any plays or games
in his house or yard or let any people in, to the end to see any such plays
or games, on any sunday or holy day before evening prayer be clean done in
that Parish, who they be and what be their names.

35. Ithem whether you know any matter Ecclesiastical woorthye of redress in
your Parish beside these that are set down before, or no.

You are to bring your answer to all these Articles into Master Gods office on
the 12. February 1584. also the 15. of March next, the 15. of June, and the 15.
of September following because reformation may be bad of such offenses as
shall be by you presented for many escape vnpresented, because you present but
once a year.

Imprinted at London by I, W. for Nicholas Ling.


