A BOOK INTITVLED: THE ENGLISH Protestants Recantation, in matters of
Religion. WHEREIN IS DEMONstratiuely proved, by the writings of the principal,
and best learned English Protestant Bishops, and Doctors, and Rules of their
Religion, published allowed, or subscribed unto, by them, since the coming of
our King JAMES into England: That not only all general grownds of Divinity,
are against the^: But in every particular chief Question, between Catholics
and them, they are in error, by their own Judgments: Divided accordingly,
into two parts: whereof the first entreats of those general Grounds: The
other of such particular Controversies. Whereby will also manifestely appear
the vanity of D. MORTON Protest. Bishop of Chester his book called Appeal,
or Answer to the Catholic Author of the book entitled: The Protestants
Apology.

Psalm. 126. v. 1. Except our Lord build the house, They labor in vain that
build yt.

With License.



Anno 1617.

TO ALL HIS WELBELOVED CONTRYMEN, ENGLISH PROTESTANTS, especially persecutors
of the Roman catholic Religion.
DVely and most friendly I remember my service, and best love unto you. In
maladies and diseases desperate usual remedies will not ^uer: in
controversies, those that be (and wrongefully) distressed, when equal trial
will not be granted, must accept unequal, or none at all. Your late
commended history of the world, recommendeth unto us, for most true, this
sentence* nothing can be a more excellent wittnessinge, then where an Enemy
does approve our cause. Your D. Morton does testify as much, and no man will
deny it; neither this that follows, that in controuersed questions, and their
trial, no condemnation is more approved, then where men in their own cause,
are condemned by their own Judgment. Thus in our laws confession of wrongs
and evil behavior, is conviction; And in matters of Religion a Recantation.
But without some high commaundinge cause how shall we find such enforceinge
and forced wittnes? Balaam his Ass spoke not of himself, nor Cayphas of
himself did prophesye. And in English Protestant Religion, where every one is
made a Judge over all, that will gain say him in their conceits, no man will
suppose, or once Imagine that any one will be fownde among them, to give
sentence against themselves, whom they value and esteem at so high a rate
above all the world besides, especially for the church of Rome, which they hate
and persecute so much. Yett because no other means is left, I must build upon
this vnleuell grounds, and come for Judgment at such a Consistory, only to
take what they shall give, and have nothing, but what they please to allow.
Which I hope will be that which is expressed in the Title of this book, the
same to which they have all sworn, or subscribed, ratified, or confirmed,
printed and published for their doctrine and Religion. I dare not go higher to
the days of Queen Elizabeth, nor bring the testimonies of Protestants in
other contries, least I receive for Answer, as others have done, that they
stand not upon what forreyne and former Protestants have taught: which though
it be a vain and only cauillons exception to be at variance, or defyance
with them, in faith, of whose church (as they name it) they would be members:
yett to avoid all suspicion and color of evasion, though never so frivolous.
Because no protestant may deny, but that is their protestant Religion in
England, under our King, supreme head styled of that Church, which he by
his laws, and proceedings, with their Consents and Assentinge has here
established, and this their Bishops and Doctors by oath or subscription have
since then confirmed, and by their published printed writings defended, or
mayntayned, or by their Religion ought so to do; I will only insist, in this
their own privileged, and allowed testimonies, and authorities. And assume by
them, to prove not only, that all grownds of Religion in general, do prove
and maintain the doctrine of the church of Rome, and condemn this protestant
Religion; But further, and demonstratiuely to manifest; by true consequence,
that in every chief question between this Protestants and Catholics, they are
in error, and we in truth: Which will be more then evident demo^stration
against D. Morton Protestant Bishop of Chester his Appeal or pretended
Answer to the Catholic Author of the Protestants Apology. And therefore
being confidently assured, that I have truly and fully performed, what I
undertake by their so great advantage, as to make them both wittnes and Judge
in their own cause, I presume (as it is) so to name this Book: The English
Protestants Recantation, in Matters of Religion. I wish it were as easy, (and
no more difficult labor) to bridle their wills and Appetites, from liberty,
overmuch love of this world, and wanton delights thereof, as it is to
demonstrate to their understandings, that they be in error: many men ar able
to do this. But God and themselves must reform the other; which of his great
mercy I most humbly beseech him to grant, That they which so long time have
only talked of Reformed Churches, and Religions, may come to the true, and
real practice of reformation, both in mind and manners. Which I hope they may
the soener attain unto, if they shall duly consider how foul and deformed
the face of this their new doctrine is, even as it is poynted by their own
colors, and pencell. That which remains, as my only suite to you, is this:
not to be regardlesse of your best good, not wilfully to err from the way of
truth, to esteem of the sacred Religion of the Church of Rome, as the
greatest enemies to it, and friends to you shall conclude it worthy, and let
my self and labors enjoy your love, as we shall deserve it. And so I shall
ever rest.

Your most wellwishing Contriman and friend, Author of this Book.

THE ENGLISH PROTESTANST RECANTATION: IN MATTERS OF Religion: THE FIRST PART.
CHAPTER I. PROVEINGE BY ENGLISH Protestant writers, since the beginning of
his Majesty's Reign in England, that the true Church of Christ is of
Infallible Judgment: The Protestants not so: and so not the true Church.
BECAUSE the cheifest and most general controversy in Religion, in this
time, between the Catholics of England, and their Adversaries their contry
persecutors, and Innouators, is concerning the true Church of Christ, which,
where, with whom, and what it is: what be the properties, true notes, signs,
qualities, authority, office and command of it, I will first begin with that
Question: In which I argue thus.

Whatsoever Company, Society, Consistorye, Judgment, or Authority, is in
time of difference about Religion, most necessary to be know, followed, and
obeyed, and is the company of holy ones, the howsholde of faith, spouse of
Christ, the pillar and grownde of truth, whose communyon is to be embraced,
directions followed, and Judgment to be rested in, must needs both be
privileged from error, and to be obeyed in Matters of controversy: But the
true Church of Christ is such: Therefore free from error, and to be obeyed in
this business. The Mayor or first proposition is evidently true, otherwise God
has bownde man to follow and embrace heresy or error, of necessity he must
be damned without all hope of salvation, except heresy, false opinions,
error, or infidelity, could bring to heaven, which is against the holy
Scriptures, true Religion which by no possibility can either be untrue, or
uncertain, being reveled by God himself, and against the light of reason it
self, that men under penalty of damnation, should be tied to be obedient to
that sentence, for obedience whereof, they were likewise assured to be damned,
which is to accuse God, most merciful, of the greatest Tyranny.

The Minor or second proposition is proved and the first also in this words of
D. Field. D. Field. epist, dedicat. before hi^ books of the Church.
There is no part of heavenly doctrine more necessary, in this days of so
many intricate controversies of Religion, then diligently to search out, which
among all the socities of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy
ones, that housthold of faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the
liueing God, which is the pillar and grownde of truth: That see they may
embrace her communion, follow her directions, and rest in her Judgment.
Hitherto the words of this Protestant Doctor, by which is evidently concluded
the most certain truth of those two Propositions in the Argument before; But
to avoid all frivolous objections and distinctions of these men, concerning
the Church general, particular, triu^phant, militant etc. He plainly
affirms, that this supreme and infallible judge is the present militant
Church in times of controversies: as is demonstrated by this his words: Which
among all the societies of men in the world, is that blessed company of holy
ones, etc. Where his words, societies of men, and, in the world, are manifest
testimony, that he assigns the present militant Church on earth, and no
other, to have this supreme, and infallible, authority, and Judgment, to
decide controversies. which is also proved by all the rest of the Protestant
citations, in this chapter hereafter. And if their words were not so clear
that they cannot be wrested otherwise: yett the Question it self does make it
manifest: for all the faithful people that ever were, and be now in many
thowsands deceased, out of this life, cannot now be assembled in a Cowncell to
give sentence. And much less can they that are not yett borne, be so gathered
together, to pronownce Judgment: and yett all this belong unto, and ar, or
shall be members of the universal Church. further this is convinced by his
cited words: That householde of faith: which cannot be possibly meant but only
of the militant Church. For in the triumphant Church, seeing God in himself,
and truly and perfectly knoweinge without belief all sacred mysteries, faith,
as the Apostle says, is euacuated in them, and turned into knowledge, and as
for those that are not yett borne, though hereafter in their time ordained, they
at truly to believe, yett now they neither have faith nor knowledge of any
thing, nor any other quality or any being at all. Thirdly this is evident
also in his last words: Embrace her communion, follow her directions, and
rest in her Judgment. Which Protestants will not, and cannot mean of the
triumphant Church: and by no possibility can either be understood, or
verefied of the true believers to come hereafter, and not yett produced into
this life; for this as yett haueing no essence, or beeinge for themselves, can
have no communion, give no directions, nor pronownce Judgment for us, now
extant to embrace and follow. And this is inuincibly further proved in the
Arguments followeinge. Therefore secondely I argue thus.

That which has Authority in controversies of Religion, to define what is
true, and good, to ouerrule all inferior and particular Judgments, and bind
all men to believe and embrace the definitions thereof, must needs be of
Infallible Judgment, and have the supreme and highest power to command, and
no man to disobey yt: But the true Church of Christ is such: Therefore it has
Infallible Judgment, the highest power on earth, and may not be disobeyed, but
in all things to be obeyed by all people. The mayor proposition is evidently
true: for Authority is to be obeyed by all subjects: otherwise it were not
authority. And there were non to command, non to be obedient. And
definitions in matters of faith, as they must be most certain, undoubted,
and infallible, as every article of faith is, and of necessity must needs
be: So they are as firmly to be believed, and professed, except we will be
Heretics, and obstinately incur damnation. The second proposition is thus
proved by D. Couell, who writes of the Church in this Couell. def. of hook
page 30.
words: That which by her ecclesiastical authority, she shall probably
think, and define to be true, or good: must in congruitie of reason over rule
all other inferior Judgments whatsoever. And to them that (out of a
singularity of their own) ask us, why we thus hang our Judgments on the
Churches sleeue? we answer with S^lonion, ^wo ar better then one; For even in
matters of less moment, it was never thought safe, to neglect the Judgment of
many, and rashly to follow the fancye and opinion of some few. Hitherto
this Protestant doctor, directly proueinge the second proposition, for which
he is cited: which also is confirmed by the Arguments followinge.

Thirdly I argue thus: whatsoever has authority from Christ, to approve the
scriptures, to be a special grownde in the matter of scriptures, to publishe
and command to her children, in Matters of Religion; is the higest Judge and
of Infallible Judgment: But the true Church of Christ is such: Therefore it is
the highest Judge, and infallible in Judgment. The Mayor proposition is
evidently proved, and confessed before, and of all men cannot be excepted
against by Protestants, commonly attributeing the highest, and (consequently)
infallible Judgment to the scriptures: for if they have their allowance and
Infallibility, so much as belongs unto us and our knowledge, from the
authority and approbation of the Church: The Church so giueing them
allowance, and warrant of Infallibility, must needs be as much, or more
Infallible, at least concerning us, in which manner we dispute, accordeinge
to that Rule of Logic, Propter quod vnumquodque tale, and illud magis. That
which is the cause why any thing is so, is rather so it self. Which is evident
thus, in this case. For if the scriptures, so much as appertains to our
knowledge, have not approbation and Infallibility of truth, but at they at
approved and published for such by the Church: This Church which so gives
them such allowance, and warrant of Infallibility, must needs likewise be
infallible, which though it needs not confirmation, being justified by a
Maxim in the light of nature, may yett for Protestants be further made
manifest by the Protestant Author of the Assertion: who to prove the ministry
of England to be no true ministry, Assertion An. Dom. 1604. page 277. 218.
does make demonstration of it in this manner: The Queens Royal Majesty being
never capable of any part of spiritual power, The same could not be deryued
from her parson, to the Archbishopps and Bishops. Nemo potest plus Iuris in
alium transfer, quam ipse habet. No parson can transfer more authority
unto an other, then he himself has. And thus much concerning Couell. cont,
Burg. page 60. Wotto^ def. of Perk. page 442.
the first proposition.

The second is thus proved by D. Couell, and D. Whitakers, cited and allowed by
him in this words: The Church of Christ according to her authority received
from him, has warrant to approve the scriptures, to acknowledge, to receive,
to publishe and command unto her children. Mr. Wotton witnesses the like in
this manner. The Iugdment of the Church, we ar so far from discrediting, that
we hold it for a special ground in this matter of scriptures. Therefore
that Judgment which may in no ways be discredited in the greatest matter,
must needs be infallible. For every witness that is fallible may justly be
discredited, in such business especially.

My fourth Argument is this: whatsoever does support and sustain the truth,
in which, and no where else the truth is preserved, which is a diligent and
warye keeper of Christ's true doctrine, committed unto it, chaungeinge nothing
at any time, diminisheinge nothing, addinge nothing, not loseing her own,
nor vsurpinge things belonginge to others, must needs be of Infallible
Judgment, and free from error: But the true Church of Christ is such:
Therefore it is infallible in Judgment, and free from error. The first
propositions is evidently true: for truth once committed unto one and
continually so supported, sustained and preserved, without change, diminution,
addition, loss or usurpation, must of necessity and Infallibly still be
truth: for neither truth nor any thing else so mayntayned, and kept
unviolable, can by any possibility be overthrown or altered. The second
proposition is thus proved by this Protestants: Mr. Ormerods Ormerod. pict.
pap. pap. 93.
words be thus: The Church is called a pillar, because it is like unto a
pillar. For as a pillar does supporte, and underprop a buildinge, and makes
it more stable firm and strong: so the Church does sustain, and supporte the
truth: for the truth is no where preserved but in the Church: D. Sutcliffe
Sutcliffe against the 3 conuers. page 79.
approves this sentence: Christ's true Church is a diligent and wary keeper of
doctrines committed to her, and changes nothing at any time, diminishes
nothing, adds nothing superfluous, loses not her own, nor usurps
things belongeinge to others. Therefore Christ's true doctrine committed to the
true Church, and continued and preserved long time in the Church of Rome,
Christ's true Church (as this Protestants grant in the next chapter, must needs
still be there and that still the true Church of Christ: because that ever
preserves, and never loses, or changes the truth, nor any part thereof,
fundamental, or not fundamental.

Lastely in this Question I argue thus: whatsoever Society, or Company has
authority in controversies of faith, and out of it there is no salvation,
remission of sins, or hope of eternal life, must needs be infallible in
Iugdment, free from error, and only to be obeyed in such things, above all
other Consistories, Conuenticles, or private parsons: But the true Church is
such: Therefore Infallible in Judgment, free from error, and so to be obeyed.
The first proposition is evidently true: otherwise men were some times bownde
to be Heretics, or believe errors, because authority is to be obeyed, and
not resisted: and Heretics might be saved, or God our most good and merciful
Lord and Savior compels and necessitateth man to be damned, which be
evident blasphemies.

The second proposition is proved by these English Protestants: first their
book of Articles, to which they all swear or subscribe, Book of Articl.
articul. 20. reconfirmed by his majesty Field. page 69. Couell def. of Hoocker
page 76.
defines thus: The Church has authority in controversies of faith. D. Field
has this sentence. There is no salvation, remission of sins, or hope of
eternal life, out of the Church. Like is the Judgment of D. Couell and
others. And thus much of the Infallible, highest Authority, Judgment,
Commanding and Bindinge power, of Christ's true Church, in general. Which can
be but one, as that Article of our Creed. I believe the holy Catholic Church:
not Churches. teaches us. And these Protestants in their Articles define it:
Artic. 19.
A congregation of faithful men etc. not congregations: And thus comment upon
it: ^here Rogers up. their Articl. page 86. 88. 89.
is but one Church. And prove it by these scriptures. Romans 11. 5. 1. Cor. 10.
17. 1. Cor. 12, 12. 13. 27. Romans 12. 4. 5. Gal. 3. 28. and add thus: all Gods
people agree with us in this point. And cite for it, the Protestant confessions
of Heluetia, Boheme, Gall. Belgia Aug^st. Wittenb. Suew. And these Protestants
before have so taught us, when they define, or descrebe it always in the
singular number only, by these their names and distinctions, blessed company
of holy ones; household of faith; spouse of Christ: Church of the liueing God
pillar of truth: etc. And in all verbes, relatiues or demonstratiues of it, so
singularly speakeing of it, as, her communion; her directions: her Judgment:
her Children: her Definitions: has warrant to approve; to publish, to
command: is a diligent keeper of doctrines, committed to her, changes
nothing, diminishes nothing etc. Which by no possibility, can be verified
of the Protestants, either in England, or any other nation; none of them in
particular, or all together, haueing, clayming, or pretending either
infallibility in Judgment, to warrant any one article in controversy: but
voluntarily and generally teachinge, that Thesis general^^ est: it is a
general Morton Apol. part. 2. page 315. willet Antil. praef. engl. and page
71. 120. 150. 4^. pref. to the Read. in Antil. Arti^l. of Relig. art. 21.
Relation of the state of Religion cap. 47. etc. Comm: upon the Articl. of
Engl. Protest by Mr* Rog. in pref.
Maxim, there is none in their Church, whose Judgment is of Infallible
authority. Neither Prince, Parliament, Cowncell, Ministry or their Church has
any priuilegd from error, but they have, and do err in things pertaining to
God. Neither challenge any Jurisdiction general, to bind others to their
Religion: but absolutely confessinge The Protestant ar without any means to
take up their controversies. No Prince with any preeminence of Jurisdiction,
above the rest: no Patriarch one or more, to have a common Superintendance or
care of their Churches. And their public comment upon their Articles, to
which they have all subscribed, assures us, is to be so, for relatinge unto
us, how in the beginning of their Revolt from the Church of Rome, to persuade
the world, they labored by all means they could, to come to unity among
themselves, as in the true Church it must be; Crammer and others used all
devises, and Caluyne wrote unto him, sayeing: That might his labors stand the
Church instead, ne december quide^ Maria, it would not grieve him to sail over
ten seas, to such a purpose. But this proved a work of much difficulty, if
not altogether impossible in man's eyes. Where they well might have left out
their addition (if not) and have plainly said without any exception, as it
has plainly proved, that it was altogether impossible, in man's eyes,
especially in the common order of proceedings among them which by their own
Relation, was this: That every kingedome, and free state, or principality,
which had abandoned the Religion of Rome, should diuulge a breife of that
Religion* which among them was taught, and believed. Whereupon (as this men
tell, came forth the several Protestant confessions, or Religions of the
several Protestant Congregations, of Wittemberge, Ausburge, Bohem Sueue,
Scotland, Heluetia, France, Belgia, Basile, Saxony, England in their 39.
Articles, etc. among whom, even those of England it self, what contradiction
there is, even in matters, by their own doctrine, fundamental, and essential
in Religion, demonstration is lately made, by this same manner and method, by
their own authorities, and will be also manifest in this work. And yett The
Answ of Orford ^^ the 1000. pet. Articul. 19. and 21.
this men, which say, they are the learnest ministerye in the world, and
definitiuely condemn all Churches, as Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, and
Rome, and general Counsels themselves of error, and may not plead Ignorance
for themselves, to excuse them from error. Neither can they with the least
pretense of truth affirm, their acknowledged lyeing, and erroneous Church, to
be the true Church of God, except they will also most blasphemously teach, and
maintain, that prima veritas, and eternal truth is eternal August. lib. de
mendas.
falsehood; or with the damned Priscillianists, that God in his Revelations to
his Church, and in the holy scriptures, has delivered lies, and errors,
commaundinge us to believe them. For they have before assured us, that the true
Church of God warily keeps all doctrine committed to her, changes,
dimini^heth adds, loses, usurps nothing. Therefore this chaungeing,
diminishinge, loseinge, and vsurpinge Church of Protestants, cannot be this
true Church of Christ, by their own doctrine. And as material essential and
fundamental it is in Religion, concerning the true ground and fowndation of
faith, and as great a falsehood, to say, in the meanest, or least point of
faith, that truth is error, God a liar, or his Church a seducer; as so to
affirm in the greatest, and most concerning mystery of Religion. The true
grounds, and fowndation of true beleeueinge, equally weakened, or overthrown
in the one, as the other. And the first proposition which our Catholic
Priests, and brethren, prisoners at Wisbych, offered to the vice-chaunceller of
Cambridge, and that university, that is, Ecclesia protestantium non est vera
Christi Ecclesia, The Protestant Church is not the true Church of Christ, is
here sufficiently questioned, and by themsels not long since more then
sufficiently demonstrated, to b^ Pul^^^a propositio, really Demonstrat. of
Recuse them. 2. 3. 4. etc.
and sincerely a true proposition, and not scoffingly, as he pleases to
parenthesize. And so will be defended, or proved, by those propownders of it.
As also their second proposition (for of the third in his proper place) d^tur
externus Iudex in rebus fidei: there is an external Judge in matters of faith:
will be mayn^ayned: not only in such sense, as the Vniuersi^ie of Cambridge,
according to the nature of their Church, and Religion grants, that is,
fallible, and deceatfull: But as our Brethren according to the nature of true
Faith, Religion, and the true Church; infallible, intended it, and still offer
to make it good, for the Roman Church ever since the time of Christ, and so
hereafter. When our English Protestant university for their so lately (as they
term Vicech: of Camb: D. Carey his letter. Aug. 7.
it) reformed Church, and light of the Gospel, ar driven to this Answer in
these words: Your second question is affirmative, auerring an external Judge,
in ma^ters of faith: If you understand a Iugde infallible in his sentence, we
deny what you affirm: otherwise we gaynesay not your assertion. Which in
their own meaning above remembered, is pulchra propositio, for their
Illuminated Church: which will have no Judge* or Judgment in matters of faith,
(above all things most infallible, and certainly true) except we will allow
it, for an Article of faith, or an infallible truth, that the Judge and
Judgment must be fallible, and deceatefull. And the Religion and faith so
adjudged, and propownded to be followed, and with divine faith to be believed,
against the nature thereof, to be false, erroneoes, fallible, or deceatefull:
for such as the Judge is, the Judgment, and difficulty adjudged, must needs
be. And yett further one scruple more there is in this business; which because
Cambridge is now busyed enough, against pore prisoners without books, I wish
that Oxford could resolve: how it can stand with the Integrity, and sownd
doctrine of a Reformed Church, and spoken consequenter, like a learned
university, to grant, as they have done, and must do by their Religion to
this day, that there be, and must be so many Supreme, and Independent Judges,
and heaps in their Church, as I have before remembered from themselves,
Religions, Churches, several and different Confessions, or Professions of
Faith, every one absolute of it self, and without dependence of any other: and
to use their own words, Without any means, to take up their controversies,
no Prince with any preeminence of Jurisdiction above the rest: no Patriarch, to
have a common superintendence or care of their Churches. Their let: sup. Aug.
7.
And yett now the university of Cambridge haueing (as they write) warrant from
our King, to accept our Priests challendge (God grant they perform their
warrant) Joins with them in this position, datur externus Iudex: there ^^ an
external, or, one external Judge in matters of faith. If there is but one
external Judge, for Iudex extern^^, and external Judge in the singular
number, is but one, then those Churches or Church of theirs which from their
beginning have had so many supreme Judges, and Judgments cannot be the true
Church of Christ, which (as now the grant) has but one. And if their former
both doctrine and practice of many such Judges, is true, then their present
doctrine, and grant, of only one, is false, and infers a false Church. But
I leave them to our Priests at Wisbych. Only here I will add: because they
have now allowed one external Judge in matters of faith, in the true Church,
to whose Judgment all must be obedient, otherwise he is not to be named a
Judge: they must also against their own limitation, allow that his Judgment
is infallible, otherwise the whole Church might err, which D. Field Field.
page 203. l. 4. cap. 5.
with privilege denies in these words: We think that particular men and
Churches may err damnably: because not withstanding others may worship God
arright: but that the whole Church at one time cannot so err: for that the
Church should cease utterly for a time, and so not be Catholic, being not at
all times: and Christ should some times be without a Church. Therefore the
University of Cambridge by warrant from our King, alloweinge the one, and D.
Field with public applause in the name of all English Protestants, as his
words (we think) ar wittnes, attesting the other, and all English Protestants
before assureing us, that they and all their Churches, do, or may thus err,
they cannot have, or be this true Church of Christ: And because there is no
other in any probable Judgment left to be free from such damnable erring, but
the Roman Church, because there reason tells us, the Church cannot cease,
but be Catholic in all times, and Christ cannot be without a Church: This
external and Infallible Judge is in the Roman Church, and that this freed,
from damnable error, is the true Church of Christ but of this in the next
chapter.

CHAPTER II. WHEREIN DEMONSTRAtion is made by these English Protestant Doctors
themselves, writing, or allowed as before, since the beginning of King JAMES,
his Reign, in England, that the Roman Church is the true Church of Christ.
NOw it will be no difficult thing to prove even by this Protestants
themselves that the Roman Church, that I mean, which submits it self to
the Jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, as the vicar of Christ, Successor to S.
Peter and supreme head thereof, is the true Church of Christ: for being
generally granted by Protestants, that either their conuenticle and
congregation, or the Church of Rome is the true Church of God, and their claim
and title thus shamefully by them selves excluded and ouerthowne, it must needs
follow by just consequence that the Roman Church, is that blessed company of
holy ones, howshold of faith, spouse of Christ and Church of the liueinge God,
privileged with such Immunities, and commanding power, as is declared, and by
English Protestants ascribed to the true Church, in the former chapter:
whereupon the Protestant offerres of conference speak of themselves, and Offer
of conference page 16.
their cause in these words: If the ministers be in^^^or, they protest to all
the world, that the Pope and the Church of Rome (and in them God and Christ
Jesus himself, have had great wrong, and In^ignitie offered unto them, in
that they are rejected, and that all the Protestant Churches ar Scismati^all in
forsakeinge unity and communion with them. And a little before speakinge of
some positions Offer sup. page 11.
among them, offered then to be disputed. They write in these terms: diverse
of the propositions ar such, that if the ministers should not constantly hold
and mayntaine the same against all men, they cannot see how possibly, by the
Rules of divinity, the separation of our Churches from the Church of Rome,
and from the Pope the supreme head thereof can be justified. But to m^ke
particular, and direct probation, of the is Catholic doctrine, by these
Protestants, I argue thus, from their own divinity, in the 2. Article of
their Religion of Articles of Relig. articul 12. and artic. 19.
the necessary and inseperable (by them) union of faith and good works, and
their definition of the true Church in their 19. Article subscribed unto by all
English Ministers, and it is in this manner. Whatsoever Church has in great
multitude, men virtuous, learned, fraught with the love of God, and the truth
above all things, men of memorable Integrity of heart, and affections,
preachinge much both of faith and piety with wonderful zeal and spirit. That
must needs be the true Church of Christ But the present Church of Rome is such:
Therefore it is the true Church of Christ. The first proposition is evidently
deduced, from those two Articles of their Religion, and cannot be denied. The
Minor proposition consists of the express words of their Protestant Relator
of the Relation of the state of Religion ^ap. 48.
state of Religion: and so nothing remains to be further proved.

My second Argument is thus framed: where The outward state and glory of the
service does engender, quicken, increase, and norish inward reverence, respect
and devotion, which is due unto sovereign Majesty and power. Where deeds of
charity be exceedinge, the life of some of their Religions incomparable in
severity, where there is excellent order of government, singular helps for
increase of godliness, and devotion, and profiting of virtue. That is the true
Church of Christ: But the present Church of Rome is such: Therefore it is the
true Church of Christ. The Mayor proposition is manifestly true, by Protestants
in their Article of the Church in these words: the visible Church of Articul.
19. sup.
Christ is a congregation of faithful men, in which the pure word of God is
preached etc. in all those things that of necessity ar requisite to the same.
All which are contained in the first proposition. The second is their own
express words, Relation of the state of Religion c. 9. c. 22. c. 26. c. 48.
written and published of the present Roman Church by their Relator of
Religion for confirmation of both which Arguments, the same Protestant Author
not ignorant of so many differences in Religion between the Roman Church and
them, persuading an union between them, only requires Catholics to give
over five things, all dispensable, and not any Relat. c. 48.
one of them, essential, as he teaches. Which is as great testimony as a
true Protestant can give to the true Church, for their common doctrine (to
defend their manifest errors) is this, that the true Church may er in matters
not essential, and fundamental. The words of D. Willet Willet Antil-pag^ 43.
Art. 19. Field. of the Church Sutcl. against D. Kell. D^^^ persuas. Wotton page
28. Middles. p. 201. Powell consid.
at these: to errors of doctrine, which are not fundamental, even the true
Church of Christ is subject. So their book of Articles of Religion, so D.
Field ordinarily in his books of the Church, so D. Sutcliffe D. Dove one of
their Bishops, Mr. Wotton, Mr. Middleton, Mr. Powell, and all the rest, that
made Protestants and Puritans but one Church do and must acknowledge. And the
benefits which this Protestant Relator assures his brethren to find by union
with the Roman Church, he sets down in these terms: they shall find
excellent order of government, singular Relat. sup.
helps for increase of godliness and devotion, for the conquering of sin, for
the profiting of virtue. Which be all the happiness, that the true Church can
give, or man enjoy in this life. For all our combat is to conquer sin, to
have virtue, godliness, and devotion, and whosoever has obtained these things,
cannot doubt of heaven, which is only prepared for people endued with such
graces, to which if we add his excellent order of government, no property of
the true Church is wantinge. And yett the scruple of this Protestant Relator,
for those five things also, shall be fully satisfied even by himself, and his
fellow Protestants, that in them also as in the rest, the Church of Rome
mayntayneth the truth, and Protestants See part. 2. cap. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
be in error, as will appear in the second part of this work, in the
chapters here cited.

Thirdly I argue thus: No Church wantinge the supreme and byndeing authority
over all others, (which their Bishop D. Bilson, D. Field, D. Morton, D.
Sutcliffe etc. affirm to be a general cowncell) can be the true Church of
Christ, and consequenly (because there is of necessity one true Church, that
which enjoys it, is the true Church of Christ: But neither any Protestant, or
other Church, besides the Church of Rome, has, or can have this supreme
byndinge authority: Therefore that only is the true Church of Christ. The
Mayor proposition for the supreme bynding authority, to be in the true
Church, is evidently true: otherwise no controversy could be decided, nothing
in Religion warranted for truth, nothing condemned for Heresy. For where
there is no such bindeinge, and commaundeinge authority, to be obeyed, or
resisted, there can be no truth believed by authority, nor any obstinate
resistance unto it, which as D. Couell, Mr. Ormerod and other Protestants
Couell exam. page 202. Ormer. dial. 2. etc. Field. page 228.
tell us, is required to heresy. Now that this supreme bindinge authority is
only in a general cowncell, by these Protestants, is testified by D. Field in
these words: The supreme and binding authority, is only in Bishops, in a
General Cowncell. So the Protestant Bishop of Winchester, D. Bilson, so D.
Morton, D. Bilson Survey page 85. Mort. part. 2. apolog. page 340. Sutcliffe
against D. Kell. page 41. 4. 102. Protest. Demonstrat. cap. 2. etc.
Sutcliffe with others. The second proposition is evidently of late
demonstrated in the book Entitled Protestants Demonstrations, where manifest
proof is made by these Protestants themselves, that they are so far from ever
haueing a General Cowncell of Bishops, that their English Protestants neither
have, nor can have true and lawful Bishop, Priest, or Minister among them of
their creation. And if by impossibility they could have Bishops, yett that
they cannot have any such Cowncell is wittnessed by their Relator in these
words: which I have also Relation c. 47.
cited before: The Protestants ar severed bands, or rather scattered troops,
each draweinge dyvers way, without any means to pacify their quarrels, to
take up their controversies. No Prince with any preeminence of Jurisdiction
above the rest: no Patriarcke, one or more, to have a common superintendance or
care of their Churches, for correspondencie and unity: no ordinary way to
assemble a General Cowncell of their part, the only hope remayninge to
assuage their contentions. And in their public gloss, upon their book of
Articles, they Rog. upon the ^ooke of Articl. in praefat.
acknowledge, this thing so impossible, in their Religion, that they could
never with all means they made, bring to pass to have any meeting of
Protestants, to come to unity among themselves, but every Protestant State
and Contry, has a several Confession, or Profession in Religion. As also
those several Confessions witness. Where we see, that it is a thing so
impossible for these me^ to assemble a General Cowncell, which they teach is,
to consist of all Professions, that they cannot do it, for their own poorte,
as the words ar, nor have any other means among them of Jurisdiction, to
decide controversies: when contrary wise of the Roman Church he speaks
Relat. sup. cap. 47.
in this manner, in the same place. The other have the Pope* as a common Father.
Aduiser and Condu^^^^ to them all, to reconcile their Iarrs, to appease their
displeasures, to decide their difference, above all things to draw their
Religion by consent of Cowncells, to unity. Neither can any Protestant say,
that this is spoken of this Relator, consideringe the present states of those
Churches, and is only so in that meaneinge Superiority, and Commaundeinge
Authority, in the whole Christian World, in spiritual causes: which no
Prince, Parliament, Presbitery, or other Regent among Protestants, does out of
their own temporal confines, and Government, as is plainly set down in the
Relators sentence, and freely acknowledged by all Protestant writers.

My next Argument is this: That which is a congregation of faithful men, in
the which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments duly
ministered, in all things requisite, is the true Church of Christ: But the
Roman Church is such: Therefore it is the true Church of Christ. The Mayor
proposition consists of the English Protestants definition of true Church
set down in the Articles of their Religion, in these words: The visible
Articles of Relig. art. 19.
Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure
word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered, accordeinge to
Christ's ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity ar requisite to the
same. The second proposition supposeing their former doctrine only requireing
in the true Church points of essential, fundamental and necessary doctrines,
which is also expressed in this Article, Relation of Relig. cap. 48. Couell
def. of Hock. page 68:
is proved before; and further by these Protestants. Their Relator writes in
these words: The Roman Church still keeps inviolable, the fowndation of
Religion. D. Couell writes thus: toucheinge the main points of Christian
truth, they (of the Church of Rome) constantly persist in them. Their Bishop
D. Dove supposeing their Religion for true, which Dove persuas. page 11.
they do or should hold, writes in this manner. In fundamental points of
doctrine, the greatest papists in the world agree with us. Concerning
Sacraments, he allows, that accordeinge to our definition which is more
limited, and saict then that of Protestants. There be as many as we teach,
(which be seven) and this shall not breed any such I arre between us, Dove
sup. page 27. 28.
that therefore we should refuse to communicate together. Which no man in
conscience can say, if he supposes us to be in error. For his own words be
these: This proposition is undoubtedly true: no Heretics nor Schismatics ar to
be communicated with all. And to give all contentment even to those
Protestants, which do not allow their own Articles, in this doctrine of the
notes of the Church, but to speak in D. Couells words: add discipline the
third note, and of as much necessity: although Couell against the pl^a of the
Innocent page 21. 56.
for his own opinion he affirms with their recited Article in this manner.
There be but two essential notes of the Church, the true preacheing of the
word, and the right administration of the Sacraments. The Relator has told
Relat. 6. 48.
Protestants before, that this Note is in the Roman Church. Wherein (to use
his words) Protestants Ioyneing with it, shall find excellent order of
government, singular helps for increase of godliness, for the conquering of
sin, for the profiteinge of in virtue. And their B. Dove persuas. page 29.
Dove speakeinge of the late Cowncell, of Trent, has these words: In that
Cowncell of Trent, they set forth such wholesome Canons, concerning Discipline,
as were fit for a reformed Church. Therefore by these Protestants nothing is
wanteing in the Church of Rome, that belongs to the true Church of Christ:
neither any thing superfluous used in these things.

Further I argue thus: Whatsoever Church is not Heretical, or Scismaticall, is
true and Orthodoxe: But the Church of Rome is neither Heretical nor
Scismaticall: Therefore Orthodoxe, and the true Church of Christ. The Mayor
proposition is evidently true: for as the true Church of God was ever called
Orthodoxe, and Catholic, so the Impugners obstinately either in
vnderstandeinge, denyeing the defined doctrine thereof, or in will resisteing
the Superiority, and true Authority* were Heretics and Scismaticks. The
second proposition is proved, by their before cited Protestant Bishop Daue,
offereinge Dove sup. pers.
Catholics to communicate with Protestants, without any change of opinion in
Religion. And yett that neither Heretics, nor Scismaticks, ar to be
communicated withal, he has before wittnessed in these words: This
proposition is undoubtedly true; no Dove sup page 5.
Heretics nor Scismaticks, ar to be communicated withal. And he gives us
security, That by no possibility (accordeinge to the Argument of General
Cowncells before) The Church of Rome can be at any time adjudged Heretical:
his words be these: No Church can be condemned and adjudged Heretical Dou^
sup. page 14.
by any private Censure: but it must be public: a General Cowncell, as he
there expowndeth himself, which Protestants never had, nor possibly can
hereafter have, as they have granted.

My next Argument is this: All that allow the present Greek Church, to be the
true Church of Christ, and yett further acknowledge, that the Church of Rome
consents with the same Greek Church, except in some few things, in which
they also hold, that the Roman Church teaches the truth, and the Greeks be
in Error, must needs acknowledge the Church of Rome, to be the true Church of
Christ: But these Protestant writers of England do Thus: Therefore they must
allow, that the Church of Rome is the true Church of Christ. The Mayor
proposition is evidently true, for the comparatiue degree in all things
includes the positive, and adds an increase unto it: as better, or more
good, more white, more virtuous, more true, etc. do include goodness, whitenes,
virtue, truth etc. and increases them: Therefore that Church which is more
true, then that which is affirmed to be true, must needs be granted to be the
true Church of Christ.

The second proposition is proved by these Protestants first their present
Protestant D. George Abbat against D. Kill page 63. Field. l. 3. cap. 5. etc.
Archbishop of Conterbury, and D. Field allow the Church of Greece for true.
The Title of D. Feilds chapter has thus freed it from the contrary, in these
words: It no way appears that the Churches of Greece ar Heretical, or in
damnable Scisme. And again: all these holdeinge the Rule of faith, and
beleeueing all those things, that are on the peril of eternal damnation to be
particularly and expressly known, and believed: we account them in the
number of the Churches of God, and doubt not but innumerable living and dyeing
in them, are, and have been saved. Now if we consider the differences
between these two Churches, of Rome, and Greece, we shall find the cheifest
to be about the procession of the holy Ghost, whether from the Father alone,
as the Grecians contend, or from the Father and the Son, as the Church of
Rome teaches: and whether in the Sacrament of the Altar leuened or unleavened
bread, as the Roman Church, teaches, is to be consecrated. And in both
these the Protestants of England consent with the Church of Rome, as appeateth
by those words of the Creed: Who prooceedeth from the Father and the Son,
allowed and used by them in the one, and their practice in the other. If
Protestants will add contention for supreamacie, most of them confess, that
it never belonged to Constantionple in Greece, whose name was not, when Rome
enjoyed it: And the present Gretians themselves acknowledge, the highest
dignity in Rome. And in the next chapter I am to prove the supreamacie of the
Pope of Rome, over all the world, for this place it suffices that the recited
D. Field tells us, absolutely it was Field. l. 3. of the Church c. 1.
but intruded and usurped by the City of Constantinople, to be accounted
superior, greater, more honorable then any of the rest, and the chief Bishop
of the whole World, because his City was the chief City of the World.
Which as he says, he challenged because he was prou^e and Insolent. Now how
these Churches agree in other questions, that be between Protestants and us
will appear in diverse chapters of this treatise, and is contained in the
censure of the Gretians against Protestants: Hieremias Patriarch, Constant. in
censura etc. Relation of Relig. c. 53. or 54.
and as in plain words confessed, by the Protestant, Relator, who speaks of
them in the Greek Church, in this manner. With Rome they concur in the
opinion of Transsubstantiation, and generally in the service, and whole body
of the Mass, in prayinge to Saints, in auriculare confession, in offering of
sacrifice, and prayer for the dead, and in these without any, or with no
material difference. They hold Purgatorij Cap. 55.
also, and worshipping of pictures. For the form and ceremonies of the Mass,
they much resemble the Latins. Their liturgies he the same that in the old
Cap. 53. or 54.
time, namely S. Basils, S. Chrisostomes, and S. Gregory's translated, without
any bendeinge of them to that change of languadge, which their tongue has
suffered. In sum, all those opinions which grew into the Church, before that
separation, between the Greckes and Latins, and all those ceremonies which
were common unto both, they still retain, as their Crosseings and Thapers
with others. Therefore if this Church of Greece is not to be condemned, as
these Protestants teach, much less can the Roman Church be condemned by
them, but must needs remain the true Church of Christ.

Thus I argue again: That which was the true Church in the time of Luther
within an hundred years, by the confession of Protestants, wherein as in the
true Church of Christ, Christianity, Baptism, Ordination, and power of
Ministry were received, and which brought forth of renowned Kings and Queens
many Saints in heaven, and many most learned, holy, and ver^uous Doctors, and
Popes themselves, and yett of that faith, which the present Church of Rome now
teaches, must needs be the true Church of Christ: But the present Roman
Church is such, by these Protestants: Therefore by them, it is the true Church
of Christ. The first proposition is evidently true for if (as before by these
Protestants there is no salvation out of the true Church so many glorious
Saints and holy ones, Kings, Queens, Popes, and Doctors, that could not be
excused by ignorance, much less made glorious in it, could not have gone to
heaven. Now supposeinge, that every Church, true, or false, consists of the
head, and other members, of him, or them, that rule, and those that be ruled,
of the shephards and sheep, Bishops, Priests, and those under their chardge.
Thus I prove the Minor proposition of the Church of Rome consistinge of the
Pope supreme head Bishops, Doctors, Priests, and other members D. Field
writes thus of this Church: The Roman and Latin Church continued the true
Church of God even till Field. page ^2.
our time. Therefore why was it refused by them? or how, not since changed,
can it be now otherwise? again he writes in these words: We doubt not but
the Church in Field. page 182.
which the Bishop of Rome exalted himself, was notwithstanding the true Church
of God: that it held a saueing profession of the truth in Christ, and by force
thereof, converted many contryes from error to truth. Therefore the doctrine
of it being truth, it must needs be the true Church. He further
acknowledges with D. Field. page 72. Couell def. of Hook page 73.
Couell and others, that Luther and the rest of his Religion, ^ere baptized,
received their christianity, ordination, and power of Ministry, in that
Church, as the true visible and apparent Church of Christ He tells us
further that diverse of the Roman Church even of the best learned be Field.
page 182.
saved and Sayncts in heaven. Then the unlearned need not fear to follow
their guides goeinge before, and theacheing them the way to heaven. D. Willet
writes thus: it is Willet Antilog. page 144.
not denied by any Protestant, but many renowned Kings, and Queens of the
Roman faith, ar Saints in heaven. And speakeing of the Kings Mother, that
glory of late Princes, Q. Mary of Scotland. He attributes unto her, and her
Religion, that of the Roman Church, such holiness and truth, that it
prevailed with God not only for herself, but her same also: his words be
these: The child of Willet Engl. pref. to the K. before Antil. Sutcliffe Ans
to the lay pet. page 34.
such prayers, and tears, cannot possibly fall away. D. Sutcliffe
acknowledges the scholemen so far and famously to be Papists, (as they term
Catholics) that he names them especially Pope Innocent the third, Thomas
Aquinas, Scotus, Albert, Durand, the most renowned in schools, particular
Agents of the Roman Church, and foretops of Popery, and joins them in that
sense with the late Doctors of the Church of Rome, defendeing in their
writeings the doctrine thereof, Hardinge, Allen, Bellarmine, Baronius. And yett
D. Couell highly speaks in the Couell def. of Hook page 24.
praise of such men in this manner: Alexander Hales, who made his sum that
excellent work, by commandment of Pope Innocentius the fourth, was called
the fowntayne of life, because of that lively knowledge, that flowed from him:
he was scholar to Bonauenture, a Scholar not inferior to himself, of whom
he was wont to say, that in Bonauenture he thought Adam sinned not: meaning
of that Illumination which was in him (and doubtless there was much in him) as
though he had not been darkened by the fall of Adam: And therefore the Church
called him the Seraphicall Doctor: To these Aquinas was not inferior who came
so near unto S. Augustine, (whom in his book (Couell against Burg.)
against Burges he esteems the chiefest Doctor that ever was, or shall be,
excepting the Apostles) that some thought he had all his works by heart, and
by a common proverb it was spoken, that the soul of S. Augustine duelt in
Aquinas: in whom above all the rest, four contraryeties were said to excel:
abundance, brevity, facility, security: in resp^ct whereof he gained the
Title to be called Angelical. And to speak somewhat of our Popes themselves,
so odious with this people, The Protestant Relator finds much virtue,
devotion, and piety in them, which have been even in these days: among
which, to particular in the last Pope Clement Relation of Relig. cap. 42. 43.
8. he writes of him in this manner. He did often weep upon piety and
godly compassion, at his Masses, Processions etc. his eyes were still
watreinge, sometimes streameing with tears, in so much that for weepeing he
seemed another Heraclitus: Relation cap. 29. sup.
he was a good Pope, a good Prince, a good prelate. And to exclude Ignorance,
he writes thus: the Papists cry maynely in all places for trial by
disputation. Then if our Popes be so holy, so good Popes, good men, good
Princes, good Prelates, our Kings and Queens and best Learned, Saints, our
Pastors, Doctors and Teachers that be the Popes Agents, and foretops of popery,
most excellent for learning and piety, their writeings renowned, their
doctrine secure, we may securely follow them, and as securely conclude, by
these Protestants, that only this Church of Rome is the true Church of Christ.
Lastely in this question I argue thus: That which by the confession of
Protestants is our mother Churches, and from which no Church ought further to
separate it self, then it is separated from it self, when it was in her best
estate, for true doctrine, and in which she still continues in all things
necessary to salvation, so undoubtedly that they confess it in plain words,
to be the familye, of Jesus Christ, part of the house of God, and visible
Church, that they which live and dye in it may be saved, must needs be
acknowledged by them for the true Church of Christ: But the present Roman
Church by these Protestants is such: And therefore by them the true Church of
God. The Mayor proposition is evidently true: for all children (to which all
other Churches in respect of Rome, or compared) ar bownde to obey their Mother,
especially teacheing all necessary truth, as is here supposed. And that which
is the Mother Church, which is the highest, if it be a part of the house of
God, and visible Church, and the family of Jesus Christ, it must needs be the
most excellent part thereof, the head, and chief, and so absolutely the true
Church, such societies being named by the most worthy and ruleing authority
in them. And if salvation is to be had in it, it must likewise by that title,
be the true Church of Christ. For D. Field with D. Field page 69. Couell def.
of Hook. page 76.
Couell and others before have given their sentence, in these words: There is
no salvation, remission of sins, or hope of eternal life out of the Church.
Then of necessity that Church wherein there is not only hope, but by the
adversaries themselves, an assured certaynetie of salvation, and eternal life,
which cannot be had without remission of sins, must needs be only the true
Church of Christ. The Minor, proposition is thus proved by these Protestants:
first his Majesty's Kings speech in parlam.
words be these: I acknowledged the Roman Church to be our Mother Church,
this in public Parliament, and in the conference at Hampton court, in this
order: No Church Confer. at Hampt. page 75.
ought further to separate it self from the Church of Rome, either in
doctrine or ceremony, then she has departed from her self when ^hee was in
her florisheinge and best estate. Which before is proved by these Protestants
she has not done in any essential, and fundamental thing, which is all
they require. And this will more then abundantly appear, through out this
treatise hereafter. And D. Conell writes thus of this present Roman Couell
def. of Hook page 68.
Church: toucheing the maine points of Christian truth, they constantly persist
in them: Protestants do gladly acknowledge them to be the family of Jesus
Christ. They of Rome were, and are still in the Church, a part of the house
of God, a limme of the visible Church. Which he adds also to have been Mr.
Hookers sentence, telling us, that Hook. l. 5. page 188.
what he writes of the Church of Rome, is but to give her her due, and we
acknowledge them to be of the family of Jesus Christ. And he concludes thus:
It is strange, for any man to deny Couell sup. page 73. and page 76.
them of Rome, to be of the Church. And again: We affirm them of the Roman
Church, to be parts of the Church of Christ, and that those that live, and dye
in that Church, may be saved. And all kinds of Protestants when they combat
among themselves, rather prefer the Church of Rome, then their fellow
Protestants. The Relator writes thus: The Relation cap. 45.
Lutherans in Germany, both the Clergy, and layetie, openly protest, they
will rather return to the Church of Rome, then join with the Sacramentary
Protestants, such as be in England. And of these Mr. Jacob writes thus: The
Bishops of England when they deal with Puritans, must join Jacob. page 73.
plainly with the Catholics in their Answers, if they will maintain
themselves. Lastely the Puritans have written against these Protestants, Offer
of conf. page 16.
as is cited before, in these words: If the Ministers be in error, they protest
to all the world, that the Pope and the Church of Rome, and in them God an
Christ Jesus himself, have had great wrong, and Indignity offered unto
them, in that they are rejected, and that all the Protestant Churches ar
Scismaticall in forsakeinge unity and communion with them. Then if the
Lutherans, or parlamentary Protestants, or Puritans, all, or any of them, ar to
be believed against others, none of their congregations, but only the Church
of Rome at this present is the true Church of Christ, whose communion of all
men is to be embraced, directions followed, and Judgment to be rested in. Now
after all these Protestant witnesses I come to D. Morton: he agrees with his
former Brethren, concerning things necessarily required to a true Church, and
in these words: The belief of some Articles ar so absolutely necessary Morton
App. lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 3. page 443.
for the constitution of a true Church, as a reasonable soul is for the
essential being of a man: such as concern the knowledge of the unity of the
godhead, and of the trinity of the parsons, together with the true and
faithful apprehension of the natures of Christ the Messiah, God and Man: the
power of his death, and resurrection, by whom we have remissions of sins, and
after death life everlasting. Wherefore we presume, that in a Church,
although corrupted with error, and superstition, yett if it does not ruinate
the foundation, the erroneous and superstitious professors may be saved: even
by virtue of that tenor which is in capite videlicet. Christ Jesus, the Lord
and Author of life, which notwithstanding, we must so understand, as that the
error and superstition do proceed not from knowledge, but from ignorance. Now
that the present Roman Church inuiolably holds all these necessary things,
to a true Church, is granted by many Protestants before; and his Majesty
whom this doctor should allow, entreateing of such (as they term them)
necessary points, writes thus: We hope that K. James ag D. Conrad. Vorstuis
page 60.
no Papists shall ever be found to err in any of those main points. And
concerning our scholemen Masters in divinity with us, he uses these words:
In the maine growndes of Christian Religion, they are worthy of all
commendation. And Page 63. sup.
toucheinge those doctrines which D. Morton will name our errors and
superstitions, he adds thus: If the subject of Vorstius Page 46. 47. supr.
his heresies had not been grounded upon questions of a higher quality then
such matters, as ar in controversy at this day, between the Papists, and us;
we do freely profess, that in that case we should never have troubled our
selves with the business in such fashion. By which words it is manifest, that
he did not think, that any opinion which Catholics hold, does either exclude
us from the true Church, or from salvation: otherwise the maintayners of such
things though as near friends as the Netherlanders to England were fervently to
be admonished. But D. Morton himself will Morton App. lib. 5. cap. 25. page
663.
clear us in this matter, and in this manner: and in these words: If we
should not acknowledge Gods holy providence (as in the Greek, so in the Roman
Church, by whom have been preserved the laws of the commandments
conteyninge the same of moral obedience, the Symboll and Creed Apostolical,
which hold the same of the fundamental Articles of faith, the two Sacraments
Baptism and the Eucharist: and the Scriptures of the old and new Testament in
their first originalls: of Hebrew and Greek, being the evidences of our
heavenly Fathers will, and conteyninge in them all truth necessary unto
salvation: we might be worthily Judged both impiously unthankful unto God,
and mali^ious against that Church. Therefore if D. Morton requires only, as
before such necessary points and Articles of faith to a true Church, and here
acknowledges them in the Roman Church, and protests they might be worthily
judged malicious against that Church, if they should deny it: It is evident
that they are malicious against it, they shall deny it, to be the true Church
of Christ: because in his Judgment the true and essential definition of the
true Church, ever was, and still is unseperably annexed unto it. Concerning D.
Mortons exception and limitation: That the error and superstition do proceed
not from knowledge but from Ignorance, is fully answered by his own fellows
in Religion before, graunteinge, that the Popes greatest Doctors, and Princes
of our Religion, ar Saints and saved souls. And to avoid ignorance, or
wilful erringe they have written: The Papists cry mamely in all Relation of
Relig. cap. 29.
places for trial by disputation. And that English Protestants, persecutions
against us, ar thought to equal those of Nero, and Dioclesian. Which we would
not suffer, if we knew our selves in error, wilful both to be afflicted in
this, and the world to come. Besides D. Mortons limitation is ridiculous, for
error and superstition do not proceed from knowledge, as his fond
distinction surmiseth: neither does the state of knowledge, or ignorance, ^arye
the essential, necessary, and fundamental definition, nature, or essence of
the Church, being one and the same in that, as in all other things, in all
estates and times. The particular exceptions which he takes against the
Innovation of some doctrines which he contendeth to have been in the Roman
Church, first ar frivolous in this dispute, none of them as he confesses
being of any thing essential, and necessary either to the true Church, or
salvation, of which we contend in this place. Secondly they shall be all
confuted in their proper places, by these his own brethren, and present friends
and contrymen in Religion. Thirdly not to suspend my Readers Judgment so long,
Doctor Morton shall answer and by a general Morton Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 30.
page 573. 574.
reason, so much as this place, will permit, confute himself in his own
objection. His words be these: Protestants in oppugninge doctrines which they
call new and not Catholic, ar so far from sufferinge the limitation of the
first 4^0. years, that they give the Romanists, the scope of the first 600.
years. S. Gregory lived within the first 600. years. He adds for himself,
and other Protestants, as the Centuriarists, and many more, of our conversion
then, in this Morton lib. 1. cap. ^. page 60. supr.
manner: Pagan and Heathnish people by the light of the gospel through the
Ministry of Austen, the legate of S. Gregory were brought unto the fold of
Christ. And therefore our Authors called i^ a gracious conversion. And yett
that this light, Gospel, fold of Christ and gratiu^ conversion, to which they
were converted, was (as they now scoffingly term our Catholic Roman
Religion) Romanisme, Papisme, Papistry, superstitions Ceremonies, and the like
by which they express the full state of our Religion is thus testified by D.
Mortons Protestant Authors, and witnesses. The words of his Centuriarists be
these: Augustinus Romanus ordinis Centuriator. Ce^tur. 6. An. 1^82. page 747.
748.
Benedicti Monachu^ a Gregorio Papa Anno Domini 582. Augustine a Roman, a
Monk of the order of Benedict was sent from Gregory the Pope in the year of
our Lord 582. into England to win it to the Pope of Rome, and to make it
subject to his superstitious Jurisdiction. Enterin into the Kentish Isle named
Tenet in the year of our Lord 596. he endued King Edelbert and his
superstitious Wife in the Roman Religion. Yett with that condition, that this
Popish worship should be free and not compelled. After calling a council he
obtruded the Romish Rites and customs to those Churches that it to say
Altares, Vestments, Images, Masses, Chalices, Crosses, Candlesticks, Censors,
Banners, sacred vessels, holy water, thee books of the Roman Ceremonies,
Oblations, Processions, Pompes, Tithes and the like. When he had subjected the
brittane Churches to the Antichrist of Rome Romano Antichristo subiecisset, he
dyed. Thus we see by D. Morton his greatly reverenced, Col. 749.
and esteemed friends, and fellows in Religion, that the state of the Roman
Church in that his allowed time, was the same, that it is at this present. And
not only his Centuriarists, but other Protestants by his own Relation ar
witnesses Morton App. lib. 1. cap. 3. Willet de August. mon. Morton supr. page
67. l. 1. cap. 6. Centuriat. centur. 7. col. 559.
in this cause. Doctor Humfrey as he acknowledges, says that Gregory brought
in on us ceremoniarum, a burden of Ceremonies. D. Willet says, he brought in
Popery, Luke Osiander and his before cited friends call that Religion,
ceremonias papisticas, papisticall ceremonies. And to use their words:
Ceremonias papisticas instituturi, and propagaturi: quod Beda vocat aliquos
Christo praedicando acquirere, to teach and publish papisticall ceremonies,
which Bid, that glory of our nation, calls to get some to Christ by
preachinge. Mr. Bale an other of his friends, Joan. Bal. l. de script. Brit.
centur. 1. in August. page 34. fol. 3 5.
and Authors has these words: Augustine was sent Apostle from Gregory to
instruct the English Saxons, in the papisticall faith, papistica fide
initiandos. And again King Ethelbert being converted received Romanisme with
the superstitions adjoined. Romanismum cum adiunctis superstitionibus suscepit.
Augustine brought in Al^^rs, Vestments, sacred Vessels, Relicts and books of
C^^^monies, all which Gregory had sent unto him, with the blessinge of Peter.
And that these with the rest of our sacred c^remonies which they call the body
of popery, were not then newly Invented, but used in the Church of Rome, when
his majesty says, it was a Rule to all K. Speech.
both in faith, and ceremonies, shall be testified and proved hereafter, in the
proper question of such things, by D. Morton himself* and too many others of
his now English Protestant confederates in Religion, to be without manifest
impudency to be denied. Therefore, by these Protestants, The present Roman
Church must be allowed to be the true Church of Christ; And all their former
Inuectiues against it, and their departeing from it, by their own Judgments,
must be recanted.

CHAPTER III. WHEREIN IS PROVED BY these Protestants, that the Pope of Rome
ever was, and now lawfully is, and ought so to be esteemed the supreme pastor,
and head on earth, of the whole Church of Christ: of his sentence and
Authority.
FROM hence it is evidently proved, That the Pope of Rome is supreme head of
the true Church of Christ: for seeing these Protestants have told us, that
true Regiment and discipline is a note of the true Church of Christ, and thus
it appears, that the Church of Rome is this true Churehe, and has this note
of true Regiment, the supreme bindeing, and commaundinge Authority, of the
Pope, being the cheifest of that government, is therein concluded Likewise it
so follows by their note of true doctrine, wherein they have granted the
Church of Rome constantly persisteth in all things, necessary and essential:
such as this Question of the Popes prerogative and highest Iuridicall power is:
for as it follows in these men's Judgments, if the Pope is not supreme head,
and Ruler of the true Church of Christ, then that society that so accepts
him, is not the true Church: So if it be proved, that he is the highest
supreme pastor, and vicar of Christ in earth. That Church which so receaueth
him, and no other is the true Church of Christ. For to be supreme governor of
the true Church, and the true Church so to be governed, ar mutual and
inseperable Correlatyues, as a King and Kingedome, Lord and Servant and the
like. And this with that which is entreated in the former chapter might suffice
in this controversy. But to give all contentment. I will prove it more in
particular, and first argue thus.

That Church which is the Mother, and consequently, commaundeing Church over
all Churches, her children* has supreme authority over them, otherwise no
Mother nor commander over all: But the Church of Rome is this Mother and
commanding Church: Therefore it has supreme authority over all. Therefore
the Pope highest Pastor in it, is this supreme Ruler, and Commander. Both
propositions be proved by Protestants before: and so nothing remains
doubtful.

Further I argue in this order: No society or company wanteing one supreme,
and chief Pastor over the rest, to suppress Scismes, and avoid factions, can
be the true Church of God, whose communion all men ar bownde to embrace,
follow her directions, and rest in her Judgment: But all Protestant companies,
societies, and Congregations, want this chief Rule^, and commander, and the
Church of Rome only enjoys it: Therefore no Assembly or society of
Protestants, but only the Church of Rome is the true Church of Christ. The
Mayor though it be evident before, yett thus it also is proved and confirmed
again by these Protestants, teacheing that from the beginning this
supreamacie was in one. D. Field writes thus: Tertullian says rightly Field.
l. 4. c. 2. page 196.
and ap^ly, what was hidden and concealed from Peter on whom Christ promised
to build his Church? D. Sutcliffe speaks more plainly in these Sutcliffe
sub. page 40.
words: Tertullian gives the keys only to Peter, saying: that the Church is
built upon him. And to prove that this prerogative fownded in thi^ chief
Apostle, first Bishop of Rome, was to continue to his successors: D. Downame
says that in the primative Church: Downame l. 1. Antich. p. 36.
Titles of honor, and pr^eminence were given to the Church of Rome, as the
chief, or head of the Churches. Further D. Field cites and approves, this
saying of S. Hierome: Eccl^si^sal^^ Hieron. contra Lucifer.
in summi sac^rdotis dignita^^ pe^de^ cui si non exors quaedam and ab omnibu^
(...) de^^^ po^es^a^, tot in ecclesia efficientur scismata, quot sacerdotes.
The health of the Church depends on the dignity of the highest Priest, to
whom except an extraordinary and eminent power be given by all men, there will
be so many scismes, where the words Church, highest Priest, and, of all,
demonstrate, that he speaks of the whole Church universal; for those words
cannot be applied to any particular Church. Again D. Couell has these words:
The twelve were not like to agree, except there had been one chief amongst
them: for says S. Hierome, amongst the twelve one was therefore chosen, that a
chief being appointed, occasion of dissension might be prevented. Which
neither S. Hierosme, D. Couell, or any other, Couell ag: the plea of the Innoc.
page 107.
Catholic, or Protestant, could suspect among the Apostles, confirmed in
grace, that any mortal or damnable dissension could fall among them:
Therefore this appointing of one, to be chief among the Apostles, and him
that was to be our first Bishop of Rome, S. Peter, it must needs be for a
continual Rule, and law, for the Universal Church for ever. And yett, if we
would be maliciously envious to the Apostles privilege in grace; if in that
special time of the grace, and favor of God. The supreamacie of one above all
was so necessary, that otherwise schisms, (which be more properly against the
whole Church and head thereof then against any particular Church wantinge such
supreme authority to be disobeyed) could not then he otherwise prevented; it
must needs be much more necessary in the continuance and later ages of the
Church, as shall be proved from these Protestants in the next Argument, in the
mean time, for this point D. Couell writes in this order? we easily see,
Couell against the plea of the Innocent. page 106.
that equalitte does breed factions, and therefore wisemen to suppress the
seeds of dissentions have made one above the rest. And better to clear this
doubt by these Protestants I will hear repeat again, what their Protestant
Relator has written in this matter utterly disablinge the Protestants
Religion, and commending Relation of Religion c. 47.
the Church of Rome: his words be these: The Protestants ar severed bands, or
rather scattered troops, each draweing diverse way, without any means to
pacify their quarrels, to take up their controversies. No Prince with any
preeminence of Jurisdiction above the rest: no Patriarch, one or more to have a
Common superintendance or care of their Churches, for respondencie and unity:
no ordinary way to assemble a general Council of their part, the only hope
remayninge to asswadge their contentions. The other have the Pope, as a Common
Father, Aduiser and conductor to them all, to reconcile their ^ar^^, to appease
their displeasures, to decide their difference, above all things to draw their
Religion by consent of counsels to unity. Hitherto this Protestant writer:
where D. Field may plainly see, that those three things, wherein he teacheath
the unity of the Church consists, cannot in the Judgment of his fellow
Protestants, be mayntayned without this one supreme, and commaundeing pastor,
and authority, in the Church of Christ.

My next Argument is thus: whatsoever Regiment, Supremacy, and Government of
the Church, was ordained by Christ in his time, and was as much, or more
necessary to remain, and continue in it, for future and succeedeing ages, is
still to be allowed, and continued: But the Supreme Regiment, and commaundeing
Jurisdiction, of one highest spiritual Pastor, and Governor is such: Therefore
still to be allowed, and continued. The Mayor proposition is evidently true,
for Christ's ordinance above all things, is to be observed, and notheing so
necessary to his Church, may be without damnation omitted. The Minor
proposition is thus proved, by these words of D. Couell, that follow: Because
in the execution of holy things, where the parsons Couell against the plea of
the Innocent. page 106.
putt in trust are but men, discord, and disorder usually do break in: the
wisdom of God thought it necessary, that amongst them, who for their
Ministry were equal, an Inequality for Order, and Superiority to command,
should be granted: that by this means, Order, and union should both be
preserved in Christ's Church. Which of it concern all persons, and ages in the
Church of Christ, (as suerly it does,) the government must not cease with the
Apostles. where it is evident, that Christ among his Apostles instituted in
one, an Authority and Superiority, to command, and without this one
commaundeing superiority, union, and order could not be preserved, that it
concerns all parsons, and ages, and so must never cease, but enduer for ever,
which is all I contend to prove, for all Protestants want it, and only the
Roman Church enjoys it. And further, the same Protestants Doctor proves
this spiritual supreamacie of one Pastor, to be perpetual, because now in
these times of scisme, and dissentions, there is more need of that
commaundeing superiority: And yett (says he) it was the principal means to
prevent scismes, and dissentions in the Couell sup. page 207.
primative Church, when the graces of God were far m^re abundant, and
eminent, then now they are: nay if the twelve were not like to agree, exc^pt
there had b^^ne one ch^ife amongst them: for says S. Hierome, amongst the
twelve one was therefore chosen that a chief being appoin^^d, occasion of
dissension might be pr^u^^^ed. And as in the same place he thus argues,
against the puritans Presbi^^ry: how can they think that equality would keep
all the Pasto^s of the world in vniti^? So I say to all Protestants, they
cannot with reason think, that so many equal Regiments, and Rulers in
Religion, as they make in their distinct Provinces, and Churches, if the world
were of their Religion, could over agree: to which the lamentable experience of
their miserable dissentions, and errors allreadie, for want of one supreme
Commander, and not otherwise to be redressed as the Protestant Relator has
Relat. sup.
written before, does testify. Which absurdity and most insufferable
inconvenience, for want of such commanding power, D. Couell sets down in
these words: seeing Couell sup. page 107.
that all men may easily err, and that no errors ar so dangerous, as those
which concern Religion: the Church should be in a far worse case, then the
meanest Common wealth, nay all most then a den of Thieves, if it were
destitu^e of means, either to convince Heresies, or suppress them. Which
cannot be done as they plainly confess, by any power, in their Church, not by
any authority, as they write, but by a General Field.
Cowncell, and a supreme Commander to call it, which they want, and as their
Relator tells us, can never have it. Further Relation.
I argue thus: That Church which as the Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury
wittnesseth, Abbot ag. Hill page 189.
by tradition of the ancient, was the seat of S. Peter, the highest and
supreme pastor in the Church as D. Field and D. Couell before have allowed,
from S. Hierome, and Tertullian, and D. Sutcliffe Sutcliff. subt. page 40.
thus cites, and writes, Tertullian gives the keys only to Peter, sayeing:
that the Church is built on him. And thus he testifies for himself: Peter
preached in no place, but he there ordained Sup. page 3.
Bishops, and teachers, and fownded Churches: Which in his book against D.
Kellison, he Sutel. against Kell. page 105.
makes an Argument of supreamacie. And which as the same Protestant
Archbishopp cites from S. Leo and Prosper great Doctors and Saints, was by
Religion supreme head of the world: This Church I say must needs be Abb.
sup. page 189. 190.
chief and supreme: But the Church of Rome is that Church, as is evident,
and appears by these Protestants in those their places cited: Therefore it
is, and so ought by Protestants to be honored and obeyed. Both propositions be
affirmed by Protestants before, and so notheinge in this Argument remains to
be further proved.

Next I suppose what D. Field writes of the great and patriarchall Churches
of Gracia, Armenia Aethiopia, Russia never subject or inferior unto any except
to the Church of Rome as Catholics hold, teacheing that to be supreme: his
words of those Churches be these: We conclude therefore, Field. l. 3. c. 5.
page 7^.
that their scismes and seperations ar sinful, wicked and dangerous, and
their errors inexcusable. And concerning scisme he thus defines it: Scisme
is a breach of the unity of the Church. That supposed, and that scisme which
is Field sup. page 70.
contempt of authority, is a kind of disobedience, which always is against
a Superior, and one higher in dignity, and command, I argue thus. Whatsoever
Church is that, to which, and against which, all patriarchall Churches,
excepting one clayminge to be highest, ar in scisme, and disobedience, is
supreme, and of highest authority: But this is the Church of Rome: Therefore
that is supreme. The Mayor proposition is evident, otherwise those Churches
against D. Feilds words before, could not be scismaticall: nor possibly could
be in scisme which he says is a breach of the unity of the Church, and must
needs be a contempt of superiority. The Minor is manifestly true: for by D.
Field before, the other patriarchall sees besides Rome ar in scisme, and no
other Church but the Roman Church was extant in the world, besides them, at
the time of their scisme, and long after neither any other then did, or now
does claim superiority over them: Therefore that alone is supreme: otherwise
those Churches not resisting superiority, cannot be in scisme, against D.
Field his grant before related. Field sup. l. 3. c. 5. page 70.


Further for my next Argument, the same D. Feilds has these words: Scisme is a
breach of the unity of the Church. The unity of the Church consists in
three things: first the subjection of people to their lawful Pastors: secondly
the connection, and communion, which many particular Churches, and the Pastors
of them, have among themselves: thirdly in holdinge the same rule of faith.
This supposed, which as it confirms the former argument, for all these things
required to the unity of the Church so necessary to be preserved, must needs
imply a supreme authorite: So it gives matter of an other Argument, in this
manner.

Whatsoever doctrine, and power, in the Church, is so necessary, that without
it, neither all, nor any of these unities absolutely needful, can be
preserved, is to be granted: But one supreme spiritual commaundeing Ruler,
and the doctrine thereof is such: Therefore one supreme governor, and doctrine
according is to be allowed. The Mayor proposition is evidently Relation of
Relig supr. cap. 47.
true, by D. Field and other Protestants, otherwise nothing can be scisme,
nothing can be heresy. The Minor proposition is directly proved before, by
the Protestant Relator, twice allreadie cited, where he expressly teaches
that without one such supreme preeminence of Iuridiction above the rest, which
he says all Protestants want and Catholics have, quarrels cannot be
pacified, unity kept, controversies decided, and consequently neither Scisme,
nor Heresy condemned.

Again thus I argue: whatsoever the Church of Rome claymed, or exercised, when
by Protestants confession, is was in her Florisheing, and best estate, a Rule
to all, Anchor of piety, chief and only Church, that it still ought to enjoy,
and we to grant unto it: But in that time, it claymed, and exercised
supreamacie over all: Therefore it ought now to enjoy it, and we to grant it.
The Mayor is evident, for that which is a Rule to all, may, not be crooked,
neither that which is confessed chief, be made Inferior, And that the Church
of Rome had those eminent privileges, is thus proved by these Protestants: our
King says of this Roman Kings speech in Parlam.
Church: it is our mother Church it was a Rule to all, both in doctrine and
ceremonies, when it was in her florisheinge and best estate. D. Couell writes
thus: The Church of Rome was the chief and Couell def. of Hook.
only Church. M^ Ormerod calls it, the eye of the west (in which diussion
England is) and Ormerod pict. pap. page 184. Down. l. 2. Antichr. page 105.
the Anchor of piety. D. Downame grants, it was a note of a Good Christian,
to clean unto the Roman Apostolical Church.

The second proposition, that the Church of Rome claymed and had supreamacie,
in that unspotted, and primative time of Christianity, is also proved in the
former: for that which is Mother, Rule to all both in doctrine and ceremonies,
chief Church etc. must needs be granted supreme. Yett to prove it further:
D. Sutcliffe, citeing S. Sutcliffe subu. page 57.
Irenaeus, lyueing near the Apostles time, and long before any general
Cowncell, or Christian Emperor, to give supreamacie to the Sea of Rome,
writes thus: Irenaeus says, that every Church ought to have respect to the
Church of Rome, for her eminent principality. Mr. Ormerod ascends to Pope,
S. Anacletus, living withein one hundred years of Christ: his words be these:
To prove that the Church of Rome has the preeminence over all Churches,
Ormerod. pict. pap. page 78.
Anacletus alleges Matthew. 16. verse. 18. upon this rock will I build my
Church: and he expowndeth it thus: super hanc Petram (id est) super Ecclesiam
Romanam, upon this Rock: that is, upon the Church of Rome, will I build my
Church. And who shall we think was better acquainted with the privilege, of
that highest Apostle S. Peter, Bishop of Rome, then this so glorious a Pope,
Martyr, and Saint so near succeedeing unto him? when especially these
Protestants before have assured us, that this supreme power was not to dye
with S. Peter, but to continue in the Church for ever. And this was not a
singular opinion of that Holy Pope, and Saint, but of others also: the words
of D. Downame be Down. l. 1. Antichrist. cap. 3. page 35.
these: diverse Bishops of Rome before the time of Socrates the historiam (in
her that best and flourishing estate) contended to have the primacie, over all
other Churches: and that is the chief scope of many of their Epistles decret
all. And yett in that time the Protestants confess those Popes for Saints:
and if their Epistles be decretalls, and laws to the Church, as this Doctor
calls them how had not these Masters of decrees, and lawemakers unto the
Church, also supreme and highest power in the Church? for laws and decrees ar
made by Sovereigns, and not by subjects. And not only Popes, but other
Saints, and Doctors before, and to be cited hereafter by Protestants, were of
the same myndc: for this time it shall suffice that M^. Middleton Middleton
Papistom. page 200.
writes thus; Papias (lyueinge in the Apostles time) taught Peter's primacie,
and Romish Episcopalitye.

My next Argument, or further confirmation of the former, is thus: That Church,
or governor, that in the best and flourishing estate of the Church, by
Protestants, did claim, exercise, and execute, supreme, and highest
spiritual Jurisdiction, in all known parts, of the world, Asia, Afrike, and
Europe was truly supreme, and so still to be accounted: But the Pope and
Church of Rome was such: Therefore supreme in authorine. The Mayor is
evidently true, for in this life no supreamacie can extend further, then into
the whole known world, and all parts thereof. The second proposition is thus
proved by these Protestants: and first of Asia, among the Greek Churches, and
privileges which they claim: D. Couell tells us, that Pope Couell ag: thea
plea of the Inn. page 65.
Victor a glorious Saint, and Martyr, did in that best time, authoritatiuely
take upon him supreamacie over all Asia, excommunicating the Churches of it:
his words be: inseperateing all Asia from the unity of the faithful, for
being disobedient in the point and question of Easter. And what greater
supreamacie can be named in the Church, then to excommunicate, and purt forth
of the Church, so great a part of the world? Therefore seeing such
Jurisdiction is not, but in superiority, this supreamacie must needs be
granted to the Church of Rome; for of all Churches of the world even by the
grant of Protestants, the Greek Church next to the Church of Rome has ever
most contended for superiotie, and in the ancient cowncells, next to the
Church of Rome, is most privileged: yett here they are by a Saint Bishop of
Rome, justly excommunicated, as by their superior: for as these Protestants
argue in an other place: par in parem non habet authoritatem. An equal against
an equal has not authority. And Doctor Couell before has told us, that they
were thus censured by the Pope of Rome, to use his words again, for being
disobedient in the point and question of Easter: Which makes it plain in his
opinion, that the Pope of Rome was supreme, and had highest power not only to
censure, but to decree in matters of Religion, and bind others unto it,
otherwise not to have conformed themselves unto him, had not been in these
Greek Churches, disobedience, which is only against authority, and
superiority. And although S. Iraeneus disliked this proceedeing, with the
Asiaticall Churches, Sucl. subu. page 57.
has wittnessed before that he says: Every Church ought to have respect to
the Church of Rome, for her eminent principality. Therefore he thought it had
supreamacie. For principality eminent over every Church here mentioned, must
needs be supreamacie over all: for every Church being subjected unto it, none
is privileged, from subjection and obedience unto it.

Next let us come to Afrike: for which M. Perkins writes thus: Appeals were
often made out of Afrike, to the Popes of Rome, in those Perk. problem, page
237. 238.
days, of her best estate. And yet appeals be all ways to superiors, and
never out of forrayne kingdoms, but to the highest, for which cause, D.
D^wname grants in this Downam. l. 2. Antichrist, page 105. 106.
manner, that S. Augustine and Victor Vticensis in Asrike were of opinion, that
to adhere to the Church of Rome, was a Mark of a true Catholic in those
times. Which could not be, except it were the commanding Church, and
enfranchised from error. Neither does this Doctor Down. su^. page 106. 107.
Deny, but the Bishops then did swear obedience to the Pope. And entreateing
of a Bishopp recanteinge his Heresies, he writes thus. He swears, to
renownce his former Heresies, and to profess, and maintain that Faith. And
Religion, which the Bishopp and Church of Rome did profess. Which is a thing
in it self so absurd for Bishops in that best time to do, except they did
hold, the Popes Authority to be supreme, and Judgment in religeons
controversies Infallible, that no man of understanding can believe it:
Therefore Mr. Ormerod wittnesseth; that S. Leo taught, that Ormerod pict. pap.
page 44. Sutcl su^^ page 19.
God did assist, and direct that See in decrees.

Concerning Europe: D. Sutcliffe gives particular examples, how S. Gregory
(to use his words) commanded the Bishops of france. And commands also in
England, the constituting of our Archbishop S. Augustine, and the very See of
that preeminence, at Canterbury. D. Couell writes the like of Pope Gregory
his Couell against Burg. page 49.
commaundeing authority, in all Spain: who provoked by the Heresy of the
Arians, commanded that through all Spain there should be but once dippinge in
baptism. And if either a general Cowncell, in the primative Church, to which
Protestants will seem to give highest authority, or the Emperor, to Bilson
Suru. page 83. Mort. Apol. part. 2. page 340. Relat. c. 47. Su^cl. subu. page
119. Field page 228. etc. Do^n, l. 1. Antich. c. 3. page 36.
whom by their proceedings they would highest power, if they could procure any
of their Religion could either give, or confirm this highest authority, to
the Pope of Rome, Then D. Downame denies not, but that both the Emperor
Justinian, and the general Cowncell of Calcedon in the primative Church,
attributed to the Pope of Rome, to be head of the Church: which he says is
the greatest style. And adds of that Church, in that best estate: Titles of
honor, and preeminence were given to the Church of Rome, as the chief, or
Head of the Churches.

Again I argue thus: whatsoever power does rightly ordain in the Church
generally ceremonies by all to be used in it, appoints Metropolitanes,
Archbishops, Bishops, assigns precincts, to every parish, and a certain
compass to every presbyter, in the primative Church, and best estate thereof,
musts needs be supreme: But the power of the Pope of Rome is such: Therefore
it is supreme. The Mayor is evidently true, for it conteyneth authority over
all in the Churches. The Minor is proved by D. Morton, Mr. Ormerod, Mr. Hull,
Mort. apol. part. 2. Orm. pict. pur. Couell exam. Hull Romans pol page 82. 83.
84. 85. 86.
and Doctor Couell, telling us, that Lent, Imbringe days, Friday Altars,
Albes, Corporalls, Priests Robes, Saints, Fastings euens, Saints Shrines,
Hymns, Pax, Pascall Taper, Mass for the dead, Canonical hours,
Processione, Holy water, Introite of Mass, Annoyntinge Bishops, crosseing with
Chrisme in Baptism, were ordained in the Church by these primative, and holy
Popes, Telesphorus, Calixtus, Stephanus, Syluester, Sixtus, Vigilius, Honorius,
Bo^ifacius, Sergius, Leo, Innocentius, Zozimus, Vitellian, Celestine, Pelagius,
Vrbanus, Agapitus, Damasus, Higimus, Pius, Alexander: all which ruled the
Church long before the exceptions of Protestants against it. D. Couell does
not only tell us, that Metropolitanes, Archbishops etc. came from thence, and
who to whom should be obedient, or superior: and were so used before the
Nicene Council: Couell mod. exam. page 111.
But further (to use his words) either Euaristus Bishopp in the Sea of Rome (in
the year of Christ 112.) or as some say Dionysius first assigned the precincts
to every parish, and appointed to each Presbyter, a certain compass,
whereof himself should take chardge alone. Therefore that authority of the
Pope, which thus from Couell exam. page 162. sup.
the beginning, and before counsels were holden, assigned, limited, and
appointed to all spiritual parsons, and callings, their Titles, honors,
precincts, Jurisdiction, and power, must needs be supreme.

I argue again: That Church, whose Bishop was before the first general
Council, Chief Patriarch in the Church of Christ, and in that and other
general Counsels, so allowed, and confirmed, by the confession of
Protestants, and whose Rulers when that Church was in her florisheing, and best
estate, a Rule to all our mother Church etc. Did make and publish decrees, and
laws to the whole Church, and in the greatest affairs of general, and other
Counsels, that they should not do against the directions of that
commaundeinge Ruler, else to be accounted no Counsels: and that it were not
lawful for Bishops to do any thing against his decrees, must needs be the
supreme and commaundinge Church, over all others: But the Church of Rome by
the testimonye of Protestants, is in this preeminent and privileged estate:
Therefore by them it is the supreme and commaundinge Church, of the whole
Christian world: The Mayor proposition is evidently true: for, first he that
is the first, and chief among all others, cannot be dependant, therefore he
must needs be supreme, otherwise D. Feilds unities of the Church could not
possibly be kept, as is proved before, nor the grant of his fellows, that
there ever was since Christ one supreme in his Church, cannot be justified.
For if the first, chief, and most worthy, is not he; the second, less
chief or less worthy carnot be he. And if by Protestants, a general
Council is highest, and supreme Judge, as D. Morton Morton. Apol. part. 2.
page 340. Sutcl. subu. page 119. Field page 228.
says: a general Council is highest Judge: by D. Surcliffe: general
Counsels have sovereign authority in external government: by D. Field:
Bishops assembled in a general Council have (and only have) authority to
interprett scriptures and by their authority to suppress all them that
gainesay such Interpretation, and subject every man, that shall disobey such
determinations, as they consent upon, to excommunication, and censure of like
nature: Then that Pope or prelate which in that true Chnrch (where such
usurpation unjustly could not be) that had authority to confirm, ratify, or
to frustrat and inualidate such, and all other Counsels, must of necessity be
supreme, and of the highest commanding power, over all. The Minor proposition
is proved by these Protestants: first D. Field writes in these words: The
main Field l. 3. c. 1. page 61. 62.
division of the christian Church is presently, and was formerly for certain
hundreds of years, into the Latin and Greek Church, as most principal. In
the time of the Nicene Council, and before, as appears Nicen. Council. can. 6.
by the Acts of the Council limiteinge there bounds, there were three
principal Bishops, or Patriarchs of the Christian Church: namely the Bishop
of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche. After which time, Constantinople before
named Bizantium made great by Constantine, and being the seat of the
Emperors, the Bishops of this See not only obtained to have the dignity of a
Patriarche among the rest, but in the second general Coun^^ll, holden at
Constantinople was preferred before both the other of Alexandria, and
Antioche, and set in degree of honor next unto the Bishop of Rome. Hitherto
See D. Field l. 4. c. 5. page 202. clearly allowt^e Popes sentence to be
greatest next to a general Council. It is cited in the next chapter.
D. Field; by which discourse of his, there is evident demonstration made, that
the privilege of the Bishop of Rome, was not given him by general Counsels,
but he had it before the first Nicene Council, the first general. Secondly
that it was the most principal, that was in the Christian Church, for of the
twoe most principal Churches ^atine and Greek (to use his words) the Latin
the most principal was under him: thirdly he was from the beginning
preferred before the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antioche, and
Constantinople: in so much, that for Constantinople claymeing after to be
chief, he calls it a pretended Title, Field sup. page 62.
and false: and further his words of the Bishops of Constantinople be these:
The mognificence and glory of his city daily encreaseinge, he challenged to
be superior, and would be nam^d universal B. not challengeing to himself to be
B. alone, but enchroacheinge upon the Right of all other, and thereby
declareinge. Himself greater, and more honorable then any of the rest, and the
chief Bishop of the whole world. Hitherto his words of the encreacheing, and
usurpation of that Bishop: Then by his sentence, the Pope of Rome still was
chief, and obtained by right the primacie, in the whole Christian: Church: And
this cheefnes and primacie, as D. Couell has told before, must needs be
supreamacie, for no other could have it: and D. Downame also has acknowledged
Down. l. 1. Ant. page 36.
that both the Emperor and general Council attributed to the Pope of Rome in
the primative Church, to be head of the Church: the greatest style, in his
Judgment: and it must needs be, if (as it is) among all members of the body
the head is chief, supreme, and most excellent. Let us add to this twoe
sentences of D. Field: the one concerning the authority of Traditions in
these words: There is no reason why traditions or unwritten verities should not
be made equal Field page 238.
with the words, precepts and doctrines of Christ, the Apostles and Pastors of
the Church left unto us in writeinge if they could prove any such unwritten
verities for it is not the writeinge, that gives things their authority. But
the worth and creditt of him that delivers them, though by word, and lively
voice only. And after delyuering three Rules, Field. page 242.
how to know certaynely these so authorized traditions, and unwritten
verities, he speaks in this manner. The third Rule is the constant
testimony, of the Pastors of an Apostolical Church, succeedeingly delivered:
To which some add the present Testimonye of any Apostolical Church, whose
declynings when they began, we cannot precisely tell. Hitherto the words of
this Protestant Doctor, of the authority of traditions, equal to scriptures
being proved by this his Rule. Then if the opinion of these some his
Protestants by his manner of argueinge, teacheing that the present testimony of
an Apostolic Church, is sufficient Rule, to prove true traditions, of so high
authority, not only this Catholic doctrine of the Popes supreamacie, and
commanding power, but all other doctrines, taught against these Protestants,
of necessity must needs be true by this Rule, for they all being the doctrines
of the present Church of Rome, the first and principal Apostolic Church,
must needs be justified by the Testimony of an Apostolic Church, at this
present when they are taught by it. And this is sufficient for my purpose: for
so that some Protestants be of this opinion, it is as much as I request, and
do not desire or expect D. Feilds voice, or an harmony of Protestants, never
yett agreeing well, in any thing, to be all of one mind in this matter. But
to vrdge this particular question in hand, of the Popes supreamacie by that
Rule of traditions, which he allows, which is: The constant testimony of
the Pastors of an Apostolic Church, succeedingly delivered: It is proved by
these Protestants before, that the Pastors of that greatest Apostolic Church,
even from the Apostle S. Peter, have succeedingly claymed, taught, decreed,
exercised, and executed that highest power of supreamacie, in all parts of the
known world. And yett for further proof of my Minor proposition, Mr. Powell
writes of these holy primative Powell l. 1. Antichrist. page 230. 231.
Popes followeing, in this manner: Calixtus Pope defined, that all Bishops
though gathered in a general Council shall fulfill the will of the Church
of Rome: They which do not this, ar pronownced of Pope Pelagius, to keep a
Conciliable and not a Council. And again in these words: Powell sap. page
240.
Pope Damasus wrote, that it is not lawful for the Bishopps to do any thing,
against the decrees of the Bishops of Rome. Therefore by these Protestants. The
Pope of Rome of right is, and of all ought to be acknowledged, and admitted,
for the supreme head, and Ruler of the Church of Christ. And this being thus
vnuincibly proved by these English Protestants themselves, our mortal enemies,
and persecutors, I conclude with their own words, granted before, upon such
trial, and conviction. That the Pope, and the Offer of Conference page 16.
Church of Rome, and in them, God and Christ Jesus himself, have had great
wrong, and Indignity offered unto them, in that they are rejected, and that
all the Protestant Churches arre scismaticastin forsakeinge unity and
communion with them. Which D. Field must also Justify, affirminge (as Field.
l. 4. c. 5. page 202.
shall be cited at lardge in the next chapter) that the Judgment of the Pope of
Rome, or Church of Rome is one of the greatest in this world, and as great
disobedience to resist, or deny it: which is evident also before, but more of
it hereafter.

Now let us come to the New Protestants history it self maliciously by their
Bishops published against the Church of Rome. First entreateing of the
conversion of this kingedome to the faith of Christ: they set down this
marginall supposition in these Theater of the Empire of great Britanie page
203. cap. 9. n. 5.
words: Saint Peter the Apostle supposed to have preached in Britain. And
further write, as follows. To which uncontrollable testimony some others have
added, that Saint Peter the Apostle preached the word of life, in this Island,
as to other gentiles he did, for whom God had chosen him, that Act. 15. 7.
from his mouth they might hear the Gospel, (as himself alleges) and that
he here fownded Churches, and ordained priests and deacons, which is reported
by Simon Metaphrastes out of the Greek Metaphrast. Centur. 1. part. 7. did. 8.
Antiquities, and Guilielmus Eisingrenius in the first of his Centurie, who
says that Peter was here in Neroes time. Therefore if the Antiquities of the
gretians, and Adversaries to the Romaue See, give this testimone unto it, we
need not be scrupulous to receive it, especially when these Protestant Bishops
with their Pantaleon give creditt to this authority of S. Peter over this
kingedome in these words: Much about these times (as Beatus Rhenanus Theat
sup. page 204. n. 9. cap. 9.
in his History of Germany, Pantaleon and others do report) one Suetonius a
noble man's son in Britain converted to the faith by the first planters of
the Gospel in this Island, and after his baptism called Beatus, was sent by
the brethren from hence unto Rome, to be better iustructed, and further
directed by Saint Peter himself. Therefore a dependence of this kingedome from
S. Peter, and the Church of Rome in spiritual things from the beginning of
Christianity is to be allowed. Which they further confirm in their history
of King Lu^ius, sendeinge to Pope Eleutherius, at Rome about the Conversion of
this Kingedome, and his sendeing hither, Faganus and Damianus, two famous Thea
of G. Br. page 206. n. 18. l. 6. cap. 9.
Clerks, to that purpose, of whom they write in this manner. These together
both preached, and baptized, amongst the Britains, whereby many daily were
drawn to the faith: And as a worthy* Dicetus Deane of London: a manuscript in
the Kings library ad An. 178.
and ancient historian says: the Temples which had been fownded to the honor
of their many Gods, were then dedicated to the one, and only true God: for
there were in Britain eight and twenty Flamins, and three Archflamins, in
stead of which, so many Bishops and Archbishops were appointed: under the
Archbishop of London were the provinces of Loegria, and Cornubia: under York,
Deira, and Saint David's in Wales.
Albania: under vrbs begionum, Cambria: by which means, this happy Kingedome
under that godly King, was nobly beatified with so many cathedral Churches,
and Christian Bishops Sees, before any other Kingedome of the world. Now
because these Protestants have told us before, that to ordain Bishops and
teachers, and to fownde Churches is an Argument of supreamacie, seeing all
Bishops of this Kingedome were ordained, Sutcliff. ag. K^ll. page, 105.
their Sees designed, and Churches fownded, by Eleutherius Pope of Rome, and
his authority, in those which he sent hither, with that power, Faganus and
Damianus; all spiritual and ecclesiastical I^risdiction of that primative
Church in this Kingedome of necessity was derived from the Church of Rome. For
although Mr Francis Mason in his new defense of the English Ministry, Mason of
the consecration etc. page 52.
would attribute great privilege to Eluanu^ and Meduinus, whom as he, with
his Bishops say, King Lucius sent to Pope Eleutherius at Rome, about the
conversion of this nation, standeinge upon a Report in these words: John
Capgraue reports that Eleutherius made Eluanus Bishop of Britain, and
Meduinus a Doctor to preach the faith of Christ through the whole Island: Yett
he must needs grant, that both Order, and Jurisdiction Episcopal, came into,
and was preserved in this Kingedome from the Pope of Rome. For first he
writes of King Lucius in this manner: The King wrote to Eleutherius,
desireing that by his commandment, he might be made a Mason sup. cap. 3.. 2.
Christian. Secondly he proves, King Lucius had but a part of this Kingedome
but the Pagan Emperors Marcus Antonius Verus, and Aurelius Commodus his
brother, were chief unto Beda l. 1. histor. cap. 4.
the wall of separation, and Lucius was tributary unto them. Thus he writes
of King Lucius: He had seen Christians reproched by the Pagans, as infamous
parsons, and dispitefully Mason l. 2. page 52. cap. 3.. 1.
handled by the Romans that were in authority. Therefore the Pagan Romans then
were in authority. Thirdly his own words before. That Eleutherius made
Eluanus: Bishop of Britain, and Meduinus a Doctor to preach the faith of
Christ through the whole Island, ar clear for Eleutherius the Pope, his
authority, universally over all, for King Lucius was but a tributary King,
for one parcel of this Island, and the Romans themselves had but part. Yett the
Jurisdiction was given (as before, through the whole Island. Mr. Masons words be
these: The Romans had spread their golden Eagle over a great part of the Island.
The Emperor Hadrian had made a wall fourscore miles long: Antonius Pius had
made an other, to divide the Romans from the Brittans: and all that lived
within this wall were tributary to the Romans: of which number King Lucius is
said to be. Therefore Lucius being but one of that number, of tributaryes, for
a part, of the Romans part, had neither spiritual, nor temporal Jurisdiction,
any further, much less over all. His words of this whole Island ar these:
York, London. Caerlegion, in these three noble cities Mason sup. l. 2. cap.
3. page 54.
were the seats of the Archflamynes, so there were 28. Flamynes, and three
Archflamynes in stead of which so many Bishops and Archbishops were appointed.
Therefore seeing the Romans themselves had but a part of Britain, and Lucius
but a tributary part, of that part, and these men assuer us, that so many were
assigned Bishops and Archbishoppes with their several Sees, and Jurisdictions,
over all this Island. comprehendeing both. England contained in the names
Loegria, Stowe Annal. 12. cap. 1. and others.
and Cornubia, unto Humber; the North and Scotland in Deira and Albania; and
Wales in Cambria, as our Historians tell us it follows by undeniable
consequence, that all spiritual Jurisdiction, and authority in all this land,
now termed great Britain, was deduced, brought in, and continued, from, and
under the Pope of Rome. And that neither King Lucius, or any his successor
did, or in justice could claim any supreamacie in such causes: For none of
them until our King James was quietly possessed of them all; and yett one and
the same spiritual Jurisdiction ruled in all these Kingedomes, of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; Ireland subject to Canterbury, and Scotland to York,
and all to the Pope, as these Protestants acknowledge, until late yares.
Therefore ridiculous it is, for the Theater Protestants, to give such
supreamacie to Kings, because as they say, Pope Eleutherius in his epistle to
King Lucius calls him, the vicar of God, in his Kingedome, for by that Kind
of reasoninge, every vicar in his parish, being so called, might claim such
supreamacy. And the Presbytery must needs be obeyed of all. But if we may
believe these men that the laws of S. Edward, do warrant S. Eleutherius
proceedings here in Britannye, they will find in those laws set out by
themselves that they warrant his supreamacie, further then I mean to S.
Edwards laws published by Mr. Lambert a Protestant page 2. fol. 1^0.
vrdge it: The words ar these: The whole land, and all the Islands to Norway,
and Denmark belong to the Crown of his Kingedome, and ar of the Appendancies
and dignities of the King. And it is one Monarchy, and one Kingedome, and was
sometime called the Kingedome of Britannye, and now called the Kingdom of
English men. For Lord Eleutherius Pope, who first sent an hallowed crown to
Britannye, and Christianity by Gods inspiration, to Lucius King of the
Britans, appointed and allowed to the Crown of the Kingdom, such metes, and
bowndes, as ar said before. Therefore English Protestants ar very ungrateful
to that Holy Pope, and Saint, our so great Benefactor. And their own Theater
is a wittnes of that his love, and well deserueing of this land, and their
ingratitude, their words be these: Pope Eleutherius thus wrote to Lucius,
King Theat. page 222. n. 8. lib. 6. cap. 19.
of Britannie, for the reformation of the King, and the nobility of the
Kingdom of Britannie: you desired us, to send unto you, the Roman and
Imperial laws, which you would use in your Kingedome of Britannie. The Roman
laws and the Emperors we may at all times mislike, but the law of God by no
means. By the divine clemency you have of late received in your Kingdom of
Britannie, the law and faith of Christ: you have with you in your Kingdom
both the old and new testament: out of them (in Gods name) by the ^ownsaile of
your state, take Corn. Tacit. in annal. in Hadr. Pi. Anton. M. Ant. Stowe hist.
Holinsh. ib. David. in Bric. Polyd. verg. l. 2. h. angl page 42. 42, etc.
you alawe, and therewith by Gods permission, govern your Kingedome of
Britannie. About which times, Lolius, Calphurnius, Agricola, Pertinax, Cl.
Albinus Iunius, Seuerus etc. were Propretors, Lieutenants, and commaundinge
Rulers here, for the Roman Emperors, as both their own, and our Historians
wittnes. And not only this, but after entreateinge of the saxons laws in this
Kingdom, and the two much severity of trial in suspicion of Incontinencie
(as they think) they write in this manner: This punishment beginning Theater
page 287 l. 7. cap. 3. n. 6.
in these Pagans, and continueing unto the year 750. Stephen the second, and
most pontifical Pope of Rome, did utterly abolish, as two severe and
ouerrigorous for Christians to undergo. They allege authority also, that
the Kingedome of Norway was given to King Arthur by the Pope. Page 317 l. 7.
cap 12.
Which is plainly testified in the laws of S. Edward, as they are published by
the Puritan Protestant, Mr. Lambard, and out of the Guliel. Lambard. in legib.
S. Edward. fol. 137. 138. print. at London Anno D. 1569. cum priuileg. Reg.
May. per december.
library of Matthew Parker himself, whom they name their Archbishop of
Canterbury. The words be these: Impetrauit enim temporibus illis Arthurus Rex a
Domino Papa, and curia Romana, quod confirmata sit Norweia in perpetuum coronae
Brytanniae, in augmentum Regni huius, vocauitque illam dictus Artherus Cameram
Brytanniae. In those times King Arthur obtained from our Lord the Pope, and
the Court of Rome, that Norway might be confirmed for ever to the Crown of
Brytaine, for increase of this Kingdom, and the said Arthur called it the
chamber of Brytaine. And for this cause the Norwegians say, they may dwell in
this Kingdom, and be of the body of this Kingdom, to wit, of the crown of
Brytayne. Of his claim and practyse in later times in such affairs their
examples ar two many to be cited. But to insist in his absolute spiritual
supreamacie, of which I entreat, as they told us before, how all spiritual
Jurisdiction was derived to the Brittannes, from the Pope of Rome, in
prescribeing and limiteing their Episcopal Sees, and privileges, so they
testify the same in the Regiment of the Saxons, for allthough England it self,
besides Scotland and Wales, was divided Theat. page 278. lib. 6. cap. 54. n. 2.
page 292 l. 7. cap. 4. n. 19.
into an Heptarchie, and contained seven Kingedomes, Kent, Southsaxons,
Westsaxons, Eastsaxons, Northumberland, Maria, and East-Angels, and none of
those Kings (if they had been Protestants could) claim to exercise any
spiritual power by their doctrine, further then their own temporal
command; yett they teach us, that the spiritual Jurisdiction in the supreme
and highest degree was wholly in the Pope, over all those Kingedomes. And for
proof of this, to use their own words: Honorius Theat. page 5. lib. 1. cap.
3. n. 4.
(appointed by the Pope) the fifth Archbishop of Canterbury first divided
England into parishes: And then they set down all the Bishoprics in England,
under their twoe Metropolitanes, Canterbury and York, which by noe
possibility can be reconciled with an Heptarchicall, Page 6. l. 1.
or seven fold government, besides that in Walls. And yett not only the welsh
diocesses of Landaffe S. David, Bangor and S. Asaph but Ireland also in those
times of divisions in temporal Regiments; and Kings, were subject not only
to the Pope, but to the Archbishop of Canterbury, which was ever subject to the
Pope of Rome, and by him instituted. Their words Page 145. lib. 4. cap. 4. n.
8.
be these: matters memorable within this province ar these: First, that the
Bishops of Ireland were wont to be consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
in regard of the primacie, which they had in this contry: until such time, as
^hou Papirio, a Cardinal, was sent thither from Pope Eugenius, the fourth, to
reform ecclesiastical discipline in this Island. And that this Kingedome of
great Britain has even from the primative Church of the first converted
Brittannes, submitted themselves, and their posterities, to the Pope of Rome,
in the highest and most commaundeinge power, and Authority in this world, in
their Judgment, a general Council (as hereafter) Cap. general Councels infr.
Theater l. 6. cap. 9. page 206. ^. 19.
I thus demonstrate from this their Theater; wherein they write in this order:
After these times the Brittannes continued constant in Christianity, and the
censures of their Bishops (for the great estimation of their constancy,
piety, and learning) required and approved in great points of doctrine,
among the Assemblies, of some general Counsels: as that of Sardys and Nyce,
in the time of great Constantine, had we our Bishops present. Whose
forwardnes against the Arrian Heresy, afterward Athanasius aduanceth in his
Apology unto Iouinian the Emperor, amongst three hundred Bishops assembled at
the Council of Sardys, in Anno 350. Then seeing as these men teach us, general
Infra cap. genesis Councels.
Counsels ar the highest Judge, and bind all men to their decrees, and our
bishops that were there, to consent unto, and embrace doctrine, for this whole
Kingdom, were so renowned for constancy, piety, and learning, and all this
in their confessed puer time of Christianity, I will recite what doctrine in
this point of Popes supreamacye, they approved, and received there, for this
and all nations to follow, and observe. In the third Canon of this Council.
Sardic. can. 3.
their great Council it is thus decreed: Bishop Osius said: if any Bishop
shall be judged in an other cause, and he thinks he has a Good cause, that
a Council should be called again, if it please you let us honor the memory
of S. Peter the Apostle, that they which have examined the cause, may write to
Julius Bishop of Rome, and if he shall adiudge, that Judgment is to be
renewed, let it be renewed, and let him appoint Judges; but if he shall
allow the cause to be such, that the things that are done shall not be examined
again, such things as he shall decree, shall be confirmed. Does this please
you all? The Council answeareth, it pleases us. Therefore all now in England
ought to be pleased with the supreamacie of that highest See, and appeals unto
it. The 4. and next Canon, Can. 4. sup.
immediately begins thus: Bishop Gandentius said: let it be added, if you
please, to this sentence full of sanctity, that when any Bishop shall be
deposed by the Judgment of those Bishops, that be in the places near. And he
shall demand to have his business handled in the city of Rome, that after his
appeal, no Bishop be ordained in his chair, that was thought to be deposed,
except his cause shall be determined in the Judgment of the Bishop of Rome. The
7. Canon declares it to be in the Can. 7. sup.
Popes power to send, a latere Judges in such causes, into any contry,
notwitstandeing any sentence of other Bishops. And as these primative Bishops
of this Kingedome, with that learned and Holy assemble of that general
Council, received, and approved that supreme power in the Pope of Rome, so
he by these Ptotestants testimony ever practiced it in this nation. For
besides that which is written before, they use these words: Celestine Pope of
Rome sent his Archdeacon Palladius into Britain to withstand Theater. lib. 4.
cap. 1. page 138. n. 22.
the Pelagian Heresy, who at one time did drive out these enemies of grace,
and ordained a Bishop among the Scots, whereby that Barbarous nation ^mbr^ced
Christianitic. This they cite, and approve from Prosper Aquitan. And again in
this manner: Pelagius by birth a brittane, by profession a Mouke, by leude
doctrine an Heretic, brought up in the fame us Lib. 6. cap. 53. page 277. n.
10.
monastery of Bangor, in Wales, his Heretical assertions were afterward
condemned by Innocentius the first Bishop of Rome. Whose doctrines were, 1.
that man without the grace of God, was able to fulfill all the commandments.
2 that man in himself had free will. That the grace of God was given unto us
according to out merits. 4. That the Just have no sin. 5. That children ar
free from original sin. 6. That Adam should have died though he had not
sinned. Concerning the Town of Stanford Lib. 1. cap. 31. page 59. n. 8.
they make this relation from Ihon Hardinge; it continued an university unto
the comeing of Augustine, at which time the Bishops of Rome interdicted it, for
certain Heresies sprange up among the Britains, and Saxons. They write
futher thus: York has challenged to have been sometime Page 6. n. 7.
Metropolitan over all the Bishops in Scotland. It was made equal in honor
and power with Canterbury, by Pope Gregory, as Beda relates, and had twelve
suffragan Bishoprics, that owed obedience. And again: York was made a
Metropolitan Page 78. n. 9.
city by a pall sent unto it from Honorius. And to show, that the disposeing
of these things, was in the power of that highest See, thus they testify
again: That Lichfeild was made an Lib. 1. cap. 3. page 6. n. 8.
Archiepiscopall See, by Pope Hadrian the first, at the suite of Offa the
great King of Mercia, is manifested by Matthew of Westminister, unto whose
Jurisdiction were assigned the Bishoprics of Winchester, Hereford, Leicester,
Siduacester, Helinham, and Dunwich. Like were the condition of S. David's, n. 6.
8.
Dorchester by Oxford, and others. And to show, that these primative bishops
were only subject to the Pope, and no Prince, in their spiritual
proceedeings; when the wicked King Vortigern had put away his first lawful
Christian wife, and married. Rowena, the daughter of Hengist, a Pagan, Theat. l.
7. cap. 12. page 313.
about the year of Christ 470; for declareing the remedy thereof they write
in these words: Which Pagan mariadge proved not only the bane of the land,
but so ruinated the Church of Christianity, that a provincial Council of the
Britains was assembled in Ann. 470. to repair those things, that this
mariadge had decayed. Then Popes, and not Princes, by these Parker. lib. antiq.
Britan nic. page 329:
Protestants ever had spiritual supreamacie in this Kingedome. For their first
Archbishop Parker An. 1536. writes thus: Potentia populis nongentis amplius
Annu in Anglia durauit. The power of the Pope continued in England above nine
hundred years. And there ought to continue still, as I have made
demonstration, by these Protestants before* to which I add this sentence of
Isaac Casanbon, ex o^e Isaac Casanb. respons. ad ep. Cardinal. p^r. page 8.
ipso. ser. Regis: taken from the mouth it self of our most sincere King,
commaundeing him to committ it te writeinge; and is as follows: Rebus ipsis
probet Romanus pontifex: let the Pope of Rome prove by things themselves, that
he does not seek his own, Page 67. supr.
but the glory of God immortal, and the peace of people, concord, and
salvation, to be a care unto him: then our most se^ene King, as he has
long since protested in his Admonitory epistle, without delay primas illi
deferet, ipsumque (...), cum Gregorio Nazianzen^, dicet non inuitus, will give
primacie unto him, and not vnwillingely say with Gregory Nazienzen, that he
has charge over the whole Church. To which I answer, that I wish, (and I
trust, with more devotion, and Religion then he) That not only Popes, but
other Princes, spiritual, and temporal, Bishops, Priests and all men in
authority, and others, did more seek the glory of God, then their own, and
were more careful of the peoples peace, concord, and salvation, then they now
ar, or many were even from the time of Christ; Then so many disorders and
Impieties should not have so full dominion, where Protestancie Rules; and the
scripture had never said, omnes quae sua sunt quaerunt, non qu^ Jesus Christi:
all men, or all sorts of men seek the things that be their own, and not of
Jesus Christ. And it charge us again to obey Magistrates, and men in
authority, though wicked, sed etiam discolis. And to say as you must do,
(otherwise you demonstrate against your English Protestant Church whose mouth
you so often undertake to be and for the Pope of Rome, that Magistrates falling
into deadly sin cease to be Magistrates, one of your brother Witkliffe his
Heresies, condemned by highest authority. For otherwise, if the present Pope,
Paulus the fifth a Saint in all Indifferent Judgments, as all his predecessors,
from Leo the tenth, and the revolt of Luther, in respect of any Protestant
succession, might be thought worthy to be esteemed such, or as your words
prescribe, in your Protestant Censure; Yett except it were his due, without
that your adjudged sanctity, neither our King of England, nor all the
Protestant Princes, and Regiments in the world, could by your Religion make the
Pope, or any other, to be primate, and have the charge, or ^uersight of the
whole Church. For by your own doctrine of Princes, or Presbyteries
supreamacie, none extends further, then their own temporal dominions, much
less over the whole Church, or any great part thereof: And by Lord Cook^
prot. assert. Jacob Reas.
your own Rule of authority, justified both by the Lord Chief Justice of
England, and your Ministers, Nemo potest plus Iuris in alium transfer, quam
ipse habet: No man can transfer or bestow more Right upon an other, then he
himself has. Therefore by our sentence from our Kings Mouth (as you assuer
us, all Popes ever were, and this is, supreme Head and Ruler of Christ's whole
Church, in England, and all other parts of the worlds (...), of the whole
Church, as your Greek grant with S. Gregory Nazianzen, is. And all that
desire to be accounted the chosen, and true sheep, and members of this great
flock, fold, and Church of Christ, ought to submitt themselves, to this high
sheephard, primate, and Ouerseer of the whole Christian world, and to be
Judged by him, and not to be Judges over him. And to this also D. Morton
himself Morton App. lib. 4. cap. 7.
must subscribe though he will be singular above his fellows, as often times
he is. For first he allows this sentence, of their, so named, Archbishop
Whiteguist, against Cartwright: Victor in the year of Christ 198 was a godly
Bishop and Martyr, and the Church at that time was in great purity, as not
being long after the Apostles. And his Majesty tells him that this Church
of Rome was then a Rule to all. Yet D. Morton assures us, that this godly
Bishop, and Martyr, and Ruler of that Church, which was a Rule to all, did
exercise the highest Act of Jurisdiction, and power over all Churches, in the
world, that did not yield unto him, in the Easter observation, inflicting
excommunication the greatest act of Jurisdiction by Protestants, against them:
his words be these: Morton App. l. 1. cap. 9.
Pope Victor excommunicated all Churches, both Greek, and Latin, which
differed from his Church, in the observation of Easter. This claim, and
exercise of this supreme Jurisdiction, was when the Church, of Rome, was a
Rule to all, in the Judgment of these Protestants: and a matter of so great
moment, that the doing of it if unjustly, had been most damnable: and yett
he lived, and dyed an holy Saint. Therefore I urge D. Morton with these his
Morton app. page 298.
own words in the case of S. Ciprian: This we think might work in our
Adversaries, at least, blush: except they would intend to prove concerning
Saint Victor, that the same man of God and holy Martyr of Christ, was neither
Saint, nor Martyr. But undoubtedly a damnable scismaticke. When D. Morton
wittnesseth the quite contrary, sayeinge, they were condemned for Heretics,
who after the Council of Nice, conformed not themselves herein to the Roman
Order. But D. Morton insisteth Mort. supr. page 76.
further in these words: S. Ciprian directly ordained in a Council, that every
man's cause should be hard there, where it was committed: and Mort. sup. page 296.
therefore commanded those men to return home again unto Carthadge, who had
adventured to appeal unto Rome. And yet, Bellarmine urges appealeinge unto
the Bishop of Rome from all the coasts of the world, as a special Argument of
the Popes absolute primacie D. Morton is answered by himself before,
proueinge that the Bishop of Rome exercised this supreme power, over all
Churches, both Greek, and Latin. Then over Afric, and Carthadge. And in
this very objection again confounds himself; for he tells us, that in S.
Ciprian his time, they appealed to Mort. supr.
Rome and proves by S. Ciprian, whom he would have an enemy to such
Appeals, and supreamacy of the Church of Rome, that such appeals were then
used, long before any general Council, or Christian Emperor, to grant such
privileges to that Church. And that the Popes, and Bishops of Rome, that
claymed, received, and admitted such appeals, namely S. Cornelius and others
ware Holy Saints, and Martyrs. Therefore if that had been true, which D.
Morton writes in these words: Morton page, 296.
Saint Ciprian directly ordained in a Council, that every man's cause should
behard there where it wa^ committed, and therefore commanded those men to
return home again unto Carthadge, who had adventured to appeal unto Rome,
not alloweinge that any other Bishops should retract things, done by them in
Afric, unless (says Ciprian) a few leude and desperate parsons think the
Bishops of Afric to have less authority, by whom they have been already
Judged and condemned. If this allegation of D. Morton were true, and certain:
Yet it nothing preiudicateth the Authority and supreamacie of the Pope of
Rome, not to be censured and Judged by Inferior Bishops, such as those of
Afric were unto Rome by Protestants doctrine. And D. Morton himself besides
all that is said before is wittnes sufficient in this Matter: for writeing of
Pope Julius in those allowed times, he has these words: Two points Morton
page 286.
would be observed in this claim of Pope Julius. The first is, what it was
that he challenged: the second is, by what right. Both these ar recorded by
Socrates. His challenge was, that he ought to be called unto the Council, and
that, without his sentence, no decrees should be concluded. The right hereof
he pretends to stand upon the authority of an Ecclesiastical canon. The
words of Socrates his Author, Socrat. histor. ccclesiast. circa An. 346. and
histor. tripart. lib. 4. cap. 9.
because D. Morton is a known myncer of authorities, ar these: Regula
Ecclesiastica iubeat, non oportere praeter sententiam Romani Pontificis
concilia celebrari. The Ecclesiastical Rule commands, that Counsels he not
celebrated, without the s^^tence of the Bishop of Rome. And again: Canonibus
iubentibus praeter Romanum nibil decerni Socrat. sup. and histor. trip. lib. 4.
cap. 19.
Pontificem. The canons commaundeinge, that nothing be decreed, without the
Pope of Rome. And yet D. Morton will not have any such canon, or constitution,
his frivolous distinction, in the Nicene Council, then lately ended, then they
must needs be of more ancient, and uncontrollable antiquity, and authority
by his own censure; and S. Ciprians Council and decree against this highest
power, of no validity; if he could bring forth any such decree, or Council,
which he does not, but only alleges these words of S. Ciprian, to Pope
Cornelius, statutum est omnibus nobis: Which he thus translated: S. Ciprian
directly ordained in a Council: Which Ciprian. ep. 55. ad Cornel. Morton App.
lib. 2. page 296.
S. Ciprian neither had done, nor could do, to bind S. Cornelius, and the
Church of Rome with all others. For by D. Mortons own Argument, if Pope and S.
Cornelius Pope and Saint Stephen, with others, Bishops of the Mother and
commanding Church of Rome, then by his Majesty, a Rule unto all, might not
be a Rule and commander over the African Church, much less could the Church
of Afric subject, Ruled, and dependinge make statutes and decrees, to rule,
and command, this Rule and commander of all. And Mr* Morton might have
concluded the contrary, of his translation, for the Church of Rome, if he had
considered that S. Ciprians words, be not, Statutum sit ab omnibus nobis, it is
decreed of or by us all, ^^t statutum sit omnibus nobis, a decree is made for
us all: Because S. Fabian Pope of Rome and predicessor to S. Cornelius had made
such a ^abian. ^^ist 3. ^^m. 1. conc.
decree to bind all, as S. Ciprian spoke of, Ibi causa agatur vbi crimen
admittitur: let the cause be hard there, where the fault is committed. Yet in
the same place Appeals to Rome ar excepted in these words: We forbid forreyne
Judgments by a general decree, reserved always the Apostolic authority.
And again: It pleases also, that if a Bishop accused, has appealed to the Sea Apostolic, that shall be decreed, which the high Bishop of that See
gives sentence of. All which, as also that whole epistle of S. Ciprian to S.
Cornelius, then Pope of Rome, never denyeing appeals thither, but excuseinge,
and defendeing, and purgeing himself, and other Bishops of Afric, accused by
Appellants at Rome, as they had likewise done, priori anno, the year before,
sufficiently Ciprian ep. 55. supr.
confirm the undeniable supreme authority of that Church. Which S. Ciprian
there proves to be of Infallible Judgment, and vndeceaueable by any
Appellants, or others in matters of Religion, and so to be appealed unto, and
supreme. His words in the same epistle, and concerning the same Appellants, ar
these: Nauigare audent, and ad Petri cathedram; They dare to sail even to the
chair of Peter, and to the principal Church, from whence preistly unity is
risen, and carry thither letters from Scismaticks, and wicked men, nor to
think, that they be Romans, (whose faith by the Apostle preachinge is praised,
to whom false belief cannot have access. Hitherto the very words of S.
Ciprian, in that place, and epistle, which D. Morton alleges against the
Roman supreamacie: by which is evident that S. Ciprian, neither did, nor could
by his doctrine deny appeals to that Church, which as he writes could not be
deceived with Heretics, nor false belief could have access unto it: which
could be for no other cause, but for the Infallible Judgment thereof, and that
God did assist it in truth, as other Protestants ar witnesses before. And D.
Morton haueing first written Morton app. page 296.
in this order: The Title of universal Bishop of the Church, has been long
used of the Pope of Rome: is as mutch to blame, to speak thus: S. Ciprian
says, none of us is called the Bishop of Bishops: which not S. Ciprian only,
but the whole Council of Carthadge, under Ciprian, did profess: furthermore
calling it a terror tyrannical, for any one Bishop to impose upon his
fellow Bishops, a necessity of obedience. For first D. Morton cannot but
know, that this Council of Afric defendeinge Rebaptization, was justly
condemned by the then Popes of Rome, and recanted by the African Bishops,
present at it, as is proved before. Secondly D. Morton will be a Presbyterian
if he makes equality in the clergy, and denies Archbishops, primates, and
Patriarchs, as his citation without better gloss implies. Thirdly he does
abuse his Readers, to wish them to believe, that S. Ciprian, and the African
Bishops, decreed any thing against the claim of S. Stephen, then Bishop of
Rome, his predecessors, and successors to be Bishop of Bishops Mort. sup. page
296.
in a right sense, as he there cites from Binias; for so against his own
words, and citation, they had called their own decree, a terror tyrannical,
for any one Bishop to impose upon his fellow Bishops, a necessity of
obedience: For D. Morton, dares not to deny but S. Stephen, and other Popes of
Rome, were at the least fellow Bishops, with those of Afric. But S.
Ciprian, and those Bishops decreed no such thing: for D. Morton may so in that
Council, that the sentence of S. Ciprian is the last of all, and after all
the other Bishops, and only to condemn Baptism by Heretics, after recanted
and condemned. And the words which he cited against Bishop of Bishops, ar in
S. Ciprians Carthagin. council. sub Cyprian. to. 1. council. init.
exhortation (not decree) to the Bishops of Afric, beginning Audistis,
Collegae Dilectissimi: you have hard o most beloved fellows, nothing
concerning, except affirminge, or confirminge that claim, and Title in Pope
Stephen, an holy Saint, and Martyr, but altogether about rebaptization, and
are these: Superest, vt de hacre quid singuli sentiamus, proferamus: Yt
remains, that every of us speaks of this matter what he thinks, Iudginge
no man, or remoueing any man from the Right of communion, if he shall think
otherwise, for none of us (there assembled) constituted himself, Bishop of
Bishops. Which seeing S. Stephen an holy Pope, and Martyr, with others of that
sacred See, (then a Rule to all, by Protestants, and D. Morton) did; by them
also it must be yielded to be just and lawful. Neither must D. Morton be so
hyperpapall, as to deny the Council of Sardyce where appeals to Rome ar
warranted, to be general, for his Masters the makers of their great Theater,
have so allowed, and received it before. Nor slander S. Cyprian, by perswadeing
the world, that he dyed out of the unity of the Church of Rome; for
recallinge of which his great rashness, I refer him to better Authorities, of
S. Augustine, S. Jerome, Augustine. ep. 48. Hieron. dialog. cont. Luciferian.
and the like. And this suffices of this question: By which the university of
Cambridg may easily resolve themselves, by their own Doctors, of the second
proposition, offered unto them, by the Priests of Wisbich: There is an
external Judge in matters of faith; who it is, and of what authority his
definitive sentence is in such things.

CHAPTER IIII. WHEREIN BY THESE Protestants is proved, that all Books of
scripture, received for such by the Church of Rome, ar canonical: That the
Protestants also have either no scriptures at all, or uncertain and doubtful:
and no true Canon of them.
THvs haueinge demonstratiuely proved by these our English Protestants, that
the true Church of Christ, is of that byndeinge and commanding authority,
power, and privilege: That, There is no salvation, remission of sins or Hope
of eternal life out of the Church: it is the blessed company of holy ones,
household of faith, spouse of Christ, pillar and grawnd of truth, her
communion is to be embraced, directions followed, Judgment rested in, to
ouerrule all Inferior Judgment. whatsoever, etc. And that both the present
Church, of Rome is this so excellent and enfraunchised society, and the Pope
and Bishop thereof supreme head, and spiritual governor, over the whole
Christian world: all other Questions against these Protestants ar all ready
determined by them, for the Church and Pope of Rome. So that nothing is further
needful to be disputed in this business, either of scriptures, or any other
matter in controversy: yet for particular satisfaction to all, in all
particulars, I will proceed, and first for the Books of holy scriptures: and
argue these first in general.

Whatsoever Books ar proposed unto us by the true Church of Christ, and the
supreme Governor thereof, to be canonical scripture, ar for such to be
embraced, and reverenced: But all Books allowed for canonical by the Church
of Rome, at this present, be such: Therefore so to be embraced and reverenced.
The Mayor proposition is evident before, by the privileges of the true Church
recited in general: and not only so, but in particular also concerning the
authority of the true Church in approueinge and proposeinge holy scriptures:
for Mr. Wotton has thus testified for Wotton ^ef. of Perk: page 442.
Protestants: The Iugdment of the Church we are so far from discreditinge;
that we Hold it for a very special grownde in this matter of scriptures. And
D. Couell has these conuinceing Couell against Burg. page 60.
words: The Church of Christ accordeing to her authority, received from him,
has warrant to approve the scriptures, to acknowledge, to receive, to publish,
and command unto her children. And to make it evident, that this privilege
by these Protestants, cannot be attributed, or ascribed to any other Church,
then the Church of Rome, they have before confessed, that never any other
Church, but that only, exceptinge the Church of Constantinople pretended Title
(much less enjoyed it, to this supreamacie, to propownde scriptures, or make
decrees, and laws to the whole Church, and the children thereof, and the
claim thereof in that behalf was but pretended and usurped: and now is by
their desolation left desolate. And to make this, the next argument and others
more clear, I will in this place recite the words of D. Field: wherein to
omit the Holy scriptures, because they in no place tell us, which be, or be
not canonical scriptures: But we ar as these Protestants before have told us,
and shall more particularely testify Hereafter in this chapter, to receive
them from the Church of Christ, That we may know whom most to trust, and
obey in this, and such matters of controversy, he writes thus, haueing spoken
of the Church before: Hither Field page 202. l. 4. c. 5.
we may refer, those different degrees of obedience which we must yield to
them, that command and teach us, in the Church of God, excellently described
and set down, by Waldensis. We Waldens. doct. Fidei l. 2. art. 2. 3. p. 27.
must says he, reverence, and respect the authority of all Catholic
Doctors, whose doctrynes, and writeings the Church allows; we must more
regard the authority of Catholic Bishops; more then these the authority of
the Apostolic Churches: amongst them more especially the Church of Rome: of a
general Council more then all these. Hitherto D. Feilds allowance that this
sentence is excellent. Therefore soeinge Protestants never had, nor can have,
as they have testified before, any general Council, and deny all Counsels to
be general, which Catholics allege for this Question of the Books of
scriptures, and others also, They are bownde to be obedient to that sentence
next unto them, which D. Field here has told us, to be the Judgment of the
Church of Rome, or Pope of Rome, which has defined, and allowed, the
catholic doctrine for the Books of canonical scripture, as also other
questions, as all Protestants acknowledge. Otherwise they are in one of highest
degrees of disobedience, that is in this world, as his words before are
witness. For he allows it for an excellent direction, for this present
time, and state of controversies: And yett if he would contend (which he
neither does, nor can being allowed for this present time) to draw it to the
days of Thomas Waldensis, disputing against Witcliffe, their Brother in
Religion, as they write, and resisting the Popes authority, it makes nothing
for his excuse: for if Witcliffe, as they say, was of their Religion, the case
between Waldensis, and him, was the same which now is with my self and other
Catholics writing against these Protestants Brethren, and Associates in
Religion unto Wickliffe, and his Adherents. This supposed, I make the like
Argument again, in this manner.

Whatsoever books ar proposed for canonical scripture, by the true Church, ar
the highest Rule, that can be had, or fownde, in time of controue^sie, ar to be
received for holy scriptures: But all those Books which the present Roman
Church allows, ar so proposed: Therefore to be received for holy scriptures.
The Mayor proposition is evidently true, otherwise all Christians in such times
must needs be perplexed in the chiefest matter of Religion, by Protestants, the
scriptures themselves: which cannot be: for so contradictories might both be
true: The highest Rule ought to be followed: the highest Rule ought not to be
followed, Which be contradictorie. It ought to be followed, because it is our
Rule, and the best that can be assigned: it ought not to be followed, because
it is false and deceatefull. And no man can be so bownde under damnation to
follow a false Rule. And concerning the authority of the Church in this
case, it is further confirmed by these Protestant sentences. D. Couells words
be Couell def. of Hook page 31.
these: The Church of Rome teaches no badd opinion, to affirm, that the
scriptures are holy, and divine in themselves, but so esteemed by us, for the
authority of the Church. And again: That the scriptures ar true, we have it
from the Church. And further thus: The Church has four Couell sup. page 32.
33.
singular offices, toward, the scripture. First to be of them (as it were) a
faithefull Register. Secondly, to discern and Judge between false and
adulterate, and that which is true and perfect. The third to publish, and
diuulge, to proclayme as a crier, the true edict of our Lord himself. The last
is, to be an Interpreter: and in that, followeing the safest Rule (to make an
undivided unity of the truth, incapable of contradiction) to be a most
faithful Couell sup. page 34.
expositor of his own meaneinge. And he concludes thus: W^e say, that we
are taught to receive the word of God, from the authority of the Church: we
see her judgment, we hear her voice: and in h^militie subscribe unto all
this. Therefore being so proved before, by these Protestants, that the Church
of Rome is the Church of Christ, endowed with these privileges, concerning
scriptures, that the sentence of it by D. Field before, is more Field. l* 4. c.
5. page 202.
to be regarded then any they have, or can pretend, and has proposed all
books for scripture, which Catholics receive, we must obey it, and the
rather agreeing with the Greek Church of which D. Field writes Field. page
71. l. 3. c. 5.
thus: we account them in the number of the Churches of God. Which that Church
cannot be which proposes adulterate and false scriptures, for true and the
undoubted word of God: The Minor proposition is also evidently true: That all
books which the Church of Rome receaueth for Holy scriptures as so proposed,
published, and proved unto us, by the true Church, and that sentence, which in
this time is highest and to be obeyed, as these Protestants have written. And
so all things in this Argument ar evidently confessed for true, by our
Adversaries.

Before my next argument I will cite the opinion of D. Dove Protestant Bishop
of Peterboroughe, in this matter, that we may plainly see, where upon
Protestants denyeing so many books for canonical scriptures, which Catholics
receive, is grownded: his words be these: Catholics Dove persuas. page 15.
prove them to be canonical out of S. Augustine: we, that they be Apochrypha
out of S. Hierome, both which Doctors are of no small authority with the
Church of Rome: And therefore in this we differ no more from them, then S.
Hierome did from S. Augustine. This supposed, I argue thus, from these
Protestants.

Whatsoever doctrine, was taught in the time of the primative Church by a
Bishop, Saint, and Doctor of the Church in the Judgment of Protestants far
the most Learned Doctor that ever was, or shall be in all likelihood,
excepting the Apostles, and this so constantly, that this so worthy a man
taught it to be the Common doctrine of the Church of Christ, in all
probability is more like to be true, then that which doubtefully taught by an
other Doctor of the same time, who both (as the same Protestants write) dealt
vnchristianely, and his authority in some other questions was not much worth,
and in this also recalled his opinion, or renownced it to be his meanening: But
the doctrine which Catholics hold, concerning canonical scriptures, is by the
testimony of Protetestants, thus much more likely to be true, and worthy to
be believed, then the contrary opinion of Protestants: Therefore by Protestants
it is more probable, credible, and worthy to be believed.

The Mayor proposition in the proceedings of these Protestants, (by whom I
dispute in this place) is evidently true. For among men learned in
professions, the Common maxim and reason is, we must believe every one most
cunninge in his art, and among men learned he that is most, or more learned,
is to be credited before him, that is supposed to be his inferior in learning:
And doctrine constantly taught not only to be the doctrine of such a more or
most learned Father, and Doctor and Saint, but further to be doctrine
generally of Christ's true Church, is of more creditt, and more worthy to be
believed, then that which by a man supposed not so learned, is either
doubtfully or singularly taught, or uncertain, whether it was so taught, or if
it were, yet was recanted, disclaymed, or retracted by himself.

The second proposition, concerning these two great Doctors, and their
opinions in this point, is thus proved by these Protestants. D. Cou^ll writes
of S. Augustine in Couell against Burges page 3.
these terms. He was far the most learned Doctor, that ever was, or shall
be in all likelihood, except the Apostles. And giueing the highest commendation
he could to S. Thomas Aquin^s our holy and learned schole-man he Couell ag.
Burg.
writes thus: By a Common proverb it was spoken, that the soul of S.
Augustine dwelt in Aquinas. Concerning S. Hi^^ome, upon whose Imagined opinion
in this point, they would hazard their whole Religion in their Judgments,
alloweing only the scriptures to be Judges, and grownds: in other points they
use him in these terms: Mr. Wottons Wotton def of perk. 495. 500. 519. 520.
words be: Hieromes authority in the case of single life is not much worth.
Hierome condemninge Iouinian dealt vnchristianely with him. The authority of
Hierome, concludeinge a work of perfection from those words of Christ: go and
sell all etc. is not to be admitted. Now let us hear from these Protestants,
in what manner these two Doctors taught as this Protestants tell us, these two
diverse doctrines, one for Catholics, and the other for Protestants. D. Field
writeinge of books, which Catholics admit for canonical, and the
Protestants refuse, tells us that S. Augustine, and the third Council Field
page 248. l. 4. c. 23. and page 246.
of Carthage, (confirmed in the sixth general Council) wherein Augustine was
present, and Innocentius Pope lyueing in that time seem to add them to the
Canon. Then it seems by this Protestant testimony, that S. Augustines
opinion, approved in so great a provincial Council, confirmed in a general
Council, the highest commaundeinge Judgment by them before, and by the Pope,
of the greatest Apostolic See, the second Judge in the Christian world,
before in D. Feilds allowance: especially in that best time, when his Majesty
says it was a Rule to all, and constantly taught as the doctrine of the
Church, by this the greatest doctor, that ever was or is like to be by these
men, is worthy to be credited and believed: and by their doctrine before, All
men that will not be disobedient both in the second, and first degree also,
ar bownde to embrace, and follow it.

Now let us hear what these Protestants will testify of S. Hierome for their
opinion, in this Question, of these books: The Protestant Conference at
Hampton court before Conference page 60.
the King, entreateing of Protestants exceptions against these scriptures,
uses these words: Most of the objections made against those books, were the
old Cauills of the Jews, renewed by S. Hi^rome in his time, who was the first
that gave them that name of Apochrypha: which opinion upon Ruffinus his
challendge, he after a sort disclaymed: the rather because a general offense
was taken at his speeches in that Kind. Hitherto the censure at that public
Protestant Conference, by which the Protestants grownde for denial of those
books of scripture, and tearminge them Apochypha, is utterly ouerthowne. For
an opinion fownded upon old Jewish Cauills against Christians, singularly
held, or renewed, reclaymed by the Author, and generally gi^^ing offense (as
these Protestants affirm this was) is not probable to be true. D. Couell
against Burges the Puritan, answeareth the objections against these Couell ag.
Burges page 8^. 86. 87. 88. 89 90. 91.
books, as Catholics do. And shows, that these books have without cause
been accused of faults, by Protestants, only to deny them to be canonical,
as Catholics esteem them. And further he adds thus: They are most true,
and might have the reconcilement Couell sup. page 87.
of other scriptures. And again in these words: If Russinus be not deceived
they were approved as parts of the old testament, by the Apostles. For when S.
Hierome writ so scornefully of the history of Susanna, and the song of the
three children, he charge him therein, to have robbed the treasure of the
holy ghost, and divine Instrument, which the Apostles delivered to the
Churches. And S. Hierome (who is not usually slow to defend himself) leaves
that point vnansweared, pretending that what he had spoken, was not his own
opinion, but what the Jews objected. And for his pains in translateing the
book of Judith, (which Protestants deny) he gives this reason: because we
read that the Council of Nyce did reckon it in the number of holy scriptures.
Hitherto D. Couells words: and much like unto this of Russinus, he cites from
S. Augustine, S. Ciprian, and others, Temporibus Apostolorum proximis, in the
next ages to the time of the Apostles. And thus we see how weak that
Protestant Religion is, that by their own testimony, is fownded upon so
singular new revived, Jewish Cauills, disclaymed, and generally offensive, and
disliked opinion.

From hence I argue further: All Books which were approved by the Apostles for
parts of the old testament, were the treasure of the holy ghost and divine
Instrument which the Apostles delivered to the Churches, which are most true,
and might have reconcilement of other scriptures, ar to be allowed for such:
But all these things ar verified of books which these Protestants deny, and by
themselves, as is cited from them before: Therefore ar to be allowed for
canonical scriptures, both propositions be granted by these Protestants
before, and so in this argument nothing remains to be proved.

And again thus I argue: whatsoever a general Council in the primative
Church (the highest Rule by Protestants before to approve scriptures, and bind
all men unto the definitions of it; received for scripture, ought to be
received for such: But more books then Protestants allow were so received as
these Protestants tell us: Therefore more are to be admitted. Both propositions
ar here also granted before by Protestants, and so the Argument concludes
truly against them.

Further I argue thus: Those Books which the Jews before, and at the coming
of Christ, for their greatest, or great part dwelleing out of Jury, used as
parts of the old testament, and delivered as a canon to the Christian Churches,
and were Joined in one volume, read by them of the Latin Church, then the
acknowledged true Church of Christ, and were received in the third
Carthagenian Council, which was confirmed in the sixth general Council, ar
now to be received and allowed for canonical scriptures: But those books
which Protestants deny and Catholics allow, be such: Therefore they are to be
now allowed for canonical. The Mayor proposition is evidently true: for if the
Jews before, and at the commeing of Christ, the primative Christians of that
time, and their practice, the authority of the true Church of Christ, the
most principal Church before by D. Field, and other Protestants, a fomous
provincial Council, and the confirmation of a general Council, are not to be
admitted, to direct and instruct us, there is no means left for instruction in
this case, these being by these Protestants before, the greatest warrants, and
Rules we can have in such causes. The second proposition is proved in this
manen D. Field haueing spoken, how the Hebrew Jews had made their Hebrew
canon, accordeing to their Jewish reckoninge of the number of their letters,
(how probably I leave to Hebritians, and may not now entreat) he concludes
thus: These only did Field l. 4. c. 23. page 245.
the ancient Church of the Jews receive, as divine, and canonical. Neither
much marvel, all the others being the last that were written, and in the time
of their decayeing state, and afflictions. Of these he writes thus in the
next words: That other books were added unto Field. sup.
these, whose authority not being certain, and known ar called Apocryphal,
fell out on this sort. The Jews in their later times, before, and at the Act.
6. c. gloss. ordinar. and lyr. in eandem locum.
coming of Christ were of two sorts: some properly and for distinction sake
named Hebr^es, commorant at Jerusalem, and in the holy land: others named
Hellenists, that is Jews of dispersion, mingled with the Gretians. These had
written sundry books in Greek, which they made use of together with other
parts of the old testament, which they had of the translation of the
Septuagint: But the Hebrews received only the two and twenty books before
mentioned. Hence it came, that the Jews delivered a double Canon of the
scripture, to the Christian Churches. Thus we see that the greatest part of
the Jews, Proselytes, and all our of Jury, did add these books with the
other for scripture, used them as part of the old testament, delivered them to
the Christian Churches, as part of the canon of scripture, and the primative
Church consequently so received them, otherwise they were not thus delivered.
Therefore thus far the Minor proposition is proved, for I do not expect D.
Field to say, or not say expressly, that these be, or be not canonical, but
what in true consequence he must say, by his own grant before, and
hereafter. Then he tells us, they in S. Augustines time were received Field
page 246.
by him, the fathers of third Council of Carthage, and Innocentius then Pope
of Rome, in the best estate of that Church when it was (as before by
Protestants) Kings speech sup.
a Rule unto all, in the catalogue of canonical scriptures. Now that the
Canons of this Carthagenian Council were confirmed in the sixth general
Council holden at Trallo: (to use his words) and which Protestants acknowledge
Field l. 4. cap. 23. page 258.
for a general Council, their highest Rule, he testifies after in the same
chapter. Neither is his exception, because the Laodicean Council which names
not all

Further I argue thus: all those Books, which Protestants in their authorized
communion book, and books of Honolyes, allowed, by their convocation, and
parliament, and our King, do prescribe to be used as canonical scriptures, as
well as others, and are so cited and practiced, ought to be received, and
allowed for canonical: But those Books which they deny, and Catholics
receive for canonical, are such: Therefore they ought to admit them into the
Canon of Holy scriptures. The Mayor proposition is evident, for books, Rules,
laws, and directions proposed by true authority, as those be supposed of
Protestants, ar to be obeyed, and followed. The Minor proposition is likewise
l. 1. homel. l. 2. homel. Artic. 25. Communion B. Tabl. direct. of service.
Survey of the Book of comm. prayer page 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. Petit. of 22.
Preach. exc. ag. hom. and except. 4. ag. comm. Book. Articl. of Relig. Articul
6.
most certain: for their books of Homelyes received in the 25. Article of
their Religion do ordinarily so cite them: and their Communion book so
terms and uses them too often to be alleged in this place. Whereupon, to
be breife, the Protestant Author of the Survey of the book of Common prayer,
affirms playnelye, and often vrdgeth it, That the Protestants of England must
approve with the Roman Church, these books for canonical. So likewise do
the 22. preachers of London in their petition. If any man shall Answer, that
the Articles of their Religion exclude them from the canon of the scripture,
and so they cannot be said to receive them: I answer him again, that this
is so far, from freeinge them in this point, that it both excludes them,
defineing and embraceing so contradictorie doctrines in so important business,
from all hope of truth, and further proves, that these men buildeing all
upon scriptures, have either no scriptures at all, or else such doubtful,
uncertain, and unresolved scriptures, that true Religion which must be most
assured, and infallible, cannot be grownded, or mayntayned by them. For proof
whereof, I will first recite their subscribed Article in this question, and
then frame my Argument. Their Article is set down in these Articl. of Rel.
articul. 6.
definitive words: Holy scripture contains all things, necessary to
salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby;
is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed, as an Article of
the faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. In the name of
holy scripture, we do understand those canonical Books of the old and new
testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church. Of the first
part of this Article I am to entreat in my chapter of Traditions, hereafter.
Of the later part, I will speak in this place, only first admonisheing my
Readers, in what ample manner D. Field, and others of that Religion Field. l. 3.
c. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. page 60. 62. 63. 64. etc. Field. l. 3. Titul. c. 1. and 2.
take this word, the Church: for breuiate whereof, the Titles of the first
and second chapters of his third book be these: Of the division of the
Christian world into the Greek, Latin, Armenian, Ethiopian, and Nestorian
Churches. c. 1. of the harshe and unadvised Censure of the Romanists,
condemninge all these Churches, as Scismaticall, and Heretical. cap. 2. Now
this supposed, I argue thus:

No books, whose authority have at any time been doubted of, in the Church,
are by this Protestant Article to be allowed for Canonical scriptures: But all
books that either Protestants, or Catholics receive for canonical, have in
the Judgment of these Protestants been doubted of in the Church: Therefore by
these Protestants, there be no canonical scriptures at all. The Mayor
proposition is evidently proved, by their recited article defineing those
books canonical of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church. The
Minor proposition is directly proved by D. Willet who writes Willet Synop.
quaest. 1. of scripture. page 2. 3. edit. An. 1594. and after published again.
directly, and at large, how every book both of the old, and new testament,
have not only been doubted of, but also denied in this their Church. I
suppose the last edition of his book was since the commeing in of his
Majesty my prescribed time: otherwise it is so directly there proved by him
that no Protestant can deny it. And to show the pitiful case of this their
Protestant Article and Religion their Protestant Bishop of Wincester D. Bilson
suru. page 664.
Bilson within my limitation writes thus: The scriptures themselves were not
fully received in all places, no not in Eusebius time. He says, the Epistle
of James, of Jude, the second of Peter, the second and third of John, ar
contradicted. The Epistle to the Hebrews was contradicted: the Churches of
Syria did not receive the second epistle of Peter, nor the second and third
of John, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the Apocalipse: the like might be said
for the Churches of Arabia. Will you hence conclude, that these parts of
scripture were not Apostolic, or that we need not receive them now, because
they were formely doubted of? Therefore the Protestants of England have no
certain, and undoubted scripture, if they will stand to their suscribed
Articles, and their own subscription. Which this Protestant Bishop before,
seeing the absurdity thereof, has refused to do. Therefore they may not (as
they do) deny those other books which Catholics admit, upon so great,
and highest warrants, before in Protestants Judgment, because in former times
they have been doubted of, as those last recited by the testimony of their
Bishop, and all the rest, as D. Willet has wittnessed have been. To these I
might add more Arguments from these Protestants true Greek Church, and the
general Council of Florence, both allowed by some of these writers, and yet
alloweing, and warranting for canonical, all books received by Catholics.
And other Arguments by them: but these ar sufficient for this matter, at this
time. And as demonstration is made, that these Protestants either have no true
scriptures at all, or not the true Canon of holy scriptures: So it is as
evident, that their Religion cannot be proved true, and infallible (as true
Religion is) by evidences, that in their proceedings ar doubtful, fallible, or
no holy canonical scriptures, but by them excluded from that number, and
sacred Canon.

CHAPTER V. OF THE INTEGRITY, AND excellency, of the Latin vulgar
translation of scriptures, used in the Roman Church: and Protestants false,
corrupt, and erroneous Translations in their own Judgment and Censure.
NOW let us entreat of the vulgar Latin translation, of holy scriptures,
handled in the next Chapter, for whose allowance by these Protestants, I argue
by them, in this manner.

That Latin Translation of scriptures which is to be used in schools and
pulpits, and for antiquity, to be preferred before all others, was used in the
Church, thirteen hundred years ago, by S. Augustine preferred before all
others, and both by the Judgment of S. Isidore, and these Protestants
themselves, is thought the best translation, and to be preferred before all
others, is accordingely to be allowed, esteemed, and preferred: But the vulgar
Latin translation, by these Protestants is such: Therefore even by them so to
be allowed, and preferred. The Mayor proposition is manifestly true: for that
which is so ancient in the true Latin Church, and to be preferred before all
others, must needs be allowed and preferred. The Minor proposition is proved,
as follows: first their Bishopp D Dove, writes in these words, of this
vulgar Latin translation: We (Protestants) grant it Dove persuas. page 16.
fit, that for uniformity in quotations of places, in schools and pulpi^s,
one Latin text should be used, and we can be contented for the antiquity
thereof, to prefer the old vulgar translation, before all other Latin
books: so much we do yield to the Council of Trent. D. Couell entreateinge
of translations of scripture, against Burges the Puritan, Couell against Burges
page 94.
answeareth in these words: We are ready to confess, whether you understand
the Italian, or that which goes under the name of S. Hierome, that they were
used a^n^iently in the Church, a thousand and three hundred years ago, one of
them by S. Augustine preferred before all the rest, the other highly commended
by Beza, and that of the vulgar (though with Pagnin and Driedo) we think it
not S. Hieromes, but mixed: yet we can be content, to say as Isodore does of
it. Interpretatio eius this translation is to be preferred before others.
Hitherto this Protestant Doctor, who with their Bishop Dove before have
granted, as much as the Council of Trent, a Rule to Catholics decreed in
this matter, if we may give creditt Field page 258.
to D. Field, citeing and alloweing Andradius, writeing in this manner: The
Church does approve translations, not pronownceing that there is no thing
amiss in them, but that the divine mysteries are therein truly delivered, and
nothing that concerns faith, Religion, or good manners, ignorantly or
fraudulently suppressed. The Council of Trent defined, that the vulgar Latin
translation shall be holden authentical: but he says, Andreas Vega, who was
present at the Council, reported that the Fathers of the Council, meant not
to determine, that it is not defective or faulty, but that it is not
erroneous, and faulty in such sort, as that any hurtful or pernicious
opinion in matters of faith, or manners, may necessarily be deduced from it.
And that this was the meaneninge of the Cowncell, he says, Andreas Vega
alleged the authority of the Cardinal of Saint Cross, afterward Pope,
who delivered so much unto him. Hitherto D. Feilds allowance, which allows
that his Protestants before have testified as much for the vulgar Latin
translation, as the Council of Trent defined, and consequently, as much as
Catholics do hold in this question.

Further I argue thus: That Translation of scripture which was used 1300 years
age, when the Church was in her best and flourishing estate, and from which no
hurtful or pernicious opinion can be deduced, is to be allowed, and preferred:
But the vulgar Latin is such: Therefore to be thus allowed, and preferred.
The Mayor proposition is evidently true, and before granted: and Couell def.
of Hook. page 29.
D. Couell says: God has so linked his word, and his Church, that neither
can stand, where both are not. The Minor is also before proved by these
Doctors, their Bishop Dove, D. Couell, and Field: so nothing remains to be
proved in this argument: And so it is proved and allowed by these Protestants,
that of all translations it is to be preferred; that it contains nothing
against Faith, Religion, or good manners, nothing that is erroneous which
suffiseth for my purpose.

Now let us see how these Protestants can justify their Translations from
such defects; for they have granted before that this vulgar Latin used, and
allowed in the Roman Church, is to be preferred before all their Protestant
Translations, Latin, English, Welsh, Dutch, French or whatsoever named
translations. I argue thus*

No translation whatsoever is authentical: But every English and other
Protestant translation is a translation: Therefore none of them is
authentical. The Mayor proposition consists of the very words of D.
Couell, Couell ag. Burg. page 94. Dove persuas. page 16.
which be these: No translation whatso^uer is authentical scripture. D. Dove
writes thus: all Tra^slations have many faults. The Minor is manifestly true:
for a translation cannot truly be said to be no translation: for so
contradictories might be true, which is impossible.

Further thus I argue: No translation, which is not well translated, but
requires new translations, is to be allowed: But all English translations ar
such: Therefore not to be allowed. The Mayor is evidently true, for things not
well done, ar ill done: because Non datur actus indifferens in indiuiduo. No
act singularized is indifferent. Therefore being ill, is not to be allowed. The
Minor is proved by the Kings speech in the Conference, at Confer. page 46.
Hampton, where he says, that he could never yet see a Bible well translated
into English: but the worste of all he thought the Geneua to be. And therefore
a new translation should be made for our English nation. And so D. Couell also
Couell ag. Burg.
wishes. Again thus I argue: No translation, that is peruerred in many
hundreds of places, is inferior to the Turks Alcaron, and denies
Christianity, is to be allowed: But the English Protestant Common translation
it such: Therefore not to be allowed. The Mayor proposition is more then
evidently true: The Minor is thus proved by the Protestant Author of the book,
called Advertisement: Aduertism. in an. 1604.
his words be these: The Bible is perverted in eight hundred, and eight and
forty places in the old testament. The English Protestant Bible, is inferior
to the ^urkes Alcaron And so Christianity is denied in England by public
authority.

My next Argument is this: No translation that has many omissions, many
additions, which sometimes peruerteth the sense, is senseless, and sometimes
contrary; is a true translation, or to be allowed: But the English received
Protestant translation is such: therefore not true, nor to be allowed. The
Mayor is palpably true. The Minor is proved by Mr. Burges in these words Burg.
apol. page 93. in D. Couells Answ.
of the approved English translation: it is a Translation, which has many
omissions, many additions, which sometimes obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the
sense: being sometimes senseless, sometimes contrary.

Thus I argue again: No translation, that is corrupt, has gross corruptions,
by leaueing out of words, by putting to of words, and which peruerteth the
meaneinge of the holy Ghost, is a true, or sufferable translation: But the
usual English translation, by Protestants, is such: therefore not true, nor
sufferable. The Mayor proposition is apparently true. And the Minor is thus
proved by these Protestants: The 22 Petit. of 22. preachers except. 21. ag.
comm. Book.
preachers write of the translation in the communion book, in this manner: It
conteyneth in it diverse corrupt translations of scriptures, by leaueing out of
words, putting to of words, perverting the meaneing of the holy ghost. The
Protestant Survey of the book of Common prayer, Survey page 160.
adds: There be many gross corruptions, as may partly appear by the
Abrigment of the Ministers of Lincoln Dyocesse. Then how sownde a Religion
these Protestants have, that must be fownded, and proved by such translations,
I leave to others consideration.

My next Argument is this: No translations that be corrupt; not answeareable to
the truth of the original; are not to be allowed: cannot be defended etc.
even in Protestants Judgments, are to be rejected and condemned as false, and
profane: But all English Protestant Translations of the Bible, even from the
revolt of Henry 8. from the Church of Rome, are such, by these Protestants:
Therefore by them to be rejected, and condemned as false, and profane. The
Mayor proposition is evidently true, even in Protestants Censure, and the Minor
is proved by them in this manner. Their sentence in their public Conference is
this: The Conference at Hampt. page 45.
translations of the Bible allowed in the time of Henry 8. and Edward 6. were
corrupt, and not answeareable to the truth of the original. And of the
translations used in the time of Q Elizabeth, Conference page 46. sup.
and his Majesty since, they testify in these words: The English Bible as it
is translated, is corrupt, and not answeareable to the truth of the original.
His Majesty professed he could never yet see a Bible well translated into
English. Therefore order is there taken, in these words: A new Page 46. sup.
translation is to be made, and none of the former to be allowed. The 22
Protestant preachers of london of their petition write in this manner: Petit. of
22 preachers except. 11. 12.
The English Protestants in their public proceedeings translate scriptures
corruptely, by leaueing out of words, putting to of words: perverting the
meaneinge of the holy ghost. Misapply places of holy scriptures to the
countenance of errors. Others of them write thus: We have diverse translations
of holy scriptures: Def. of the Minist. reasons page 10.
That which by our Service book (this is the practical Rule of their
Religion) is appointed to be read, is the worste of all, and to be charged,
with sundry gross, and palpable errors. And speakeing of Mr. Hutton, taking
upon him to excuse their translation, their words be these: Def. supr. page
38.
Mr Hutton taking upon him the defense of Protestants corruptions, is no more
able to make his part good, against the truth of the exceptions, with all his
florishes: then Goliath was against David with all his blasphemies. Therefore
the Religion of English Protestants by themselves, to their own pleaseing,
deduced either from such false, corrupt, and erroneous translations, or from
Greek, or Hebrew, or any other ancient, or received text, so corruptely, and
profanely translated, and expownded, by no possibility can be justified, for
true and holy.

If any man answeareth, that these Protestant testimonies of their corrupt
translations, and my former Arguments, against the validity of deductions, and
conclusions from so false, corrupted, doubtful, or uncertain texts, and
sentences of scriptures, proceed only against their former translations, and
Religion then used, and so deduced among them: But now they have a new, and
better translation, by his Majesty's order, and commandment, and thus
entitled: The holy Bible conteyninge the old Title of the Protest. new
translation of the Bible. An. 1614.
testament, and the new, newly translated out of the original tongues: and
with the former translations diligently compared, and reuised, by his Majesty's
commandment. Imprinted by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty. To this I answer; that if this new translation be true, and all the
others, as they acknowledge false, corrupt, and worthy to be condemned,
(otherwise they have unworthily condemned them.) Then as all their Religion in
their doctrine was deduced from such false translations, They must needs come
to a new correction, and as they have forsaken their translations for corrupt,
and adulterate, from which their Religion was deduced; So they must now alter,
change and correct their Religion, or some Articles thereof, because it was
deduced, and fownded from corrupt translations, and deceaueinge principles. For
their Religion wholly consisting upon their conclusions, which always
follow the worse part, conclusio semper sequitur deteriorem partem; Their
Religion must needs be worse, and more requireing correction, then their
translations. Again, I only dispute against their Religion, which hitherto
they have practiced, not against any new Religion, which they will make from
their new translations, not knoweing yet, neither they temselues (so often
chaungeing) what it will please them, to be. Thirdly I must deal planely with
them, to think they had done far more excusably for themselves, and their
Religion, still to have faced out their old for tolerable, rather then to have
given such a downefull to their Religion, and scriptures, so much troubled
their four and forty translators (as Mr. Hugh Broughton, their most admired
H. Brough. oratiuncul. ad Jacob. Reg. 1609.
linguist tells us) and yet still abuse us (themselves shall be wittnes) with
new and more false translations of holy scriptures. For the same greatest
Protestant Rabbine thus Intituleth his book of exceptions against these
Protestants sufficiency, and synceritie in this cause: Oratiuncula de
molitione versionis e sacrorum codicum fontibus in Riuulos Orat. supr. in Imit.
Britannicos. Ad Iacobum Regem magnae Britaniae. A little oration of the
entreprise of translation from the fowntaines of the holy books into the
british gunnells. To James King of great Britanny. And to tell us, what
indirect dealeinge was used by the Protestant Bishops, in this matter, how
false both their former translations were, and this can prove no other by any
probable Iugdment, thus he begins his oratiuncula, as he calls it: O
great King the British nation has now long desired to obtain a better
translation of the Bible. And I have meditated these thirtre continual years
well to perform it. And your highness pleasure was that I most exercised of all
should take in hand this hard work. Vestraque Serenitas me voluit,
exercitatissimum omnium opus hoc arduum moliri. But the Bishops as we call,
two ways wrastled against it. First that their usual translation might
continue. But your highness, the errors being thoroughly known, thought that to
be wickedness. Then they themselves would do it, by chuseing of their fellows,
or rather four and forty vicars of their labor. As though our nation were
able to yield so many fit men: when there scarcely are, or ever were, two in
all the world, which could handle the Hebrew Prophetts, as good Thalmudists,
and the Hebrew Greek Apostles also as Athenians. But now six years trial
has taught, that it is one thing to dream of tongues, an other to know
them. And now they are said to be at a stand. And would willingly give over,
but that the Kings authority requires an end. But that your most learned
Majesty may se what is to be hoped for, from them, least the Churches be
forced to buy bables for the word of God: I will in few words deleuer, that it
may appeace that such pore students are not to be suffered to lest with the
King, and the flock. Hitherto this great linguists oration, his exceptions
are to tedious to be recited. Only because these men have so magnified the
Hebrew text of the old testament, in respect of the septuaginta, and vulgar
Latin, now this great searcher of Hebrew monuments can hear only (for he
never se either of them, of two perfect Hebrew copies of the old testament, in
all the world, and both they be in the Jews custodye, one in Jerusalem, and
the other at Nehardegh in Mosopotamia. Veteris testamenti duo exemplaria tam
accurata atque men's humana prouidere potuit, seruantur a Iudaeis. Hierosolymis
alterum: alterum Nehardeghae in Mesopotamia. Then if we have no better
comfort, from these Hebritians, for a true Hebrew text, then that England
neither has, had, or can procure any, and none is to be had, but from our
Enemies the Jews; and yet if they could procure a true copy, which they have
not done, there is not any one in England by their own Judgments able truly
to translate it, and these last translators were weary of their entreprise, and
would have given it over, after six years experience of their disabilitie,
but that the Kings Majesty's pleasure was, to have one end or other, we may
not easily admit such translations for holy scriptures, nor Religion deduced
from them, for a true Religion. And ^his the rather, because since the birth of
this new translation, it is condemned by their own approved writeings, I will
omit others, and only cite one place out of their late commended history of
the world, in these Histor. of the world l. 1. cap. ^.. 14. Chron 2. cap. 21.
v. 16. The Protest. new transl. sup.
words: The ill translation of Ethiopia for Chus, is among other places, made
most apparent in the second of Chronicles in these words: So the Lord styrred
up against Iehoram, the spirit of the Philistines, and the Arabians which
confine the Ethiopians: The Geneua translation has it, which were besides the
Ethiopians. (the new English reads thus:) more over the lord stirred up
against Iohoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were
near the Ethiopians. Now how far it is between the Philistines, and the
Negros, or Ethiopians, every man that looks in a mapp, may Judge. For he
Philistines and Arabians do mixed, and join with the land of the Chusites, and
are distant from Ethiopia, about two and thirty, or three and thirty degrees,
and therefore not their next neighbors: but all Egypt and the deserts of Sur,
and Pharan, are between them. And to aggrauate this matter the more, these new
Protestant translators taking upon them, to translate the old testament out
of the Hebrew, and new out of the Greek, and only alloweing those texts in
words, are so far from performing it in deeds; that in the old testament they
have forsaken the Hebrew text diverse thowsands of times, as may be proved by
their own merginall observations of that matter; my leisure was not to recompt
them all, but in Genesis the first book they have thus behaved themselves
above two hundred times, and after the same rate in all the rest. As in the 5.
20. and 25. chapter of the book of Judges fourtye times. Fyfteene times in
Sam. l. 1. cap. 18. in the 2. Book of Samuel in cap. 22. thirteen times. in
cap. 1. 7. 18 20. in four chapters above fyfty times in the third book of
Kings. And so they deal with the Greek in the new testament, and in the old
testament, where the scripture is written in the Chaldy, and Hebrew mixed, as
in the time of captivity so they use the Chaldy tongue, as in Esra cap. 4.
they forsake the Hebrew thrice, and the Chaldye eleven, or twelve times, in the
second chapter of Daniel, they leave it thirteen times, in the third chapter
twelve times, in the 5. chapter neyne times etc. and in these and other places
where they refuse the original tongue, as for example, the Hebrew, they do it
not, many times to prefer either the vulgar Latin, Septuagin^a, or
Syriacke, but their own conceit, and Imagination. Yet in places where they
forsake the original, to prefer, any of the other, it is evidently against
their own profession, and Religion, and in places of their former
translations, censured by Mr. Gregory Martyne, or other English Catholics,
they often times neither regard their own, or ours, but give us new
scriptures, and revelations of their own (though not many times in great
matters) and so in this multiplication, and change of scriptures they have
also multiplied, and changed Religion, deduced from them, and for that one
Article of their ancient creed, I believe in the holy ghost, may now say by
such proceedings: we believe in the four and forty English Protestant holy
Ghosts. For whosoever reject all texts of scripture, as their own marginall
observations tell us, they do, though (as before) often not in great things,
yet sometimes otherwise, and deny unwritten traditions of this kind, must
needs be in such estate.

CHAPTER VI. PROVES BY THESE PROtestants, that the true and Iuridicall
exposition of scriptures is against them, and for the doctrine of the Roman
Church.
AFTER these, I am to entreat of the true, lawful, and Iuridicall Exposition
of holy scriptures; And that it belongs to the Church of Rome, haueing both
the true scriptures* the true translation of them, and it self haueing power,
and authority, being the true Church of Christ, to propose it to all
Christians: and not to these Protestants: for no company or congregation of
men, wanting and denying diverse books of scriptures, in which diverse Articles
of Religion, as prayer to Angels, their patronadge, prayer and sacrifice for
the Dead, meritt of good works, etc. are directly proved, not so apparently
taught in other scriptures, besides followeing, and alloweing erroneous, and
corrupt translations, can have the true and Iuridicall exposition of
scriptures, especially having no Jurisdiction over others, by their own
grant: But the English Protestants are in this state: Therefore they have not
this true, lawful, and Iuridicall exposition of scriptures. Both propositions
are granted before, and so nothing remains to be proved in this argument.

Further I argue thus: No private Interpretation of scriptures, by conference
of places, and such Rules as Protestants assign for Interpreteinge scripture,
is bindeing, or iuridicall: But all Protestant Expositions, in respect of true
byndeing authority, in such cases, is private: Therefore no Protestant
Interpretation is binding, or Iuridicall. The Mayor proposition is thus proved
by D. Field Field l. 4. c. 19. page 235.
in these words: We confess that neither conference of places, nor
consideration of the antecede^tia, and consequentia, nor lookinge into the
originalls, are of any force, unless we find the things which we conceive
to be understood and meant in the places interpreted, to be consonant to the
Rule of faith. And he writes thus again: private Interpretation Field page
226.
is not so proposed and urged, as if they would bind all others, to receive
it. The Minor proposition* That all Protestant expositions in respect of a
bindeing and Iuridicall power are private, is thus proved by this Protestant
Argument: No Interpretation or Interpreters wanteing Jurisdiction, and
authority, to command their Interpretations, and expositions in matters of
faith, to be believed as such, is to be accounted byndeing, and Iuridicall: But
all English Protestant Interpretations, expositions, and definitions, by their
own Judgment, want this bindeing, and commaundeing authority in matters of
faith: Therefore they are not Iuridicall, and byndeinge to be believed. The
Mayor is evidently true, for, where there is not power and authority in
things, those things cannot be rightly and iuridically commanded, or bindeing
men to do, or believe them. The Minor proposition is proved by D. Field in
these words: As before we made Field page 228.
three kinds of Judgment, the one of discretion Common to all, the other of
direction Common to the Pastors of the Church, and a third of Jurisdiction,
proper to them that have supreme power in the Church: So likewise we make
three kinds of Interpretation: the first private: the second of publick^
direction: and so the Pastors of the Church may publicly propose, what they
conceive of it: And the third of Jurisdiction, and so they that have supreme
power, that is in the Bishops assembled in a general Council, may interpreate
the scripture, and by their authority suppress all them, that shall gaynesay
such Interpretations: and subject every man that shall disobey such
determinations, as they consent upon, to excommunication, and Censures of the
like nature. Hitherto D. Feilds words, plainly declareing, that in his
Judgment, the Protestants neither have, nor can have this Iuridicall, and
commaundeing Judgment, or Interpretation: because, as is proved by themselves
before, they neither have had, nor can have any general Council, in which
alone he places this Jurisdiction, and bindeing power. For, proposeing without
authority, which he gives there to Bishops, is not Iuridicall, and coactiue.
If he shall answer, that in the first three hundred years there was no
general Council, and yet matters of Religion were decided and embraced: he
condemns himself, and all Protestants, in this business; for either he must
leave that primative Church absolutely without Iurisdict^on, and power, which
is most absurd, or leave it to them that both truly claymed, and used it,
the Popes of Rome, as these Protestants have before acknowledged: And above all
men D. Field must be of that opinion: for he Field. page 202.
has written and allowed in this manner: We must reverence the authority of
all Catholi^ke Doctors, whose doctrine and writeings the Church allows: we
must more regard the authority of Catholic Bishops; more then these the
authority of the Apostolic Churches: amongst them, more especially the
Church of Rome of a general Council more then all these. Therefore by this
Protestant Doctor, in time when general Counsels cannot be, the highest
deciding, and Iuridicall sentence, and power is in the Church and Pope of Rome.
And by this he is also prevented, from saying that Protestants may command
such Interpretations, and definitions within their own temporal Territories:
for so they should not most reverence, and respect, next to a general
Council, the Church of Rome the next Judge, as he has written, but quite the
contrary their own stubborn, and disobedient wills, which in such causes is
Here^icall, or Sc^maticall usurpation, and yet D. Field in his division of
Interpretations before, assigns no Jurisdiction at all to inferior Bishops,
to command either in the whole Church, or in Provincial, in such cases.
Further I argue thus: No opinions or Articles, not grownded upon the word of
God, are to be believed or commanded as matters of faith: But all Protestants
deductions, and Interpretations in these controversies, are such, not grownded
upon the word of God: therefore not to be believed, or commanded, as Articles
of faith. The Mayor is the Common doctrine of Protestants: The Minor is proved
both before, when Protestants have deprived themselves of Counsels, Popes, and
all true proposers of the word of God, tying themselves to their own
doctrines, and deductions, and is thus further confirmed, by D. Couell, in
these words: Couell def. of Hook. page 85.
Doctrines derived, exhortations deducted, Interpretations agreeable, are not
the word of God. Therefore the whole Religion of Protestants against
Catholics, being thus fownded, upon so deceatefull a ground as humanee
deduction is, cannot truly and Iuridically be commander. Yet it is so
manifest to all, that their Religion consists wholly on their Imagined
Interpretations, and deductions, that Mr. Wotton and Wotto^ def. of Perk. page
467. etc.
others are enforced absurdely to say, that deduction from scripture makes a
matter of Faith: otherwi^e he cannot make any articl^ of faith to be in their
doctrine against us. And D. Field himself so resolute before against these
private Interpretations, and expositions, seems to be of the same mind, to
defend their Religion in making such deductions to be matters of faith, by
every private deduction, his words be these: We Field page: 226.
say that men not negl^cting that light of direction, which the Church
yields, no^ other helps and means, may be assured out of the nature of the
things themselves, the Conference of places, the knowledge of tongues, and the
suitable correspondence, that one part of dyuine truth has with an other, that
they have sownde out the true meaneinge of it. And by this assurednes he
seems to understand assurednes of faith, making their private deductions,
and Interpretations, the word of God, as M. Wotton before cited, does in
Wotton def. of Perk. page 467.
these words: We acknowledge both and hold, all matters concludes Logically
out of the scriptures to be the word of God, as well as if they were expressly
set down in it, word for word. Therefore I may l^wfully take it is a Common
Protestant doctrine, both Doctor Field and M. Wotton speakeinge for their
Protestants in the plural number: we say: we acknowledge etc. so that by
their Religion, M. Feilds or M. Wottons Logic, vain and uncertain
deduction, is of higher authority, and more to be believed, then any general
Council or Articl of Relig. art. 21.
other external Rule of Religion; for all these by them, as is presently to be
proved may err, even in things appertayning unto God: but their private
Interpretations, and deductions, suteing with their humor, is the word of God
as well as if it were set down in scripture word for word, as M. Wotton has
told us before.

My next Argument is this: No people, or professors of Religion, freely
acknowledgeing, that all Rules in their Religion, though their best approved,
and most public to be most reverenced, and respected, be subject to error,
may err and have erred in things belongeing to God, are erroneous, unconstant,
variable, often recant, and correct their public proceedeings in such things,
can be said to have the true, and Iuridicall exposition of scriptures:
otherwise there is a lawful and true Jurisdiction and power to bind them of
their Religion, both to errors in things, against God, and misbeleefe in this
life, and to eternal damnation, the peneltie thereof in the next: But the
Protestants of England are in this Condition, by their own Judgment:
Therefore, they have not the true, and Iuridicall exposition, and
Interpretation of scriptures: The Mayor is proved before, and directly by M.
Wottons Wotton sup.
words: all matters concluded logically out of the scriptures, are the word of
God, as well as if they were expressly set down in it word for word: But the
word of God neither is, nor can be erroneous, to be recanted, amended
corrected etc. therefore the Mayor is most certainly true, by these men: And
the Minor also is proved by them in this order: They have granted before, that
a general Council is the highest Judge: And yet in public and subscribed
Articles, have these Articl. of Relig. art. ^1.
words: General Counsels may err, and sometime have erred, even in things
pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared
that they be taken out of holy scripture. Therefore no certain Interpretation
with them for they have assured us, Field page 228.
that a general Council may expownd scripture, and by authority suppress
all them that gaynesay such Interpretations, to excommunication, and Censures
of like nature, and is by them the highest Judge has no more privilege but to
err, and be examined, and controlled by inferior (for none is higher as
before) Reprouers, and particular Interpreters among them, whom (as they have
also taught before) we are not bound to believe, but be so vile, corrupt, and
erroneous, as they have confessed, there is none among them, to decide, things
in controversy, or define a truth. And least any man should absurdely say,
that their Convocation, Parliament or any other pretendeing superiotie among
them, in these matters should be better able to Judge and interprett
scriptures, then Bishops assembled in a general Council: Willet Antilog.
first D. Willet writes thus: In England the temporal prince is governor,
Ruler, chief ouerseer, praef. Engl. and page 71. 120. 150. 43. Pref. 19 the
Reader in Antill.
and steward of the Church, to whose Judgment and redress the reformation of
Religion belongs. Yet he adds: Neither he, nor their Church has any
privilege from error: but plainly protests: they must take out a new
lesson, and learn to reform their erroneous conceits. Which their Bishop D.
Dove allows to have been their state from the first original of their Dove
persuas. page 31.
protestancie, in England, his words and grant are these: When the Mass^ was
first putt down, King Henry had his English liturgy, and that was judged
absolute without exception: but when King Edward came to the Crown, that was
condemned, and an other in the place which Peter Martyr, and Bucer did approve,
as very consonant to Gods word. When Q. Eliz^^eth began he^ Reign, the former
was Judged to be full of Imperfections, and a new was devised, and allowed by
the consent of the Clergy: but about the middle of her Reign we were weary
of that book, and great means have been wrought to abandon that, and
establishe an other: we do at the least, at every change of prince, change
our book of Common prayers, we be so wanton, that we know not what we
would have: Hitherto this Protestant Bishop of the public proceedings in
their Religion; And he freely confesses errors in all these their states and
chaunges. And this their flitting from error to error, findeinge no Center, or
hope of settleing in truth, has so perplexed even their best learned, that a
late Protestant writer among them, has these words: The late Archbishop of
Canterbury (D. Whiteguist) as is credibly reported Survey of the B. of com.
prayer page 159. 160.
took such a grief, (when their communion book was to be amended) discovered
by these or like words: good Lord; when shall we know^ what to trust unto?
that he presently fell into his palssy, was curryed from the Court, and dyed
shortly after. And D. Morton (D. Couell M. Wotton, Morton Apol. part. 2. page
315. Couell ag. Burg. page 75. 43. Wotton def. page 42. etc.
M. Middleton and now the university of Cambridge teaches, it is a general
position, there is none in their Church whose Judgment is Infallible. Then I
conclude their Interpretations be false, and their Religion erroneous,
uncertain, and false; for they have granted before, that the word of God
which is Infallible, most certain, and undoubted, is the ground of true
Religion, and every article in it, so fownded: But these their highest and best
sentences in Religion, being so erroneous to be corrected, fallible, deceatfull
etc. must needs be the word of lyeinge and deceatefull men, or the wicked
spirit, and in no ways the holy Infallible, and most certain word of God,
who can neither be deceived in himself, or deceive others.

Further thus I argue: whosoever teach not only, that the whole Christian
world may err in things pertaining to God, but are bownde to receive such
errors, under pain of excommunication, and like Censures, and yet teach this
from scriptures, cannot be said to have their true Interpretation: But the
Protestants of England by their own testimony, are in this state: Therefore
have not this true Iuridicall Interpretation, of scriptures. The Mayor
proposition is evidently true, for so God that is just, should ordain
Jurisdiction; and power, to bind men to things unjust, such as errors in
Religion be, and these Protestants, though to excuse, or alleuiate their own
Heresies, they affirm, that any particular Church, or a general Council, may
err in this manner, yet they deny it of the whole Church, in which cause D.
Field page 203. l. 4. c. 5.
Field writes in these words: we think that particular men and Churches may
err damnably, because notwithstanding, others may worship God aright: but that
the whole Church, at one time, cannot so err: for that the Church should
cease utterly for a time, and so not be Catholic, being not at all times: and
Christ should sometimes be without a Church. Thus it is evident by these
Protestants, (for the words: we think: be plural) That whosoever by their
Interpretations should allow such absurdities, cannot have the true
interpretation of scriptures. Now the Minor is easily proved by him also: for
all men are bownde to obey lawful superiority, and authority such as he
says a general Council has over all Christians, in these cases: his words
before cited be these: They that have supreme Field l. 4. ^. 16. page 228.
power, that is the Bishops assembled in a general Council, may interpret the
scripture, and by their authority suppress all them that shall gaynesay such
Interpretations, and subject every man that shall disobey such determination,
as they consent upon, to excommunication, and Censures of like nature.
Wherefore seeing general Counsels have this bindeing, and commaundeing power,
over all men, by these Protestants, and yet by their Article before, may err,
and have Art. 21. sup.
erred even in things pertaining unto God, the whole Christian world with so
many absurdities, may be in this damnable error, the Church might cease, not be
Catholic, Christ Field page 203.
should be without a Church: which D. Field before esteems great
absurdities. Again thus I argue: They which straungely pervert belly, deprave,
abuse, and falsefye holy scriptures, cannot be thought to be true interpreters
of them: But M. Parkes so testifies of our Parkes ag. lymbom. def. of the 1.
2. 3. testim.
English Protestants: Therefore they cannot be thought to be true Interpreters
of them. Notheing remains in this Argument to be proved.

Further I argue thus: No Interpreters, or expositors of scripture, whose
Interpretations be partial, untrue, seditious, sauoureing of Treason, poysen
the Gospel etc. are to be Judged true, and Iuridicall: But the English
Protestants hy their own testimonies, be such: Therefore not to be judged
true, and iuridicall interpreters: The Mayor is true and evident: And the Minor
thus proved, first by the Protestant Confer. at Hampt. page 47.
conference in these words: The notes annexed to the Geneua translation, some
are very partial, untrue, seditious, and sauoureing to^ much of dangerous,
and traiterous conceits. Yet these were allowed, and published, as public and
approved interpretations. An other Protestant writes in this manner: The
Bishops Aduerment. An. 1604.
notes betray our Lord, and Redeemer, and befoole the rock of salvation, they
are the very poison to all the Gospel. M. Ormerod writes thus of his
fellow Ormer. pict. purit. q. 4.
Protestants: They fill the margents of their books, full of places of
scripture, in a wrong sense, that by this means they might more easily
deceive the simple people. They neither care for Mayor, Minor, nor Conclusion,
so they may say some thing. They point their margents with shameful abuseing
of scripture. To these I might add more arguments, as that by their own
testimonies they are Heretics, Scismaticks, have no ttue Church, no true
Religion, and the like, as among other reasons from themselves, why Catholics
may not communicate with them, in spiritual, and religeous affairs, is proved
in a late treatise against them: I will therefore pass them over, as already
proved.

CHAPTER VII. WHEREIN BY THESE PROtestants is proved, that unwritten traditions
lawfully proved, are the word of God, equally as the holy scriptures: That many
such are: and all confirm the doctrine of the Church of Rome: and condemn
Protestants Religion.
AFTER this entreateinge of holy scriptures, the written word of God, let us
come to that part of his sacred word, delivered by traditions and unwritten
verities, preserved and proposed to faithful Christians by the holy spouse,
and Church of Christ, whose Judgment, Rule, and direction is so dignified above
all Inferior Judgments, by these Protestants before. Concerning the validity
and authority of truly proved traditions, I argue thus.

All Rules, Grounds and Authorities in matters of Religion, that are equal
with holy scriptures, in the Judgment of Protestants, the highest Rule in such
causes, are ^eghely to be reverenced, and obeyed of all Christians: But the
holy traditions and unwritten verities delivered by Christ, and Apostles being
lawfully proved, are of this nature: Therefore to be reverenced, embraced, and
received. The Mayor proposition is evidently true, for where there is absolute
equality, there is not inferioritie, but paritie, as is manifest in all
equalities. The Minor is thus proved in this manner: first M. Wotton speakeing
of such, has these Wotton def. of Perk. page 405. page 436. supr.
words: out of all question we are bound to keep them; and tells us that
M. Perkins was of the same opinion. D. Field speaks thus concerning
traditions. In this question, by tradition, we understand such parts of
Christian doctrine or Field page 238. l. 4. cap. 20.
discipline, as were not written by them, by whom^ they were first delivered.
For thus our Adversaries understand traditions which they divide into diverse
kinds. First in respect of the authors, so making them of three sorts,
Divine, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical. Secondly, in respect of the matter,
they concern, in which respect they make them to be of two sorts: for either
they concern matters of fai^he, or matters of manners: and these later again
either temporal, or perpetual, universal or particular. All these in their
several kinds they make equal with the words, precepts, and doctrines of
Christ, the Apostles, and pastors of the Church, left unto us in writeinge.
Neither is there any reason, why they should not so do, if they could prove
any such unwritten verities. For it is not the writeing that gives things
their authority, but the worth and credit of him that delivers them, though
by word and lively voice only. Thus the authority of Traditions is justified
by Protestants to be equal with the scriptures, if they can be proved. Now
because Protestants mayntayneinge the sufficiency of scripture for matters of
faith, deny traditions of that nature I argue in this manner. All Articles and
matters of faith are in Protestants Judgment proved and delivered to us by
tradition: Therefore some articles, and matters of faith, are in their
Judgment, or so must be granted, to be delivered by tradition: The consequence
is evident, for every general proposition includes the particular. The
Antecedent is thus proved by them. Whosoever do grant those things, which,
by them conteyne all matters and Articles of faith to be delivered by
tradition, must needs allow traditions in matters of faith: But these
Protestants do so: Therefore they must allow such traditions. The Mayor is
evident, for whatsoever contains all, excludes none, and so comprehending
all, comprehends also some and the parts of that all. The Minor is likewise
proved in this manner, supposeing the Common opinion of these Protestants, set
down in the sixth Article of their Religion Articl. of Relig. art. 6.
in these words: Holy scripture conteyneth all things necessary to salvation:
so that whatsoever i^ not read th^rein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to
be required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith,
or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation. Now to prove my second
proposition, D. Field will testify, that both these scriptures, and the right
order of deductions from them, in matters of faith, are delivered unto us by
tradition only, his ^ordes be these: Much contention there has Field l. 4.
page 238. cap. 20.
been, about traditions, some vrgeing the necessity of them, and other
rejecting them. For the cleareing whereof, we must observe, that we reject
not all: for first we receive the number, and names, of the Authors of books
divine, and canonical, as delivered by tradition. This tradition we admit.
The number, Authors, and integrity of the parts, of these b^oke^, we receive
as delivered by tradition. Thus much for the scriptures, that their number,
Authors, parts, and every chapter, verse, and sentence is by tradition; Then
their pretended deductions from thence must needs be such, for in every
theological Syllogism they must needs take either the one or both
propositions from this granted tradition, and their conclusion must much
rather be tradition, as also the manner of deduceing, for they grant they are
not expressly in scripture, and to decide this, D. Field wittnesseth again in
this order. The Field sup. page 238. 239.
second kind of tradition, which we admit, is that summarie comprehension,
of the chief heads of Christian doctrine, contained in the Creed of the
Apostles, which was delivered to the Church, as a Rule of her faith. The
orderly connection, and distinct explication, as these principal Articles
gathered into an Epitome, i^ rightly named a tradition. And howsoever he will
contend that the Articles are in scripture, or may thence be deduced: in which
his fellows in Religion, hereafter will give him denial for Christ's
discendeing into Hell, communion of Saints, and others: yet he must needs
grant, that the Creed of the Apostles being composed by them, and delivered
to the Church, as a Rule of her faith, before the scriptures of the new
testament, wherein he will say it is contained, were written, is absolutely a
Tradition. And yet he makes it so absolute a thing, that to use his words,
in it are employed, and whence are inferred, all conclusions Theological. But
that the Field supr. cap. 20.
true explication also of scripture is a tradition, he wittnesseth in these
words: The third is that form of Christian doctrine, and explication Field
page 239.
of the several parts thereof, which the first Christians receauinge of the
same Aposiles, that delivered to them the scriptures, commended to posterities.
This may right be named a tradition, for that we need a plain, and distinct
explication, of many things, which are somewhat obs^urely contained in the
scripture. Therefore seeing these deductions from scripture, are not without
tradition, and things obscurely contained, may not be received as articles of
Religion, by them without a plain and distinct explication, by tradition, and
the plain things of scripture, by them before, as also that epitome of our
faith, the Apostles Creed, are traditions; it is manifestly proved, that all
Articles, and matters of faith, are by tradition, by these their writeings.

Further I argue thus: whatsoever doctrine is of that necessity, that the
denial Field: (...)
obstinately, is Heresy, must needs be a matter of faith, and necessary to
salvation: But by these Protestants, there is such doctrine only by tradition:
Therefore some matters of faith, and necessary to salvation, are believed
only by tradition. The Mayor proposition is evidently true, yet further
confirmed by these Protestants: D. Couells Couell exam page? 202. Ormer. dial. 2.
words be these: Heretics are neither simple Infidells, nor Idolaters, but
obstinately erringe in some fundamental point. M. Ormerod writes thus: he is
an Heretic: which so swarueth from the wholesome doctrine, as contemning the
Judgment both of God, and the Church, persisteth in his opinion. Thus we see
that Heresy is not without denial of a matter of faith, wherein both the
Judgment of God, and the Church is contemned.

The Minor is proved by D. Field in this manner where first (to use his words)
he allows for a clear Instance not to be proved by Field page 240.
scripture, the perpetual virginity of Mary, and after confesses that
Hiluedius for pertinatiousely denial thereof was condemned of Heresy. In that
he says: this is no point of Christian faith, but a Field sup. cap. 20.
seemly truth delivered unto us by the Church of God, fitting the sanctity
of the blessed Virgin, and the honor due to so sanctified a vessel of Christ's
Incarnation, as her body was: he speaks truly in allowing it for a
Tradition, but denying it to be any point of Christian faith, and yet telling
us that Heluidius for denial of (...) was condemned of Heresy, he both
contradicts himself, the truth, and his fellow Protestants before,
assureing, that Heretics be they that obstinately err in fundamental points,
as D. Couell writes: or as M. Ormerod notes: swerve from the wholesome
doctrine as contenininge the Judgment both of God and the Church. Where it is
evident, that a matter of faith is denied in every Heresy, and also that
things delivered only by tradition, (as D. Field acknowledges the perpetual
virginity of our blessed Lady to be) are the word, and Judgment of God.
Further these Protestants seem to condemn the Anabaptists, and denyers of the
necessity to baptize Infants: yet D. Field writes thus: Field page 239.
The foarth kind of Tradition, is the continued practice of such things, as
neither are contained in the scripture expressly, nor the example of such
practice expressly there delivered. Of this sort is the baptism of Infants,
which is therefore named a tradition, because it is not expressly delivered in
the scripture, that the Apostles did baptize Infants, nor any express precept
there found, that they should do it. And his words, of the plural
signification: The fourth kind of traditions: such things: of this sor^e^ etc.
are sufficient argument, that he allows diverse other Traditions of this
nature. That which he adds, we find the scripture to deliver the grounds of
it, is expressly Field page 228. Couell def. of Hook. page 85.
against himself before, and D. Couell, thus assureing us in these words:
doctrines derived, exhortations deducted, Interpretation^ agreeable, are not
the word of God, and D. Field: Field supr. page 226.
private Interpretation is not so proposed and urged, as if they would bind
all others to receive it. Yet all men are bownde to receive, and firmly
believe articles, and matters of faith. Further D. Willet tells us, that
Vigilantius Willet Antilog. page 13.
was condemned of Heresy, for denying reverence to Relickes, and yet
Protestants generally teach, that doctrine is not contained in holy scriptures.
D. Field writes Field page 138. l. 3. cap. 29.
in these words: Aerius condemned the custom of the Church, in nameing the
dead at the altar, and offeringe the sacrifice of the Eucharist for them. For
this his rash and inconsiderate holdenes, and presumption, in condemninge the
universal Church of Christ, he was justly condemned. For the practice of the
Church, at that time was not evil in any of these things, neither do we
concur with Aerius in the reprehension of that primative and ancient
Church. What was this practice of the primative Church concerning the dead,
for denial whereof Aerius was condemned as D. Field has told us, I will
recite from other Protestants. M. Middleton assures us thus: Middleton
papistom. page 64. 45. 46. 51. 47. 48. 49.
S. Chrysostom taught it to be the Apostles ordinance to pray for the dead,
it was a tradition in the primative Church received from the fathers, to pray
for the dead, and beg mercy of God for them. The dead were prayed for in
the public liturgies of Hull Romans pole page 86 Morton Apol. part. 1. page 273.
Basile, Chrysostom, and Epiphanius. The Church in Epipbanius time used to
crave mercy, for the dead. M. Hull says: Leo 15 Leo the pope, appointed
Masses for the dead. D. Morton cites from Calvin this: ipsi veteres preces
fundebant pro defunctis. The ancient fathers prayer for the dead. And to give
final content to D Field, the sentence of his true Greek Church is Gennad.
Schol. def. 5. cap. 3.
this: The doctrine of purgatory, prayer, and sacrifice for the dead, was a
Tradition of the Apostles. That which the Latins call Purgatory, they of the
Greek Church name Catharte^ion. They were only Scismaticorum sectatores,
followers of Scismaticks which denied it. The seeing Protestants do ordinarily
teach, that prayer for the dead is not contained, either expressly, or
deducebly in scriptures, it must needs be by tradition; for denial of which
tradition Aerius was condemned of Heresy, and the universal Church at that
time by D. Field taught prayer for the dead, for he tells us, that Aerius
in his opinion contemned the universal Church of Christ: and so must D. Field
confess of himself, and his fellow Protestants, if they deny this to be a
Tradition, as they have denied the Books of Machabees, where this verity is
taught, to be caconicall scriptures, to gaynesay this primative and Catholic
doctrine.

And from hence, thus I argue again by the Rule of S. Augustine allowed by D.
Field: whatsoever the whole Church holds, not Field l. 4. c. 21. page 242.
being decreed by the authority of Counsels, but having been ever holden,
may rightly be thought to have proceeded from Apostolic authority: But the
Catholic doctrine; of prayer, and sacrifice for the dead, is such, by the
testimony of these Protestants: Therefore a tradition from the Apostles by
these Protestants. The Mayor consists of the very words of S. Augustine, as
they be translated and allowed by D. Field in this manner. Field page 241.
Having set down the kinds and sorts of traditions it remains to examine
by what means we may come to discern, and by what rules we may Judge which
are true, and Indubitate traditions. The first rule is delivered by S.
Augustine: Quod vniuersa Aug. l. 4. cont. Donatist. cap. 23.
tenet ecclesia, nec concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
authoritate apostolica traditum, rectissime creditur. Englished by D. Field as
in the Mayor proposition: where, rectissime creditur, is most rightly
believed: he has translated, may rightly be thought. The Minor proposition is
proved before by these Protestants, in teacheing, this doctrine to have been
the doctrine of the universal Church, resisted by Aerius, and also that it was
an Apostolic tradition: which all Protestants of England must needs grant
unto, by S. Augustines, and D. Feilds* first Rule before; for by their
proceedings, they are so far from graunteing, that this doctrine is defined by
Counsels, and by that title to be embraced: That they plainly teach in the
Articles of their Religion the definition of a general Council in matters of
faith not taken out of scriptures (as they teach this is not) is nothing
worth. The Articl. of Relig. art. 21.
words of their Article be these. Things ordained by general Counsels as
necessary to salvation, have neither strength, nor authority, unless it may
be declared that they be taken out of holy scripture. Hitherto their subscribed
article: And that this is a thing necessary to salvation, must needs also be
yielded unto, by these Protestants, telling us before, both that Aerius was
condemned of Heresy for denying it, as also that Heresy is arror in some
fundamental point, Cou^ll sup.
which must needs be necessary to salvation. My next Argument shall be taken
from the next Rule of D. Field, to know true traditions: and my Mayor
proposition shall be his very words thus next followeing. The second Rule is,
whatsoever all, or the Field supr. page 242.
most famous, and renowned in all ages, or at the least in diverse ages, have
constantly delivered, as received from them, that went before them, no man
contradicting or doubting of it, may be thought to be an Apostolical
Tradition: But the Catholic doctrine of prayer for the dead, praying to
Saints, single life of the clergy, especially in the Latin Church, and
others in their proper place to be proved such by these Protestants, are in
this state: Therefore by Protestants they be Apostolic traditions. The Mayor
is the very saying and sentence of D. Field before: and the Minor concerning
prayer for the dead, also before allowed by these Protestants: the others are
to be proved in their order this now suffices.

The first proposition for my next Argument shall be D. Feilds third, and last
Rule, to know true, and indubitate traditions; and is delivered by him in
these words: The third Rule, is the constant testimony, Field supr. l. 4. c.
21. page 242.
of the pastors of an Apostolic Church, successively delivered: But prayer
for the dead etc. is so proved by such testimony: therefore an Apostolic
tradition. The mayor is D. Field sentence. And the Minor is before proved by
these Protestants: for if the universal Church (as before by them consented)
is this verity, not only one Apostolic Church (sufficient for his Rule) but
all did consent unto it, otherwise it could not be said the doctrine of the
universal Church. And of all Churches Apostolic, there can be no question
with Protestants bur the Church of Rome ever taught thus; and D. Field has
told us before, that Field l. 4. c. 5. page 202.
amongst Apostolic Churches, the Church of Rome is more specially to be
obeyed, reverenced and respected. Further thus I argue: whatsoever things are
either approved by these Protestants themselves, for true, and indubitate
traditions, or allowed by them, that the primative Church, and fathers received
for such, are to have that allowance: But the sign of the cross, mixture of
water with wine, in the Eucharist, reverence of holy Imadges, and Relics,
sacrifice and prayer for the dead, vows of chastity, and single life of
priests, parsonall absolution from syn after confession, Baptism by private
parsons, in time of necessity, Confirmation, profession of our faith to
believe in the Father the Son holy Ghost, ordination of Archbishops in their
provinces, and Bishops in their dioces, the Article of Christ descent to Hell
the Apostles creed, Baptism of Infants, the perpetual virginity of our
blessed Lady, the celebrateing of our Lords day, called Sunday, for the
sabbath in the old law, the feasts of Pentecoste, and Easter, and their time
when to be celebrated, not answeareing to the Jews, and for denial of which
the quartadeciman Heresy was condemned, and others are thus allowed by these
Protestants to be true traditions, or so esteemed in the primative Church by
their testimony: Therefore they ought to have allowance for true and
indubitate Traditions. The Mayor is evident, for against Protestants no better
testimony can be, then from themselves, and they have granted before, that
the primative Church is a true Rule in Religion, and to be followed of us.

Now to prove the Minor I must ci^e these Protestants, and if any of them in
the Judgment of some others in their Religion speak not allwaies to their
likeinge, or improperly as they think, let them try this combat with
themselves, it belongs not to me in this treatise, First D. Couell and
others teach, That the sign of the cross is Couell ag. Burg. page 139. 124.
125. confer.
an apostolickall constitution and tradition. And the Protestants against
Puritans do not defend it by scripture. The same D. Couell from the Couell ag.
Burg. page 122.
ancient Fathers tell us: That the mixture of water with wine, is an
apostolical tradition. And as a general Council is of highest Judgment, by
these men before, so D. Willet writes Willet Antilog. page 169.
thus: the Greeks in a general Council held at Nyce, confirmed and allowed
the adoration of Imadges, and it taught that Reverence of Imadges is an
Apostolical tradition. M. Middleton has Council. Nyc. 2. Middleton pap. page
64. 45. 46. 51.
thus testified: S. Chrysostom taught it to be the Apostles ordinance to pray
for the dead, and confesses it was a tradition in the primative Church,
received from the Fathers, to pray for the dead, and beg mercy of God for
them. The dead were prayed for in the public liturgies (or Masses) of
Basile, Chrysostom and ^piphanius. The Greek Gennad. Schol. def. 5. c. 3.
Church so allowed by Protestants as before testifies thus: The doctrine of
Purgatory, prayer and sacrifice for the dead was a Tradition of the Apostles.
M. Perkins, Ormerod, and others assure us, Perk. probl. page 93. Ormer. pict.
page ^7 Morton Apol. part. 1. page 227. 228. Middleton pap. page 134. Willet
Antilog. page 13.
the ancient Fathers taught prayer to Saints: and D. Morton alleges: how
all antiquity taught Invocation of Saints. Then seeing Protestants will not
allow it by scripture, they must grant it by Tradition. M. Middleton tells
us: that the ancient Fathers so receaueinge it, from them that went before
them, taught; that vows of chastity, and single life in Priests, is to be
observed by tradition. D. Willet grants, that Vigiluntius was condemned for
an Heretic, for denial of reverence to Relics: Then by tradition in the
Judgment of Protestants, for they teach, that it is not contained in
scripture. His Majesty and the Protestant conference tell us with Confer. page
13.
the Fathers, and Apostolic Churches, that the particular and p^rsonall
absolution from sin, after confession, is apostolical and a very godly
ordinance. And yet other Protestants there affirm, that neither that nor
others followeing are contained in scriptures. D. Bilson Protestant Bishop of
Winchester with consent Confer. page 18.
of Antiquity teaches: That baptism to be ministered by private persons, in
time of necessity is an holy tradition. His Majesty, and the said:
Conference teach, that Bishops be divine ordinations: Confer. page 35. 36.
and confirmation is an apostolical tradition. How it ought by these men to be
received Page 10. 11.
for a sacrament, shall be proved among other Sacraments hereafter. M. Wotton
writes, Wotton def. of Perk. page 465. 4^6.
that S. Basile did hold: that the very profession of our faith, by which we
believe in the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, is a tradition. D. Couell
wittnesseth thus: that it was an Couell ag. the plea. of the Innoc. page 104.
Barlowe Ser. Sept. 21. An. 1607. part. 3. cap. 2.
apostolical tradition, or ordination, to ordain Archibishop^ in their
provinces: as Bishops also in their diocese to rule the Church. And yet many
English Protestants to be cited hereafter deny such things either directly or
consequently to be contained in scriptures, and yet (as before) do make true
discipline, and Regiment, so essential a thing in Religion, that in their
doctrine it is a note of the true Church. The Protestant Puritans utterly deny
also, that Christ's* descent into Hell can be proved out of scripture: yet
their Protestant Bishop of Winchester D. Bilson Bilson suru. page 664.
affirms: That the Article of Christ^ descent to hell, and the Creed wherein
it is contained is an Apostolical tradition, delivered to the Church, by the
direction and agreement of the Apostles. To which D. Field has also given
testimony before: Field page 238. 239.
And affirms the same of other particulars, remembered in the Minor
proposition; among which, that doctrine of baptizing infants is denied by many
of his English Protestant Church, either to be contained, or to be proved by
scripture: yet D. Field Field page 239.
writes thus: Baptism of Infants is named a tradition, because it is not
expressly delivered in scripture, that the Apostles did Baptize Infants, nor
any express precept there found, that they should so do. Then if we should
grant more authority, and give greater credit to this Doctor, that in his
Judgment against his fellow Protestants before, he could probably deduce
this doctrine from scripture, which they deny, yet it is but his private
deduction and Interpretation, and perhaps some few others, which as before by
his grant binds us not to receive it, as the doctrine of baptizing infants
does. Of the perpetual virginity of our blessed Lady, to be a tradition, I
have entreated before. And Doctor Field adds thus: The fifth kind of
traditions Field supr. 239.
comprehends such observations, as in particulare are not commanded in
scripture, nor the necessity of them from thence concludes. Of this forte
many think the observation of the Lent fast to be, the fast of the fourth and
the sixth days of the week, and some other. The custom of standeing at prayer
on the Lords day, and between Easter and Whitsontide, was generally received
as delivered by Apostolic tradition, and when some began to break it, it was
confirmed by the Council of Nyce. And if Council Nic. can. 20.
to stand at prayers, at such times of the Lords day, Easter, and Whitsontide
was generally received as a Tradition delivered by the Apostles, then the times
themselves, not being either commanded, or directly exemplified in scripture,
must also be allowed by tradition. And yet the Sabbath day in the old law,
which was abrogated by this tradition of the Sunday, the Lords day (as he
names it) was so expressly commanded by scripture, that in order it is the
third of the ten chief commandments, and one of the first table belongeing
to the worshipp of God. Therefore a Tradition so powerable, as to give a
ceaseinge, to the express written word, law, and commandment, of God, must
needs be of equal power. And the Christians feast of Easter, likewise
crosseing with, and euacuateing the Pascha, of the law written, and without
scripture, only by the prerogative of Tradition, cannot be inferior,
especially seeing (as before) the Quartadec^mans, denyers thereof were
condemned as Heretics by the primative Church for that cause. And the like
reason is of the feast of Whitesontide, in the Church of Christ received by the
same Rule of Easter, only by unwritten tradition, yet clearly abolisheinge
and takeinge away the written law, and word of God in that behalf.

Further I argue thus: whatsoever is not a perfect, and complete Rule, and
Square in matters, and questions of Religion, without the help, and dyrection
of unwritten traditions, cannot be termed an absolute Rule in this kind: But
the scripture, and written word of God, by these Protestants is such:
Therefore by them no absolute and perfect Rule in matters of faith. The Mayor
is evidently true, in the light of nature: otherwise, one and the same thing,
in the same respect might be absolute, and not absolute, perfect and not
perfect, and two Contradictories might be true, which is impossible. The Minor
proposition is thus proved by D. Feilde, who speakeing of traditions Field l.
4. cap. 20. page 239.
unwritten, and yet allowed by him, has these words: The third kind of
tradition is that form of Christian doctrine, and explication of the several
parts thereof, which the first Christians receiving of the same Apostles, that
delivered to them the scriptures, commended to posterities. This may rightly be
named a tradition, for that we need a plain and distinct explication of many
things, which are somewhat obscurely contained in the scripture: Which is
sufficient proof, that tradition unwritten is the cause, why many things are
believed by faith grownded upon tradition not written, which the scriptures
could never warrant us to believe. For things obscurely handled, and not
plainly and distinctly explicated, which (as he says) is by tradition,
cannot be the formal object of faith, by any possibility; for seeing true,
certain, and undoubted Revelation from God, even by Protestants, is the
formal cause of beleeueinge, things obscurely contained, or taught, cannot
have this privilege: And yet by D. Feilds words, many things be in this
state, without the assistance of tradition, and yet firmly to be believed:
Therefore not the obscurity in scripture, but (to use his words) a plain and
distinet explication of many things by tradition, received by the first
Christians, from the Apostles, commended to posterities, is the formal cause,
and reason of beleeueinge such verities.

Now to draw to an end in this question of traditions, D. Field to his four
before acknowledged kinds of traditions, The holy scriptures, the Creed of
the Apostles, the form Field page 238. l. 4.
of Christian doctrine. and explication of the several parts thereof which the
first Christians receaueinge of the same Apostles, that delivered to them the
scriptures, commended to posterities, and the continued Field page 239.
practice of such things as neither are contained in the scripture expressly,
nor the example of such practice expressly there delivered, though the
growndes, reasons and causes of the necessity of such practice, be there
contained, and the benefitt, or good that follows of it: he adds the fifth
kind in these words: The fifth kind of traditions comprehends Field supr.
page 239.
such observations, as in particulare are not commanded in scripture, nor the
necessity of them from thence concluded, though in general, without
limitation of times, and other circumstances, such things be there commanded.
Of this sort many think the observation of the lent fast to be, the fast of
the fourth and the sixth days of the week, and some other. This supposed as
also the Field page 242.
same Protestant Doctors Rules before, to know true traditions, the consent and
doctrine of the Church, the most renowned for learning, the constant
Testimony of the pastors of an Apostolic Church, among which next to
general Field page 202.
Counsels bynding and commanding all, the Church of Rome is especially to be
obeyed, reverenced and respected, as most privileged from error: yt must
needs be evident by these Protestants, that Traditions whether delivered in
scripture, to be deduced from them, or to be received without scripture, are to
be adjudged for the Roman Church: for that before is proved by them to be the
true Church of Christ, the Pope of Rome to be the supreme, commanding Ruler
in it, that the scriptures received by it, are Canonical, and the vndowbted
word of God, and all true, and Iuridicall expositions, and deductions from
them are only for the doctrine of the same Church of Rome: And so their other
grounted Rules of general Counsels, and Learned Fathers, to be handled in the
next chapters, do also teach unto us, the same doctrines, by these
Protestants; for by their Judgment they may not, nor can proceed in such
b^sines, but by the holy scriptures, and true expositions, and deductions from
them, allreadie proved by these Protestants for the present Roman Church:
Therefore I conclude this question with this Arguments following.

Whatsoever doctrines in Religion, general Counsels, the highest binding and
commanding Rule and authority over all Christians, in the Judgment of
Protestants, have defined by the Bishops, and Fathers assembled in them, in
matters of Religion, by traditions, written or unwritten, are to be received
and embraced of all: But all, or the cheifest Articles in question, between
Catholics, and Protestants are directly concluded by the grounte of these
Protestants, by the Counsels, and Bishops, in them assembled, at Nyce the
second, the great Laterane, Florence and Constance, Basile, cited and allowed
for general Counsels by the Protestant Bishop of Winchester, D. Bilson, D.
Willet, D. Couell* M. Bills. Middlet. papist. ^9. 119. 120. 124. 125. Willet
synop. cont. 1. q. 7. Liniban. ap.
Parkes and others, in such manner as the present Church of Rome now teaches:
Therefore they ought so to be received, and embraced of all Christians, both
propositions are granted before, by these Protestants, or in these citations.
Therefore nothing remains to be proved in this Argument. And because these
Protestants Parkes page 137. 180. Couell def. of Hook. page 21. Parkes ag.
lymb. page 176. Willet Antil. page 178. etc. Abbot ag. Hill page 38. 48. 49. 51.
teach that those doctrines are not contained in, or to be proved by
scriptures, consequently they defined them by unwritten traditions, of equal
authority with scripture by D. Field before, being so adjudged, allowed, and
approved by that highest commanding sentence in the Church of Christ. But of
general Counsels I am to entreat in the next chapter. In the mean time I
vrdge only this one particular of the highest authority, and gouermnent in
the Church by tradition, as these Protestants assure us and I argue thus.

Whosoever defend, and teach that which they think to be the highest
authority and function spiritual in the Church, without which the word of God
cannot be truel^ preached, nor Sacraments duly ministered, the essential
things of the true Church, by the Protestants Religion, to be an unwritten
Tradition: needs must allow of unwritten traditions, necessary to salvation:
But these English Protestants case is such: Therefore they must allow
unwritten traditions, necessary to salvation. The Mayor proposition is
evidently true: and the Minor thus proved by them. The Protestant Author of the
offer of conference Offer of confer. page 12.
writes thus: The Bishop of Rochester with the consent and by the direction
(no doubt) of some of the cheifest Prelates has published his sermon preached
before the King at Hampton Court, the main drift whereof is to prove, that
the offi^e and c^lling of Bishops is a divine, and Apostolical ordinance. And
again in these words: unwritten ordinances, Page 34. sup.
as well as written or dyuine and Apostoli^ke, in the constitution of the
cheifest office, and ministry of the Church. D. Couell has testified the same
for himself before: and their Bishop Barlowe Barlowe Ser. Sept. 21. 1606.
before the King.
his words before the King, and with public applause are these of this
matter: First posuit actu he acted it by the hands of the Apostles, and so the
Episcopal function is an ordinance Apostolical he has enacted it for
succeeding posterity, and so it is a canon, or constitution of the whole
Trinity. It is Geographia agraphos, vnwrit^en Housbandrie* whereof there is no
written precept or Rule from Christ. Irenaeus calls it an Apostolical
tradition, manifest to all the world.

To these let us add some Protestant testimonies, how from the first creation
of the world, all Articles of Religion, for many hundreds of years, and
afterward many chief and necessary points thereof, were taught, and delivered
by tradition without scripture. And I will only cite their late work,
Historye of the world, much commended Histor. of the world lib. 1. page 180.
and approved among them. Of the practice and delivery of Religion thus they
write: That the Rule in general was paternall, it is most evident: for Adam
being Lord. Over his own children, instructed them in the service of God, his
Creator: as we read, Cayne and Abel brought oblations before God, as they had
been taught by their parent, the Father of mankind. Their sixth treatise or
Paragrah in that first book is Lib. 1. 6. page 78.
thus entitled: of the Patriarchs deliueringe their knowledge by tradition.
And write in these words: if we consider the curiosity and polecie of elder
ages, we shall find, that knowledge was the greatest treasure, that men sought
for, and which they also covered, and hid from the vulgar sort, as Jewels of
inestimable price, feareing the irreuerent construction of the Ignorant, and
irreligeous: so as whatsoever was attained unto, concerning God, and his
workeinge in nature, the same was not left to public dispute, but delivered
over by heart, and tradition, from wise men, to posterity, equally zealous, ex
animo in animum sine literis medio intercedente Dion. Areop.
verbo, from mind to mind without letters by way of Tradition or word of
mouth. And it was thought by Esdras, Origin, and Hilarious (as Mirandula
conceiueth) that Moses did not only upon the mount receive the law from God,
but withal secretiorem and veram legis enarrationem, a more secrett and true
explanation of the law, which says he, out of the same Authors, he
delivered by mouth to Iosuah, and Iosuah to the Elders: for to teach these
mysteries, which he called, secretiora, to the rude multitude, were no other,
quam dare sanctum canibus, to cast pearls before swyne. In succeeding times
this understanding, and wisdom, began to be written in Ciphers, and
Characters, and letters, bearing the form of beasts, birds, and other
creatures: and to be taught only to such, as served in their temples, and to
their Kings, and priests. Of the first the Cabala of the Jews was Page 79.
an imitation: This Cabala imports a law received by Tradition, and
unwritten. Cabala in Hebrew is Receptio in Latin, and a receiving in English.
If then such as would seem wisest in the use of reason, will not acknowledge,
that the story of the creation, or beginning of all things, was written by
Inspiration, the holy Ghost guiding the hand of Moses: yet it is manifest, that
the knowledge thereof might by tradition (then used) be delivered unto him, by
a more certain presumption, then any or all the testimonies which profane
antiquity had preserved, and left to their successors. For leaving to
remember, that Adam instructed Seth, and Seth his children, and Successors,
which cannot be doubted of, it is manifest that Mathusalem lived together with
Adam himself, 243 years, and Noah with Mathusalem no less then 500 years;
and before Noah died, Abraham was 58. years old: from whence this knowledge by
an easy and ordinary way might come to Israel, and so to Moses. And to clear
all doubts, and objections these Protestants prove unto us. That the very
binding, and obligatory precepts of God themselves, were thus delivered, and
observed, only by unwritten traditions. They entitle the 8.. of their second
book Histor. sup. libr. 2. cap. 4.. 4.
in this manner: Of the unwritten law of God, given to the Patriarchs by
tradition. And thus they add: The Patriarchs of the first age received many
precepts from God himself and whatsoever was first imposed by Adam, the same
was observed by Seth, who instructed Enos: from whom it succeeded to Noah Sem,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and Moses. Yea many particular commandments
afterward written, were formerly imposed and diliuered over by tradition, which
kind of teacheinge the Jews afterward called Cabala precept received from the
mouth of their priests and Elders: to which the Jews after the law written,
added the Interpretation of secret misteryes, reserved in the bosoms of their
priests, and unlawful to be uttered to the people. But the true Cabala was not
to be concealed from any: as being in deed the divine law revealed to the
Patriarchs, and from them diliuered to posterity, when as yet it was unwritten.

And entreating how after letters and writing was invented, and many revealed
mysteries so recorded, yet men must still maintain traditions unwritten, and
instruction from them, they exemplify in this order out of S. Jude his
Epistle, Josephus, Page 79. 80.
Origin, Tertullian, S. Augustine, Beda, Procopius, Gazaeus and others, that
Enoch did write di^ine things. And thus they add: it is probable that Noah had
seen, and might preserve this book. For it is not likely that so exquisite
knowledge as these men had was suddenly invented, and fownd out. And entreating
how the book of the battles Page 306. cap. 5.. 7.
with others of holy scriptures had been lost thus they write: it seems
probable, that such a book as this there was: and that the same should now be
wantinge, it is not strange, seeing so many other volumes, filled with divine
discourse, have perished in the long race of time, or have been destroyed by
the ignorant and malicious heathen Magistrate. For the books of Henoch,
howsoever they have been in later ages corrupted, and therefore now suspected,
are remembered in an Epistle of Thaddaeus, and cited by Origin, and by
Tertullian. That work also of the Patriarch Abraham, of formation, which
others bestow on Rabbi Achiba, is no where fownde. The books remembered by
Joshua c. 10. v. 13. and in the second of Samuel c. 1. v. 18. called the book
of Iasher, or Iustorum, is also lost. The book of Chozai concerning Manasse,
remembered in the second of Chron. 33. v. 18. and 19. of this book also lost
Hierome conceyues that the Prophet Isay was the author. The same mischaunce
came as well to the story of Solomon, written by Ahia Silonites; as to the
books of Nathan the Prophet, and to those of Ieedo the Seer, remembered in the
second of Chron. c. 9. v. 29. with these have the books of Shemaiah, and of
Iddo remembered in the second of Chron. c. 12. v. 15. perished: and that of John
the son of Hanain, cited in the second of Chron. c. 20. v. 34. also that of
Salomons, which the Hebrews write Hiscirim, of 5000 verses, of which that part
called Canticum Canticorum, only remains 1. Kings 4. 32. and with this
diverse other of Salomons works have perished, as his book of the natures of
trees, plants, beasts, fishes etc. 1. Kings 4. 33. with the rest, remembered by
Origin, Josephus, Hierome, Cedrenus, Ciccus Aesculanus, Picus Mirandula, and
others. Of Page 307.
these and other books many were consumed with the same fire, wherewith
Nebuchadnessar burnt the temple of Jerusalem. Hitherto this Protestant
discourse, of the necessity of unwritten traditions, not only before the
scriptures were written, but after, so many books of holy scriptures dictated
by the holy Ghost, having utterly perished. Except we will say (which God
forbid) that God revealed, and published in holy scriptures, so many needles,
and fruitelesse things: or else so many necessary and divine Revelations have
altogether been lost, and concealed from those that should believe, and
keep them.

CHAPTER VIII. WHERE THE HIGHEST, supreme, Judicial, definitive authority,
of general Counsels, is both proved to be such, by these Protestants: To
bind all Christians in matters of Religion, to approve the doctrine of the
Church of Rome, and condemn protestancie.
THE next Question is concerning general Counsels: of what authority, and
command they are, in controversies of Religion; and whether the Doctrine of
the present Church of Rome, or that of English Protestants, is proved, and
confirmed by them, in the sentence of these Protestants themselves. Toucheinge
their power, and commanding authority, in these causes, I argue thus.

Whatsoever in controversies of Religion, is the highest Judge, the only
remedy, to redress errors, has sovereign authority, is above others, to be
appealed unto, has authority to interpret scriptures, and to supresse all
them, that gaynesay such interpretation, and subject every man disobeyeing
such determinations, to excommunication, and Censures of like Nature, and
above all other Judgments is most to be reverenced, and respected, in the
opinion of Protestants, must also by them, be allowed for the supreme,
highest, and last, not to be appealed from, Judgment in this world, in such
questions: But by the testimony of these English Protestants, a general
Council is of these preeminences, in these matters: Therefore by them, the
supreme, most bynding, uncontrollable, and Judgment not to be appealed from,
or denied by any. The Mayor proposition is evidently true: for that which is
supreme, and highest, cannot be Inferior unto any: neither that which has
command, and authority over all, can possibly be under the controlement, and
correction of any, none being left to be superior unto it. The Minor is proved
by these Bilson Suru. page 82. Morton part. 2. Apol. page 340. l. 4. cap. 18.
Relat. cap. 47.
Protestants following. The Protestant Bishop of Winchester D. Bilson has
these words: The authority of general Counsels, is most wholesome in the
Church, and he cites S. Augustine to that purpose. D. Morton writes thus:
Concilium publicum est summus Iudex: a general Council is highest Judge. The
Protestant Relator of Religion names it the only remedy in such times of
controversies. D. Sutcliffe has Sutcliffe subu. page 119. Sutcl. ag. D. Kell.
page 41. 42. 102.
these words: general Counsels have sovereign authority in external
government. And thus again: False it is that we will admit no Judge, but
scriptures, for we appeal still to a lawful genenerall Council. We hold
all the Christian faith explaned in the six general Counsels. D. Field has
written thus: Bishops assembled in a general Field page 228.
Council have authority to Interpret scriptures, and by their authority, to
suppress all them, that gaynesay such Interpretation, and subject every man
that shall disobey such determinations, as they consent upon, to
excommunication, and censures of like nature. And Field l. 4. cap. 5. page 202.
(as before is cited) allows this sentence: We must reverence and respect,
the authority of all Catholic Doctors, whose doctrine and writings the
Church allows: we must more regard the authority of Catholic Bishops:
more then these, the authority of the Apostolic Churches: amongst them more
especially the Church of Rome: of a general Council, more then all these.

Now, to prove that general Counsels thus allowed by these Protestants, for
the highest, and irreuocable Judgment, cannot by their own doctrine, prove
their Religion to be true, and so consequently no Inferior authority Justify
their cause, I argue in this manner: whosoever by public decree, and
constitution, do condemn general Councelle, of error, and to be a fallible,
and deceatefull Rule, in Matters of Religion, and have no other means to find
the truth, cannot pretend their Religion to be infallibly true, as matters of
faith and revealed of God are, by such testimonies: But the English Protestants
are in this condition, concerning general Counsels: Therefore their Religion
neither is, nor can by their own proceedings, be warranted and proved by them
to be true. The Mayor proposition is evident: for no Judgment erroneous, and
fallible, can possibly make any matter, or question free from error, and
infallible: otherwise a thing might be effected and caused without a cause.
The Minor proposition is manifestly proved by these Protestants, in this order:
for they have before condemned all other Rules, which they have, of error, as
their parliament, Kings Censure, and all private Interpretations, and made them
subject, and controleable by general Counsels, as having authority over all
parsons: D. Feilds words of allowance after he had with others granted
general Counsels to be supreme, bynding, and commanding all be these: We
must obey without scrupulous questioninge, with all modesty of Field page 202.
mind, and reverence of body, with all good allowance, acceptance and repose
in the words of them that teach us, unless they teach us any thing, which
the authority of the higher and superior controlleth. Immediately before he
had allowed the supreme and highest Judgment to general Counsels, and the
next to the Pope, and Church of Rome. Then Protestants teacheing contrary to
superior, and higher authority in the Pope, are to be condemned by him. But
notwithstanding all this to make their cause desolate, and demonstrate, that
their Religion has no warrant of truth, and Infallibility, at all, Thus they
write of this highest Rule of general Counsels, even in their public
Articles of Religion: Articles of Relig. art. 21.
general Counsels may err, and sometime have erred even in things
pertayninge unto God. Wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to
salvation, have neither strength, nor authority, unless it may be declared,
that they be taken out of holy scripture. Therefore how truly, or certainly
soever general Counsels make decrees, and definitions in matters of faith,
they give no validity to Protestant Religion, if in themselves they should
approve it, for by their cited Article, their ordination has neither strength,
nor authority, as it is the decree of the general Counsels, but as it may be
declared, by a private Protestant writer, Prince, Parliament, or Convocation, in
their conceit to be taken out of scripture, and yet before they have told us,
a general Council commands all, all must submitt themselves unto it, and
all other their Rules be erroneous, and deceatefull. Therefore by these
Protestants neither general Council, nor any other Rule, assigned by them,
can by any possibility, prove their Religion true.

Further I argue thus: No society, people, or professors of Religion, which by
their own confession, neither have, nor by their proceedings can hereafter
have, or have heretofore had, any general Council, or means to assemble, and
call it, can in reason pretend it for their cause: But the state of Protestants
by their own confession is such: Therefore general Counsels cannot be
pretended for them. The Mayor proposition is evidently true: for esse and
being must needs in all things, go before operari, and workeinge by them For
as by nature nothing can be made of nothing, so that which wants being, and
is not, can produce nothing. The Minor proposition is likewise manifestly
true, for never any Protestant, nor altogether, so much as claim authority,
or Jurisdiction, in this matter, none among them pretending it further, then
their own particular temporal dominions, which all united together (never
like to be) are far to short, and unequal, to make a Council general,
which they say excludes none, especially of the great patriarchs of Rome,
Constantinople, Alexandria and Antioche, not one of them being for them, but
all with their whole precincts, limitts, subjects, and ditions against them, by
their own confession. To this I add the Censure of their own Protestant
Relator, in these words: The Protestants Relation of Religion cap. 47.
are severed bands, or rather scattered troops, each drawing diverse way,
without any means to pacific their quarrels, to take up their controversies.
No Prince with any preeminence of Jurisdiction, above the rest: no Patriarch
one or more, to have a Common superintendance of care of their Churches, for
correspondencie and unity: no ordinary way to assemble a general Council of
their part, the only hope remayninge ever to assuage their contentions. And
yet if they could have means for such a meeteing of Protestants, so few in
number, and weak in Jurisdiction, by their own grant, in regard of
Catholics, and other Christian Kingdoms, and provinces, different to them in
Religion, this would be far from the least show, and name of an universal,
and general Council, such as they allow, to Judge, and sentence in this
business. Neither can these men now deny the necessity of general Counsels,
having so much allowed them for supreme sentencer before, and appealed to a
general Council to be assembled. Neither may they compare their so desolate
estate with the primative Church of the first three hundred years: for
themselves have granted before, that a supreme, and commanding binding power
over all, was not only claymed, but lawfully and iuridically exercised, and
executed by the Popes of Rome in those times, in all parts of the Christian
world: and both power, and authority to approve, and reprove Counsels, was
belongeing unto them by publicly received Canon in those days. And herevppon
I argue in this manner, that general Counsels are for the doctrine of the
Church of Rome. Whatsoever Church in the primative time of Christianity, was
endowed with such privileges, that every thing was void, that was done
without the consent of the Bishop, and Ruler of it, and no Council could be
called, without his allowance, and at this present, has by the grant of
Protestants, a common Father, aduiser, and conductor, to end Iarrs,
displeasures, differences, to keep Religion in unity by Counsels, when no
other Church enjoys these immunities, must needs in all reason be said to be
warranted and defended by general Counsels: But the Church of Rome is by the
grant of Protestants in this Condition: Therefore warranted, and defended by
general Counsels* The first proposition is evidently true: for he that from
the beginning, had these prerogatives, to approve, or disprove, Confirm, or
inualidate Counsels, cannot be conceived to have ratified, or confirmed any
thing, against the immunities, and Common received doctrine of that Church, so
exalted, dignified, and privileged above all others of the whole Christian
world, and against his own supreme, and eminent Authority.

The Minor proposition is thus proved: first D. Couell shows, that an hundred
years before the Nycene Council in the year of our Lord 2^5 when there was
no Emperor Christian, to call Counsels, as Protestants would p^rsuade the
world, they did, and should; the Pope of Rome had this prerogative to call
Counsels: Therefore from the beginning by preeminence of his See, seeing there
had not been either general Council or Emperor to give it unto him. His
words be these: The synod of Rome called Couell ag. the plea of the Innoc.
page 110.
by Cornelius (Pope of Rome) against Nonatus, consisted of threescore Bishops
and many others of the clergy. Where we see Heresy condemned, and ^^ that
scarcetie of Bishops in those first days of Christianity, so great in
Council assembled by the Popes authority. Wherefore the Protestant Bishop of
Winchester D. Bilson D. ^orton his late ^ppeale, with others of his
Protestants, grant these propositions: Bilson true diff. page 66. 67. Morton
Appeal page 286.
The Canon of the primati^e Church made every thing void, that was done
without the Bishop of Rome. And again: The Canon of the primative Church
forbad any Council to be called, without his consent. Which being only
peculiar to him, and his See Apostolic, and from the beginning, must prove a
singular preeminence in him; and a power supreme in deciding Matters, and
doubts of faith. Therefore M. Ormerod wittnesseth, that S. ^eo, Ormer. pict pa.
page 44. Orm. sup. page 78.
that glorious Saint, and Doctor, taught that God did assist, and direct that
See, in decrees. And further he wittnesseth, in these words: To prove that
the Church of Rome has the preeminence over all Churches, Anacle^us (liueing
in the Apostles time, and Pope of Rome) alleges Matthew. 16. verse. 18. upon
this rock will I build my Church: and he expowndeth it thus super hanc
Petram (id est) super Ecolesiam Romanam, upon this rock: that is upon the
Church of Rome, will I build my Church. This of the testimony of that
Apostolic Pope, Saint, and Martyr And D. Downame granted, that Downame lib.
^. An^^chr. page 105.
S. Augustine that renowned Doctor, and Victor Vticensis were of opinion, that
to adhere to the Church of Rome, was a Mark of a true Catholic, in those
times. And tells us further, of a Page 107. sup.
Bishop fallen into Heresy, and after recanting it, in this order: He
swears to renownce his former Heresies, and to profess, and mayntayn^ that
faith and Religion, which the Bishop, and Church of Rome did profess. All
which proceedings of so great consequence, and preeminencie, testified by
enemies themselves, could never have been exercised by that Apostolic See,
with so great approbation of Saints, and Doctors, in the primative Church,
and best estate thereof, except supreme authority even in Counsels
themselves, as those Canons testify, and peculiar assistance as S. Leo taught
to be freed from error in decrees, and consequently not to be condemned by
general Counsels, whom it was to confirm or reprove, had been granted by
Christ unto it. Then this privilege and prerogative of that Church
Apostolic, being thus both supreme, and perpetual, it may not now without
Irreligeous Injustice, be denied unto it. And therefore the Protestant Relator
of Religion, having, as before, excluded his fellow Protestants from all hope
of comfort, and releife by general Council, adds immediately of Catholics
in Relation cap. 47. sup.
these words: The other have the Pope as a Commom Father, Aduiser, and
Conductor to all, to reconcile their Iarres, to appease their displeasures, to
decide their difference, above all things to draw their Religion by Consent of
Counsels, unity. And that this Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, is not only
over the Catholic and truly believing members of the Roman Church, but of
right belongs unto it, over all Christians in the world is proved before by
these Protestants themselves. Cap. 3. sup.


Further I argue thus: whatsoever Counsels define, or confirm the doctrine of
the Roman Church, and condemn Protestant opinions, defended against it, are
to be said to prove the Religion of Catholics: But diverse Counsels both
allowed by Protestants for general, and others in the primative Church and
confirmed even in the Judgment of Protestants, are such: Therefore the Religion
of the Roman Church is proved by them. The Mayor proposition is evidently
true. And the Minor thus is proved first concerning the first general
Council of Nice, D. Couell Couell ag. Burg. page 87.
has told us before from S. Hierome, that it received more books for
scripture then Protestants allow. M. Middleton says, it Middlet. papistan.
page 39.
taught the dignity of Rome over the West provinces, (at the least) and this
by old custom. How much more ample this custom was, is proved before: and
himself sufficiently insinuates, speaking in this manner. Papias Page 200. sup.
(liueing in the Apostles time) taught Peter's primacie, and Romish
episcopalitie. And D. Downame denies not, but the great general Down. l. 1.
Antich. page 36.
Council of Calcedon attributed to the Pope of Rome to be head of the Church.
Which he says is the greatest style. D. Field before has wittnessed, that
the third Council of Carthage confirmed Field sup.
in the sixth general Council, and wherein S. Augustine was present, receaueth
canonical scriptures, as the Church of Rome now does. D. Willet perceauing
Will^t Antil page 88. 89.
the primative Counsels to be so clear for the Church of Rome, that he could
not gloss them, with any resemblance or color of truth, calls the ancient
confirmed Counsels of Neocesarea, and Toletane the first, and the sixth
general Council before expressly allowed by D. Sutcliffe, the papal Church,
popery, doctrine in popery. And of the seventh general Council he writes
thus: The Greeks in a Willet sup. page 178. Middlet. papist. page 193.
general Council held at Nice, confirmed and allowed the adoration of Images.
M. Middleton speaks in this manner: peruseing Counsels, Fathers, and stories
from the Apostles, for^ward we find the print of the Popes feet. So that it
is evident by them, that from the very beginning, the doctrine of the Church of
Rome as occasion was, is allowed both by Counsels, Fathers, and Histories. And
this is the reason why in their Article of Religion Artic. 21.
before they have thus defined: general Counsels may err, and some times
have erred, even in things pertayninge unto God. Because from time, to time, as
cause was given, they have defined the truth of the doctrine of the Roman
Church, against them. And because, I may not in this breuiate repeat many
particulars, breefely I argue thus.

Diverse Counsels, allowed by these Protestants for general Counsels, have
confirmed, and allowed all, or the cheifest doctrines, which the Roman Church
now teacheath against Protestants, and condemned the contrary held by them,
even by their own testimony: Therefore by their own Judgment they are for
the Roman Church, and not for them. The consequence is evident, and the
Antecedent is thus proved by them. The Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury
writes thus: The Council of Constance was a general Council. D. Abbot ag.
D. Kill. page 38. 48. 49. 51. Bilson Willet apud Parkes page 137. 180.
So their Protestant Bishop D. Bilson, and affirms the same of the Council
of Basile. So does Doctor Willet, and grants the same of the Council of
Florence. And yet it is evident to all the world, that in these Counsels the
complete body of their Protestant Religion, was condemned, in their
predecessors, John Wickliffe, John Husse, and Hierome of prage; and the quite
contrary in all things, decreed, and concluded for the Church of Rome. For
further confirmation whereof, the Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury has
these words: the Council of D. G^orge Abbot sup. page 48. and 52.
Constance (before by him and others general) did define Wickliffe to be an
Heretic. Also Pope John the 23 in a general Council at Rome did condemn
him for an Heretic. Then by this grant, The protestancie of England, being
the same (as these Protestants tell us) which was taught be John Wickliffe, and
by these Counsels (general by their own assertions) condemned for Heresy,
must needs be Heresy: And the contrary doctrine of the Church of Rome,
orthodoxall, and Catholic; otherwise no doctrine ever at any time was or can
be hereafter lawfully condemned for Heresy, or iuridically approved, and
allowed for true and Catholic. For by their own Censure, the highest
Judgment in the Church, general Counsels have thus defined, and by their
doctrine before of the power of general Counsels bownde all Christians, under
penalty of eternal damnation, so to believe in these questions. And allthough
the general Counsels of the primative Church were assembled about other
Heresies, The Catholic doctrine of these points now impugned by Protestants,
then generally received, and not doubted of, as will manifestly appear in the
Chapter of Holy Fathers and Doctors of the primative Church: yet because the
first four general Counsels are by name received and authorized by
Parliament, both by Queen Elizabeth, and our Statut. 1. Eliz. and 1. Jacob.
etc. Sutcliffe ag. D. Kell. page 102.
present Sovereign: And D. Sutcliffe for Protestants has answered thus
before: we hold all the Christian faith explaned in the six general
Counsels. Then seeing the first six have got this great papal approbation:
first concerning the first general Council of Nice, all though Vitus and
Vincentius were presidents there for the Pope of Rome, yet it was further
confirmed by that Apostolic Conc. Romans tom. 1. council.
See in these words: Whatsoever is constituted in Nyce of Bithinia to the
strength of our holy Mother the Catholic Church by 318 Priests we confirm
with our mouth. We anathematize all them that shall dare to dissolve the
definition of the holy, and great Council, gathered together at Nyce. The
third Canon of that holy Council Conc. 1. Nicen. can. 3.
defines thus: Omnibus modis Interdixit sancta Synodus etc. The holy Council
has wholly forbidden, that it shall be lawful neither for Bishop, Priest, nor
Protest. Book of making and Order. Bish. Priests etc. An 3. Edw. 6. 1. El.
and 1. Jacob. and can* Jacob. can. 7. can. 8. Socr. 1. c. 8. Sozom.
Deacon, nor any other of the Clergy, to have with him any strange woman,
except perhaps mother, or Sister or Grandmother, etc. Where there be more
Orders of the Clergy, then Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, only allowed with
them, and none of these to have any other woman, or wife, but to live in
chastity. Their Answer that Paphnutius persuaded the Council, that wives
married before orders might be kept, out of Socrates and Sozomen is directly
against the words of the Council l. 1. c. 22. Epip. in Compend. Basil. epist.
17. in addit. Hier. in vigilant. epist. 50. ad Pammach. cone. Carthag. 2. can.
2. council 6. generca. 2. in Trull.
before cited, against S. Epiphanius that glorious Saint, and Father of the
Greek Church, S. Basile also S. Hierome etc. the second Carthagenian Council
confirmed in the sixth general Council allowed by D. Sutcliffe defineing thus:
Apostoli docuerunt and ipsa seruauit antiquitas etc. The Apostles taught and
antiquity it self observed: that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and those that
handle Sacraments, should be keepers of Chastity, and abstain from wives. And
yet these Protestants utterly deny the opinion of Paphnutius himself, as they
themselves cite him, for they Marry after Orders, which they confess both
Paphnutius, and the first Nicen Council denied to be lawful, together with
Socrates Sozomenus, and all Greek authority, and practice. In the fourtenth
Canon of that first general Council, the sacrifice of Mass, and Christ's
real presence in the blessed Sacrament, of the altar are taught in these
Council. Nicen. 1. can. 14.
words: This neither the Rule nor custom has delivered, that they which have
not power to offer sacrifice, should give the body of Christ to them that
offer it up. The sixth canon delivers by their Council. 1. Nicen. can. 6.
own Interpretation, that the Pope of Rome is supreme head of the Church of
England, and all others in this part of the world: And in truth of the whole
John Speed in Theatr. page ^06. council. Sardicen. can. 3. 4. 7. etc. Theodoret.
l 2. hist. c. 8* hist. trip. l. 4. c. 24. 2^. 15. 16. Conc. Constantinopol 2.
gener. can. 2. Can. 5.
Christian world, as is declared in the great Sardican Council general, and
otherwise binding this Kingdom, by our Bishops presence, and assent there, by
our Protestant Theater, where Appeals be granted to the Pope from any
Bishops, or Counsels themselves. And the second general Council held at
Constantinople makes manifest that the Nicen Council prescribed no limits, to
the Pope of Rome, but to other Patriarchs: and plainly deciareth, Episcopuin
Romanum habere primatum. That the Bishop of Rome is supreme. And by denying
this, to have been the decree of the Nicen Council, they prove the Popes
supreamacie from the beginning. For Socrates Socrates in histor. tripart lib.
4. cap. 9.
writeing how the Antiochian Council kept within twenty years of that of
Nyce. Was rejected, because not approved by the Sea of Rome, writes thus: Cum
vtique Regula e^clesiastica iubeat, non oportere praeter sententiam Romani
pontifi^is Con ilia celebrare. The ecclesiastical Rule commands, that
Counsels be not called, without the consent of the Pope of Rome. Therefore
their Bishop Bilson writes thus: The Canon Bilson true diff page 67 page 66.
sup.
of the primative Church forbad any Council to be called without the Bishop of
Rome his consent. The canon of the primative Church made every thing void,
that was done without the Bishop of Rome. Then what may we think of the
Protestants doeings in England, where his Authority Nicephor. Calix. histecel
in council. Ephesians. Prosper in Chron. An. 431.
is so despised? In the third general Council at Ephesus the then Pope of
Rome Celesti^^^, constituted Cyrillus Patriarch of Alexandria, to be president
for him. In the fourth general Council at Caleedon the cause of the Popes
supreamacie, is so clear, that D. Downame denies not, but it attributed
Downam l. 1. Antichrist. c. 3. page 36. council. Calcedon. sess. 8.
to the Pope of Rome to be head of the Church. In that Council in the 8.
session is thus registered: Omnes Episcopi clamauerunt etc. All the Bishops
cried out, next unto God, Leo (then Pope of Rome) has Judged. And the Pope
himself not being present in that Council, his legates gave sentence against
Dioscorus. The words of the Council be these: Et cum Council. Calced. Act. 1.
2. 3.
adhuc in sua permaneret pertinacia etc. And when Dioscorus continued in his
obstinacy, Paschasinus Bishop, and with him Lucentius Bishop and Bonifacius
Priest holding the place of the most holy and most blessed Archbishopp of the
Apostolic See, the elder Rome, Pope Leo pronownced sentence. A Bill Conc.
Calcod. Act. 3.
was preferred to the Council with this Title: Sanctissimo and beatissimo
universally Archiepiscopo etc. To the most holy, and the most blessed
universal Archbishop, and Patriarch of great Rome, Leo, and to the venerable
Synod of Calcedon. The Council. calced. Act. 1. ex nou. trans.
Church of Rome is there called, Caput omnium ecclesiarum: The head of all
Churches. And granted, if any Council was called without Authority of that
See: Nunquam rite factum est, nec fieri licuit; It was never rightly done, nor
lawful to be done. The Council writes to S. Leo then Pope, to confirm their
decrees. Council. Cacled. epistol. ad S. Leon Leo epistol. 53. 54. 55. 59. 60.
61.
And he confirms them, excepting the precedencie of Constaminople before
Alexandria, and Antioche. Further in this great general Council of 630.
Fathers more Ecclosiasticall Orders then Protestants allow are assigned, their
marriadge disallowed, Can. 6. Can. 11. Can. 15. Can. 23.
except lectors. For Monks or sacred virgins to marry is excommunication.
Likewise for temporal men to live in, and possess Monasteries, and Religeous
howses.

The fist general Council, held at Constantinople, wholly proceeds against
errors of that time, and handles nothing now in Controversy, yet both that,
the sixth general following, and all others before, are confirmed by Pope Leo
the second, in these Lee 2. epist. ad Consta^tin. 4. Imperat. seff. 18. council.
6.
words. Because, this sixth Council, has most fully taught the definition of
true faith, which the Apostolic See of blessed Peter does reverently receive,
Therefore we also, and by our office this venerable see Apostolic agreeably
and with one mind, consents unto, the things which by it are defined, and by
the authority of S. Peter confirms them, as upon a firm Rock etc. And
receiving all these six Counsels by name, and approving them, decrees, that
the Fathers in them assembled, are to be numbered, Inter fanctos Ecclesiae
Paires, atque Doctores, among the holy Fathers, and Doctors of the Church.
The same general Council writes Epist. 6. synod. ad Agathon 1. ppam.
to Pope Agatho, in this: We refer unto thee, standing upon a firm rock,
as to the Ruler of the chief See, of the universal Church, what is to be
done, yielding to the letters of true confession, sent from your fatherly
blessedness, which we acknowledge, Epist. Agasess. 4. synod 6.
as sent from the highest head, of the Apostles, written by divine instinct,
by which we have driven away the lately risen heretical sect of manifold
^rrors etc. In which so much applauded Epistle these words are contained,
concerning the Sea Apostolic of Rome: This is the Rule of true faith, which
both in prospiritie, and adversity, the Apostolic Church of Christ has
lively held, which by the grace of God, shall be proved never to have erred,
from the pathe of Apostolic Tradition, neither has shrouke depraved with
Heretical novelties, because it was said to Peter, I have asked for thee,
that thy faith sail not, and thou sometime converted, confirm the brethren.
Here our Lord has promised, that the faith of Peter should not fail, and he
admonished him to confirm his brethren, which all men know the Apostolic
Popes, predecessors of my meannes have allwaies confidently done. And because
these Protestants do so freely acknowledge, the Trullan Canons, to be the
decrees and Canons of this sixth general Council, allowed by them: first in
the second Canon are approved Can. 2.
so many provincial Counsels, and writings of the ancient Fathers, utterly
condemning Protestant Religion. In the third Canon is taught, how the custom
of the Church of Rome for an vnmatryed Can. 3.
Clergy is the true observation of the Ecclesiastical Canon therein. And for
the Church of Greece it self deposes Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons marrying
after Orders. And to show both the Ecclesiastical Orders which Protestants
condemn, and disable matrimonies of votaries against these men, thus they
decree. If any Bishop, or Can. 4.
Priest, or Deacon, or Subdeacon, or Reader, or Cant^r, or Ostiarius shall have
company with a womam dedicated to God, let him be deposed, as he that has
violated the spouse of Christ. But if a lay man do it, let him be
excommunicate. The manner of the consecrating and receiving Council. Carth. 4.
can. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12 Council. 6. gener. supr. can. 2. can.
6.
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolythite^, Exorcists, Lectors,
Ostiariers, Psalmists, Nonnes, Widows etc. Is contained in the 4. Carthagenean
Council, confirmed in this sixth general Council. Their 6. Canon defines
thus: Because it is said in the Canons of the Apostles, of those that be not
married, are promoted to the Clergy, only Readers and Singers may marry: we^
also observing this decree, that from henceforthe is he lawful for no
Subdeacon, Deacon or Priest to contract marriadge: and if he shall dare to do
it, ^et^ him be deposed. And concerning Bishops, thus begins the 12. Canon.
It altogether commands, that Bishops after they are Ordered, depart Can.
12.
from their wives. They receive, and allow those forms of Masses, that be
attributed to S. James the Apostle, and S. Bas^le, Can. 32.
and affirm them to be the true Authors of them. The monastical single life,
with the Can. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. 47. Can. 48.
Rules of Monasteries, are set down in diverse Canons. And when a Bishop is
chosen that was married, he is separated from his wife, and she put into a
Monastery, far from him: Vxor eius monasterium ingrediatur, proculab Episcopi
habitatione extructum. They define thus for lent: Visum est Can. 56.
etc. It seems good that the whole Church of God, which is in all the world,
should keep fast following one order and obstayne from eggs and cheese, as
from the flesh Creatures etc. Honor to the sign of the cross is thus
concluded: Vt ei p^r quam ab antiquo lapsu saluati sum etc. Seeing the
viuificant Can. 73.
Cross has showed unto us, that salvation, we ought to use all diligence to
give due honor to that, by which we are saved from our old fale. Whereupon
giving adoration unto it, both in mind, in word, and sense, we command
that the figures of the Cross, made by some on the ground, and pauement be
blotted out, least that which is the Trophee of Victory unto us, be injured,
by the treading of them that go upon it. The use and Reverence of holy
Imadges is sufficiently approved, when they call them, Venerabilium Imaginum
picturas, Can. 82.
The pictures of venerable Imadges, commanding the making, and use of them. In
the last Canon they give diligent, and long directions, Can. 102.
unto priests, how to behave themselves, in aduising and absoluing penitents,
in the Sacramen^ of penance. Therefore I may conclude, that Protestants
Religion is utterly condemned by general Counsels both of the primative
Church and latter ages: And consequently by all other Judgments, in the Church
of Christ: Because these men have told us, that all Bishops, Doctors, and
Professors of Religion, are bownde to follow the definitions, of general
Counsels.

CHAPTER IX. WHEREIN IS PROVED BY these Protestants, That the authority of the
primative Fathers, is to be received, and followed in matters of Religion: And
how it wholly proves, the present doctrine of the Church of Rome: utterly
condemninge all Protestant Religion.
THE authority, and value of the Testimony, of the ancient Fathers, and that
they taught and approved the doctrine of the present Church of Rome, even by
the grant of these Protestants is evident in the last Chapter: for being of
that opinion in general Counsels, and public assemblies, and sentences, to
which by their own consent, and subscription they submitted, and bownde
themselves, as to their lawful and commanding Rule, they could not, and might
not, teach and write otherwise in private, then in public themselves and
others had authoritatiuely concluded. Yet for a full satisfaction to
Protestants in all things, I will breefely entreat of these also, as they were
private writers: And first of their authority, I argue thus.

Whosoever ever allow in show, and words, among the Ignorant Readers, or
hearers of their writings, and sermons, the authority of the ancient, and
primative Fathers, to procure people to believe that their Religion, and
doctrine agrees with them, as men teaching and writing the truth, and to that
purpose do yield unto them great respect, and reverence, ought truly and
syncerely to believe and embrace their Religion: But these English Protestant
writers be such: Therefore they ought and are bownde to follow, and embrace
their doctrine. The Mayor proposition is evidently true: for as dissimulation,
crafty, and double dealeinges, to delude and deceive others, in all things is
a vile and abominable sin, against truth, charity, and Justice, so in
matters of Religion, wherein not the least equivocation of to save a man's life,
may be used, it must needs be an offense, most damnable, and deuelishe. The
Minor proposition is thus proved, by these Protestants: Their Protestant Bishop
D. Bilson writes thus: The Bilson suru. page 85.
ancient consent of godly Fathers, is with great care to be searched, and
fallowed of us, cheifely in the Rule of faith. And again: We rest upon the
Page 82. sup.
scriptures of God, upon the authority of the ancient Doctors, and
Counsels. And makes the same reason, with Vincentius Lirinensis, in these
Page 83. sup.
words: Least every man should wrest the scriptures, to his fansye, and suck
thence, not the truth, but the patronage of his error. And he adds, that S.
Augustine gave this respect, not only to general Counsels, but to the
testimonies of particular Fathers, Irenaeus, Ciprian, Hilarious, Ambrose,
Gregory etc. Chrisestome, Basil and others. D. Sutcliffe writes thus: We
Sutcl. subuers. page 87.
acknowledge the faith of the Fathers of the fourth, fifth, and sixth ages, and
adioyne our selves to that Church. And to credit his cause, and make his
readers believe, he consents with those Fathers, he speaks in this manner:
The Fathers in all points of faith, are for us (Protestants) Sutel. ag. D.
Kell. page 17.
and not for the Pope. D. Willer knowing of what little credit his bare word
is, even by his Protestants, as appears hereafter, would procure creditt to
his protestancye by damnable perjury, in these words: I take God to witness,
before Willet Antilog. page 263.
whom I must render account, etc. That the same faith and Religion, which I
defend, is taught and confirmed in the more substantial points, by these
Historians, Counsels, Fathers that lived within syne or six hundred years
after Christ. And further Page 264. sup.
thus: It is most notoriously evident, that for the grossest points of Popery,
as Transsabstantiation, sacrifice of Mass, worshipping of Imadges,
Justification by works, the supreamacie of the Pope, prohibition of Marriage,
and such other, they (of the Roman Church, have no show at all, of any
evidence from the Fathers, within syue hundred years of Christ. In all which
questions, among others, I am to prove the contrary be these Protestants
themselves hereafter, in their place. And in an other page of the same treatise
he writes thus: The ancient Fathers that lived within six hundred years of
Christ, are Willet Antil. page 271. K. speech in parl. An. 1603: conference at
Hampt. page 73.
against them. His Majesty's speech in parliament it this: I will ever yield all
reverence to antiquity: And in their conference: For my part, I know not,
how to answer the objection of papists, when they charge us, with novelties,
but to tell them their abuses are new. And he approves the days of
Constantine for a Rule, in Religion: saying: Constantine is not to be appeached
of superstition, but things then used may still be continued. Confer. page 69.
But now it shall appear, that these Protestant Doctors, and Ministers, are so
far from justifying these their oaths, protestations; and assertions, they be
enforced to acknowledge, those primative Fathers do allow, teach, and
approve the doctrine of the present Roman Church, which these men impugn and
persecute: and for that cause do not only deny the authorities of those
primative, learned, and holy Fathers, but call, and censure them, with
uncivil, barbarous, contemptuous, and Irreligeous names, and phrases. For
proof whereof I argue thus.

Whatsoever Sect, Religion, or People, being urged by such testimonies, as
Protestants have given for allowance of the Fathers authorities before, to
follow them, accept of their doctrine, and stand to their Judgment in these
controversies of Religion, do utterly refuse, and disallowe it, though his
Majesty should approve it, but say they are unfit Judges, in controversies of
divinity, that their Judgment is little to be respected, their testimony is
not worth answearing, there is no probability in their opinions, they are not
to be believed, deserve not credit, are not credible, to be admitted, are not
fit Judges, were to partial, are to be forsaken, contemned, and despised;
such men cannot with any appearance of truth, affirm those primative Fathers,
and Doctors, to allow, their Religion, and proceedings, or defend their cause,
by their Authorities: But these Protestants Doctors, and Ministers of England
be such: Therefore, those Fathers are not for their Religion. The Mayor
proposition is to manifestly true, and the Minor is proved also by these
Protestants themselves in this manner. M. Wotton expressly controlleth the
Kings sentence before, concerning Wotton def of Perk. page 15. 16.
the time of Constantine, and antiquity: his words be these: the trial of
Doctrine, is not to be fetched from the opinions and examples of men. And
again. It may not seem strange, if superstition were crept into the Church
before Constantines time. M. Ormerod scoffeth Ormerod pict. page 78.
at the authority and testimony of S. Anacletus, Pope of Rome, that lived in
the Apostles time and was a glorious Martyr, for Christ, because he proves
the supreamacie Middleton papistem. page 200.
of the Sea of Rome from the grant of our Savior. M. Middleton does the like,
by Papias, lyueing with the Apostles, for the same doctrine. M. Hull condemns
for like causes, allmoste all the blessed Popes, Hull Romans pol.
and Martyrs, Bishops of Rome from S. Peter the Apostle, with in the first
four hundred years, as shall be cited hereafter. D. Couell before has styled
S. Augustine with Part. 2. cap. Ceremonies. Wotton def. of perk. page 8. page
17. 9. 88.
the greatest commendation of learning: yet M. Wotton writes: We need not
fear S. Augustine, though against us. Eusebius is to be reprehended. There was
want of modesty, and truth also in the treatise of Hierome against
Vigilantius. The auntie^t Fathers spoke more like philosophers, then dyuines.
It is more then I know, that Gregory is a Saint. The Author of the Epistle to
the Philippians, (attributed to S. Ignatius) is an unfit Judge in Wotton sup.
page 118. 224. 422. 440. 462.
controversies of divinity. Tertullians witness is of small authority.
Damascen is not greatly to be respected O^igen is generally condemned.
Ignatius epistle to the Romans (approved by S. Hierome and Protestants also)
is a counterfaite Ignatius, for Page 340: Page 387. Page 467. Page 494. Page
495.
teaching meritt of good works. Ciprian is toe far carried away, since he
ascribes to alms daes the purgeing of sin. Irenaus Judgment is little to
be respected. Tertullians testimony is not worth answeareinge. Tertullian and
Origin may be joined together. Chrisostoms Rhetoric is better then his Page
499.
Logic, Hieroms authority in case of single life is not murch worth. Those
Christian Fathers which condemned Page 500.
Iouinian (as S. Augustine, Ambrose, Hierome etc.) dealt unchristianly with him.
The Page 519. Page 520.
authority of the ancient writers (Athanasius, Augustine, Hierome)
concludeinge a work of perfection from those words of Christ go sell all
etc. is Page 543.
not to be admitted. The authority of Clement of Alexandria and Augustine,
with the school Doctors is inferior to the Jews. Origin and Theodoret (whom
before he prefers before S. Page 545. 546. 584. 594.
Augustine) overthrow their own distinction. Lactantius though he were an
ancient Christian, yett in his verses (of worshipping the Cross) he shows
himself liker a light Poet, then a grave writer. And as he has used all the
learned Fathers of the primative Church, for teacheing the doctrine of the
present Church of Rome, so he exclameth as barbarously, and undutifully,
against all Christian Kings, of this, and other nations, for the same cause,
his words be these. The Wotton def. of perk. page 53. Ormer. pict. page 44.
Kings of England, and Scottland etc. were Sathanes Soldiers, when they were
of the Popes Religion M. Ormerod disalloweth S. Leo, because he taught that
God assisted the Sea of Rome in decres. For the like reason D. Downame rejected
the authority of many holy Popes, and Martyrs of that Church, in her best
days, when it was a Rule to all, according to his Majesty's Censure, Down.
lib. 1. Antichr. cap. 3. page 35. 36.
because (to use his words) Diverse Bishops of Rome before the time of Socrates
the Historian, contented to have the primacie, over all other Churches; and
that is the chief scope of many of their epistles decretall. Yet this was as
our King Conference at Hampt. page 75. Perk. problem. page 4.
has told us, when it was a Rule to all, and when no man might separate
himself from the doctrine of that Church. M. Perkins has written thus: The
Fathers have spoken many things incommodiously of holy things. The ancient
Fathers did Page 93. 94. Page 105. Page 184.
sin in the Invocation of Saints: yea, were guilty of sacrilege, such were
Paulinus, Fortunatus, S. Leo, S. Ephrem, S. Fulgentius, Petrus Damianus,
Prosper. The ancient Fathers sometimes speak inconueniently, of the Article
of Justification. Some of the ancient Fathers (as Tertullian and Cyprian) are
Montanists* or at the least do err filthely, for making Confirmation a
Sacrament. D. Sutcliffe Sutel. subu. page 5. Page 8. Page 9.
Who before made so much show of reverence to the Fathers, writes thus:
Metaphrastes is a lyeinge pedant, writeinge more lies then leaves: Bid
reports to many things by heareasy. Ado is a fabulous writer. The History
of King Lucius his conversion (testified by so many authorities) Page 19.
May well be parogoned, with the tales of King Arthure, Sir Tristram, and
Lancelot Du^acke. The Brittaynes have cause to detest the memory of Augustine:
That holy Saint syrnamed the Apostle of our nation for conuertinge i^. M.
Ormerod is not only at defiance with Ormer. paganop. page 44.
all Fathers, for teaching that Christ descended to comfort the Patriarchs,
and Fathers dead before him, but compares, the Article and belief of Christ's
descending into Hell, for such purpose, to the fable of Hercules, feigned to go
thither, and fetch from thence Theseus, Pe^ithous and Cerberus, the great
dog of Hell, with three heads, as the poets Imagine. M. Middleton Middleton
papistom. page 40.
writes thus: The credit of men is but a sandy foundati^n to build upon:
Meaning the holy primative Fathers of the Church: and scoffingly telling, that
great Saint and Page 27.
Doctor, S. Epiphanius, that he lost the book of Page 45.
the Apostles Constitutions out of his bosom, which he cited Haeres. 45. he
adds of him thus: I must crave leave to say of Epiphanius: many assertions
he counted for Heresies, which were not Heresies: many assertions he counted
not Heresies, which are Heresies: And all this, because he condemns diverse
Protestant opinions of Heresy, and justifies the doctrine of the Church of
Rome, against them. Against S. Middleton sup. page 49.
Dionysius the Areopagite, for teaching prayer for the dead, he scoffeth in
this manner: Denis his aunsweare is shortheeld, ready to fall back. When S.
Ambrose approves Christ's real presence in the blessed Sacrament, and
Transsubstantiation: he writes of him thus: Page 61. Page 64.
he is gultie of presumptuous, and desperate blasphemye. At S. Chrysostom he
scoffeth, and teaches him, how he should speak, because he teaches the
doctrine of prayer for the dead. And uses this mock against him, calling
Page 66. sup.
it an apostolical Tradition: well might Chrysostom say, the Apostles knew
what profit redownded to the dead, by prayer for them: for himself knew not.
And thus in general: The Fathers sometime went beyond the bounds of
sobriety, in the doctrine Middlet. sup. Page 133. Page 134.
of chastity: The Fathers are not fit Judges to determine either of Priests
marriage, or vawes of chastity. And for this doctrine, thus he writes of S.
Ambrose: That man has the Apostaticall dragon, the devil dwelling in him.
And, so he will send Midd. page 135.
Ambrose away with his Quietus est. Chrysostom is so hot in his
amplifications, that he forgetts himself. Page 137.
Chrysostom in his vehemency, goes beyond Page 138.
measure in reprehendinge: and the Christians of his time in their lightness
went beyond measure in vowinge. The Canons which Epiphanius cites against
Priests mariadge, or married men to be made Priests, Middleton sup. Page 141.
Page 143. Page 144. Page 156. Page 161.
are apocryphal. He was two partial affected in this matter. The ancient
Fathers did err. Augustine was a most subtle disputer: yet a quick wi^^
soonest falls into contradiction. Neither is Hilarie (howsoever the Romish
Church has made him a Saint) over hastily to be received. Irenaeus, Hilary,
and Epiphanius, (for teaching free will) are Pelagian Page 179. Page 180.
Heretics. We have hard before, what great respect in words the Protestant
Bishop of Winchester, gives to the ancient Fathers, yet by his own
confession, his own Protestant Brethren charge him, with the contrary in these
words: all this Bilsons sur^^. page 84.
great shew^ of cleaving to the Fathers Judgment, is but colored in you. For
in other points again we see, when they speak not to your liking, the case
is altered. You forsake the ancient, and learned Fathers. You contemn and
despise them. You affirm Page 85.
against all the Fathers. You little regard the sownde doctrine of the
Fathers. And the same Protestant Page 98.
Bishop D. Bilson tells us, that these Protestants which have thus written of
him, do for themselves less (if it may be) regard those ancient learned
Fathers: for writing Bilson sup. page 98. page 274. 275. prefa. to the King^
sup.
against them, in this kind, he intituleth one Treatise thus: The defenders
disdain of the Father, Others: wrested, and leudely falsyfied. And again.
They cond^mne all the Fathers, Greek, and Latin, as conspiring against the
truth, and perverting the scriptures. Therefore I conclude this Argument, by
these Protestants, that the primative Fathers be not for their Religion, but
wholly for the doctrine of the Church of Rome. And hereupon, (though needeles)
I make a new argument against them, by themselves, in this manner: whosoever to
make their Readers believe, that the Fathers be for their cause, do falsefye
them, corrupt, indignely and injuriously handle them, clipp, shamfully corrupt
them, greatly abuse, untruly allege, misquote, mayme, mistranslate, notably
corrupt, Father falsehoods upon them, pervert their true Arguments, disdain,
wrest, and lewdely falsefy them, cannot justly pretend, that they be for their
Religion: But these English Protestants are by their own testimony, in this
case: Therefore they cannot justly pretend, that the Fathers be for their
cause. The Mayor proposition is evidently true. And the Minor is sufficiently
proved before, by D. Bilson and other Protestant writers. To which I add
affirmed, and publicly with privilege published, against D. Willet, who
before has so damnably sworn, that the Fathers be for the Religion of
Protestants. Park^^ against Lymbomastix p. 170. page 151. def. of 3. test.
sect. k. k. k. def. of 1. and 2. test. p. 2. 5. sect. 18. 21. page 181. 166.
101. 100. def. of 2. place sect. 10. 11. 20. def. of 3. test. sect. 7. 12. 15.
16. etc. page 7. 10. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. def. of 3. test sect. 16 page
28. def of 1. 2. 3. test.
M. Parkes in his book dedicated to the then Protestant Archbishop of
Canterbury writes of him in these words: He condemns all the ancient
Fathers, for dreamers. Condemns all the ancient Fathers, for dreamers.
Condemns all the Fathers. He condemns all learned and godly divines, for
enemies of Christ's Cross, and blasphemers of his passion. He instifieth most
wicked Heretics, and condemns most holy Fathers. He falsely translateth,
corrupts, indignely handles, greatly abuses, untruly alleges,
misquoteth, mayneth, mistranslateth, much abuses, notably corrupts, etc. S.
Augustine, Origin, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Leo, S. Hierome, Tertullian,
S. Bernard, etc. Fathereth falsehoods upon them, peruerteth their true
Arguments, corrupts their words. He teacheath us further, that he belyeth
Bellarmine, and Catholic writers, deceaueth the world. He straungely
peruerteth, belyeth, depraueth, abuses, much abuses, falsefyeth holy
scriptures. And the same D. Willet has written, and published with priuiledg
also, as foul dealings, or more vile in his Judgment, and the Censure of the
Protestant Approuers of his book, of the same English Protestant Author. The
particulars are toe many, gross, and tedious, therefore I will only set down
the Title of his book, to give some conjecture of the contents in this kind.
It is styled in these words. Loidoromastix, that is a scourge for a Willet in
Lo^doromastix in the Title of it.
Rayler: containing a full, and sufficient Answer, unto the vncristian
Raylings, slanders, untruths, and other injurious imputations, vented of late
by one Richard Parkes, Master of Arts, against the Author of Lymbomastix,
wherein three hundred Raylings, errors, Contradictions, falsifications of
Fathers, corruptions of scripture, with other gross ouersights, are observed
out of the said uncharitable discourse by Andrewe Willet Professor of
divinity. Hither to the only Title of that Book, published by a Professor of
divinity, as he terms himself, and privileged by public allowance, of
English Protestants. Therefore there is no show, either of probability, or
possibility, that the authority, and testimonies, of the holy, learned, and
ancient Fathers, of the primative Church, should be for the Religion of these
Protestants: when by their own writings, it is directly condemned by them,
whether we examine their works and authorities in particular, or when they
were assembled in general, or others generally confirmed Counsels as
demonstration is made by their own Assertions. And by this it is evident, by
these Protestants themselves, that their so termed Religion, is Heretical,
impious and damnable, and for such condemned in their own Judgments, by all
general and approved Rules, and growndes in divinity, The holy scriptures,
sacred traditions, The Church of God, decrees, and sentence of the highest, and
all Apostolic Sees, general, and other approved holy Counsels, learned
Fathers, and whatsoever can be pretented, to be a Judge in these causes. So
that not any one true Christian Consistory, or Censure can be truly claymed,
or cited for justifying of their proceedings. Which is as much as can, and more
then needs to be alleged, for condemninge of Heresy, or any error in
Religion. Yet to leave nothing omitted, to satiffy these Protestants, in these
questions, and recall them to the unity of the true Church of Christ, or from
their sauadge cruelty of persecution. I will in the next, and second part of
this work immediately following, make like demonstration by their own
writings, and authorities, published, allowed, or received among them, since
the beginning of the Reign of our Sovereign, King James, in England. That in
all the cheifest Controversies, of this time, in particular, The doctrine of
the present Church of Rome, is only orthodoxe, Catholic, and true: And the
Contrary of these Protestants, erroneous, Heretical, and damnable.

Here ends the first part of the general grownds in Religion: and ensues
the second, of the particular Questions, between Catholics, and Protestant,
of England.
THE SECOND PART OF ENGLISH PROTESTANTS RECANTATION IN MATTERS OF RELIGION.
CHAPTER I. WHEREIN BY THE PRESENT English Protestant writers, is proved
against Protestants, and their doctrine, That the predestination of particular
men, cannot without particular Revelation, be certaynely known: much less as
a matter of faith.
AS among all Questions of Religion, the eternal predestination of men to be
saved, being from eternity, in God, can have none before it in duration; So in
order let us first entreat, and begin from thence: how fare and certainly it
may be known of particular men's preordination to glory, in this world.

The holy Council of Trent, aduertising all men with S. Paul, to work their
salvation with fear and trembling, has thus defined of Philipp. 2. v. 12.
Conc. Trid. sess. 6. can. 12.
this secrett. So long as we live in this mortality, no man ought so much to
presume, of the hidden mystery of Gods Predestination, that he certainly
determine himself to be in the number of the predestinate, as though it were
true, that he which is justified, could either syn no more, or if he shall
syn, ought to promise to himself a certain Amendment: for except by special
revelation it cannot be known, whom God has chosen. The like doctrine it
concludes against the predestinaries of Can. 15. 16. sup.
this time, in the 15. and 16. canons, of the same session.

The contradictorie of which Catholic position, has been so fare and
generally defended by Protestants: That it is as the Sea cap. 2. infra.
principal and cheifest grownde of their Religion: That as a man is justified
by faith, so this faith is that, which assures him, that he is just, in grace
and favor with God, that he cannot (at the least finally or totally) fall
from grace: And so consequently that he knows as a matter of faith, that he
is both just, and predestinate: as will sufficiently appear in the next
chapter by English Protestants since his majesty's entrance into England, the
short time which I have limited to dispute against them by themselves; what
inconveniences, abuses, and iniquities, this invention has brought into the
world, will in some sort appear in this chapter, by their own writeings: and
is so much known to all men, by lamentable experience, that I need not to
repeat it in this place. Wherefore I will only confute this Protestant
opinion by the present English Protestant writers, and thereby demonstrate the
Catholic doctrine of the cited sacred Council, to be most true, and
religious, in this point, even by their sentence.

Then first, concerning this proposition, I argue thus No doctrine or opinion,
which is a desperate doctrine, contrary to divinity, and to the true doctrine
of predestination, is or can be the true doctrine in this question: But the
predestinarie Protestant doctrine, with assurednes of faith (without particular
revelation) that a man shall be saved, is thus desperate, contrary to
divinity and to the true doctrine of predestination: Therefore it neither is,
nor can be the true doctrine.

To deny the Mayor or first proposition, is blasphemy: because God, infinite,
and immutable wisdom, cannot possibly command, or reveal for truth, any
such error, Therefore the first proposition being evidently true, The Minor or
second proposition is authoritatyuely with English Protestants, concluded
against this predestinarie opinion in the public Protestant Conference at
Hampton Court, before his Conference at Hampton court page 29.
Majesty and with his allowance, in these words. Very many in these days,
neglecting holiness of life, presume too much of persisting in grace, layeing
all their Religion upon predestination, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved,
which is a d^sperate doctrine, contrary to good divinity, and the true
doctrine of predestination, wherein we should reason rather asce^dendo, then
disce^dendo, thus: I live in obedience to God, in love my neighbor; I follow
my vocation etc. Therefore I trust that God has elected, and predestined me
to salvation. Hitherto the consent of this English Protestant Conference: from
whence it is manifest, that no certanitie, much less by faith, but only a
moral trust, or hope, according to the good life of man, can be had without
revelation, that we are predestinate.

Secondely supposing, which with the scriptures all Protestants grant, that
without grace by Christ, and persisting in it, no man can be saved: I Argue
thus. No man that is uncertain, whether he sall fall from grace, can be
certain with certanitie of faith, that he is predestinate, or shall be saved:
But without particular Revelation all men, Protestants, and others, be
uncertain, whether they shall fall from grace: Therefore no man without
particular revelation, is or can be certain, he is predestinate.

The Mayor proposition is certainly true. And his Majesty in the same cited
Protestant Assembly, citeing the place of S. Paul before related, against the
certainerie of predestination, concludes the Minor or second proposition thus.
We may full from grace: Conference at Hampton sup. page 30.
and adds: the doctrine of predestination should be handled with great
discretion: which he insinuates the Protestants have not done, and speaks
plainly of them in these words: The Inferring of the necessity of standing
and persisting in grace is a desperate presumption. The like is taught more at
lardge in other places of that conference: where it is also Confer. sup. page
41. 42. 43.
acknowledged, that present Justification, or justice is lost, by any mortal
or grievous syn: which to be frequently committed by Protestants will appear
hereafter by their own testimonies.

My third Argument is this: No doctrine that is pestilent, and scandalous, to
all Churches, is, or can be true doctrine: But this predestinarie doctrine is
such: Therefore neither is, nor can be true. The Mayor Relation of Religion
cap. 45.
is evident. The Minor is proved by the Protestant Relator of Religion, who
tells us, that Protestants in Germany will rather return to the Church of
Rome, then admit this Protestant point of doctrine, which they call
predestinarie pestilence: and adds, that this with some others Cap. 48.
of their opinions, has exceedeingly scandalized all other Churches.

My fourth Argument is this. Nothing that is not revealed of God, can be
believed with certainty of faith, or with faith: But particular men's
predestination is not revealed of God: Therefore it cannot be by faith believed.

The first proposition is evidently true: because Gods revelation, or to be
revealed of him is the formal object, or cause of belief, and true faith. The
second proposition is thus proved, by D. Couell; who entreating Couell def. of
Hooker page* 59.
of this great question, has these words. A curious searcheing into that
will, which is not revealed, serves but to breed a contempt, of that, which
is revealed unto us. Man desires rather to know, then to do; nay to know,
even those things, which do not concern him, rather then to do that, for the
neglect whereof, he must give an account. From hence comes it to pass, that
what the schools have curiously sought out, concerning the nature of Gods
will: the pulpitts, nay the stalls of Artificers, have undertaken to decide
them all. And Page 62. sup.
prosecuteing this question, having cited and approved the Catholic
distinctions of the will of God, into antecedent, consequent, of Gods good
pleasure, and the sign of it: into a will absolute, conditional etc. he
concludes thus: God wills all men to be saved. Who therefore that they are
not it is not his decree, but their own fault. Certainly says S. Ambrose,
he wills all men to be saved, if they will themselves: for he that has
given a law to all, doubtless has excluded none. If any Protestant will
answer, (as Wotto^ def. of Perkins page 467. etc.
many of them unlearnedly hold.) That deduction from scripture, as they
suppose makes a matter of faith. I tell him with all learned dyuines, and in
true divinity, that nothing uncertain, doubtful, or fallible, can possibly
make a matter of faith, which must of all assents in this world be most
certain. But every deduction from such supposed scripture, especially where
neither the matter, man, his name, parson, or any thing of him in particular
is revealed, must needs be uncertain, doubtful, and fallible: Therefore it
cannot make a matter and conclusion infallible and of faith. For the
conclusion, in no syllogism can be more certain, then the premises, and
fallible humane deduction, from, and by which it is concluded: But according to
the Rule of Logic, semper sequitur debilioreni partem; always follows the
weaker part. And the Mayor is evident in it self before. The Minor is proved
thus by Doctor Field: private Interpretation (or Field page 226. Couell def. of
Hooker page 8.
deduction) binds not. But true faith binds all men. And D. Couell
expressly writes the same, which I have answered, and in these words.
Doctrines deryued are not the word of God. But nothing, but the word of God,
written or nor written, as is evident, makes a matter of faith even by
Protestants.

The first Argument is framed thus: whatsoever is only known of God, cannot
be known, much less with certainetie of faith by particular men: But
particular men's predestination is only known to God: Therefore not to
particular men, much less with certanitie of faith. The Mayor proposition is
evidently true, the word only, being exclusive, and denying all others. The
Minor proposition is thus testified, by D. Couell in express words. Couell
def. of Hooker page 63. and page 108.
God only knows who are predestinate. And in an other place, thus: Men's
predestination unto life none can know, but God only.

The sixth Argument is: No doctrine that draws from consideration, what
concerns man's salvation, and brings contempt of good works, is true: But
this predestinarie opinion is such: Therefore not true.

The Mayor is evidently true, even in the doctrine of English Protestants,
making in Artic. 12.
their square it self of their Religion* good works to be necessary to
salvation, and the consideration of it also. The Minor is thus proved by D.
Couell. If all men rightly considered Couell def. of Hooker page 107. 108.
in those actions, that concern man's salvation, how far we are tied, not
only in obedience, but for use, to those things that are means to effect the
some: few would have been so carlessely resolute, to contemn good works,
through an opinion of eternal election. By which sentence he does not only
deny the Protestant certanitie, and security of predestination, but plainly
teaches, that good works are the means to effect salvation. Then as the end
cannot be obtayed, without the means, that brings unto it: so it cannot be
predestinate without such means, except God could, or should predestinate
things to be, otherwise then they be, or can be, which is impossible.

The seventh and last Argument in this question, may be this. Noe man Ignorant
of that whereupon predestination, or the certain knowledge thereof depends,
can certainly know himself to be predestinate: But all Protestants are
ignorant of that; which is, whether they shall live and dye in good works:
Therefore noe Protestant is certain of salvation.

The Mayor is evident: And the Minor proved Couell. sup. page 108,
by the same Protestant Doctor in these words: Eternal election includes a
subordination of means; without which we are not actually brought to enjoy
what God secretly did intend: and therefore to build upon Gods election, if
we keep not ourselves to the ways, which he has appointed for me to walk
in, is but a false deceauing vanity: for all men notwitstanding their
preordination unto life (which none can know but God only) are in the
Apostl^s opinion, till they have embraced the truth, but the children of
wrath, as well as others. And to manifest that this was the doctrine of the
primative church, by which these Protestants say they will be Judged; D. Morton
writes Morton Apol. part. 2. page 223.
in these words. Veteres Patres fere omnes arbitratisunt, praedestinationis
causam fuisse praeuisa hominum opera. All most all the ancient fathers did
think that the good deeds of men foreseen, were the cause of predestination.
And Mr. Wotton writes thus: we acknowledge that the fault is wholly Wotto^
def. of Perkins page 86.
in cuery man, that is not saved. Therefore I conclude this question, that even
by English Protestant Doctors, the doctrine of the Roman Church in this is
true: and that of the predestinarie Protestants is false, erroneous, and
damnable.

CHAPTER II. PROVES BY THE SAME Protestants of England: That only faith (much
less the assureing faith of Protestants, neither does, nor can Justify.
NEXT unto this Question of predestination, let us entreat of that, which
has most and nearest connection unto it, man's Iusification in this life:
whether it be by the supposed assureing faith of Protestants, that a man is
justified and righteous as thy commonly call it, or otherwise, by these
writers. Of which matter the Council of Trent first for Catholics defines
thus: It is necessary Codcil. trid. ses. 4. can. 9.
to believe syns neither are forgiven, neither were at any time forgiven, but
freely by the mercy of God for Christ. And then adds concerning the
presumptuous faith of Protestants (which it had before confuted) in this manner.
If any Can. 12. sup
man shall say, that justifying faith is nothing else, but a confidence of Gods
mercy, remitting sins for Christ, or that by that only confidence, we are
justified: let him be Ana^hema.

Now that the ordinary Protestant opinion has been and still is, a man to be
justified by this only kind, of their supposed assureing faith, or
confidence: as also that a man justified cannot totally or finally fall from
grace, is manifestly known unto all acquointed with their doctrine, and this
is often repeated and allowed in their recited conference at Hampton court. And
these present Protestant Confer. page 41, 24. 30. Wotto^ def. of perk. page
129. 134. 279. 280.
writers with others. Mr. Wotton writes thus: it is out of doubt, that
assurance of salvation by says may and must be had. And again. Falling from
faith is impossible, And further thus. We hold it as impossible to lose
charity, as to lose faith. He which has not both faith and charity to the
end, never had them. Mr. Powell speaks Powell. l. Antichrist. page 508. 712.
and 476. Page 712. and 518. sup.
thus: Every one that is elect, is and ought to be assured of a full remission
of his syns. The faithful ought to be assured, they shall have eternal life,
and he which denies it, does not believe his Creed. To affirm that a man
which is Justified, may fall from grace and be damned is not to believe the
Creed. It is blasphemy to say, a man truly justified and sanctified, may
totally and finally fall from grace. The Protestant Catechism printed in the
year of Christ 1609. Catechis. An. D. 1609. page 35. Maxey Sermon. 8. Ianuar.
1604.
thus defines faith: Faith is a full assurance of my salvation in JESUS CHRIST
alone.

This supposed, first I argue against these Protestants (and it is granted by
Mr. Anthony Maxey the Kings Chapleyne in his sermon before his majesty) in
this manner. If a man is, or may be suer, that he is just or instified, and
certaynely in grace, and cannot totally or finally fall away, he is also and
may be suer that he is predestinate: Because noe man perseuering and dyeing in
grace, is or possibly can be damned: But noe man (as is proved by Protestants
in the former chapter) without particular revelation, is or can be certain,
that he is predestinate: Therefore neither is, or can be so certain of his
Justification, and perseverance, if he were Just, and could be so assured of
yt.

Secondly the same doctrine of the not certainty of Justification is confirmed
and proved by Protestants, in their recited Conference, Confer. sup. page 29.
30. Articul. 17.
alleging from their book of Articles, that the promises of God in scripture
touching these things are general. From which I argue thus: noe promise of God
in general does make a revelation particular to any private parson: But all
promises of him, of these things, are only general: Therefore they can make
noe revelation in particular, or cause such faith of any private parson. Both
propositions are proved before, and are evidently true: For noe private man by
his humane deduction uncertain. And subject to error, can possibly apply
general things unto himself, with such assurednes, and infallible certainetie,
as is, and of necessicie must be in faith, founded upon the immediate
Revelation and word of God, which by noe power can be uncertain or doubtful.
For as these Protestant writers have assured us before: Private Interpretation
or Part. 1. cap. Interpret. of scriptures.
deduction, as it is not the word of God, so yt binds no man unto it.
Therefore it is not true faith, but a most certain folly, for D. Raynolds, D.
Sutcliffe, D. Field, D. Morton, or any Protestant to believe, that he in
particular is Just, shall so persevere, or is predestinate. When not so much
as the least memory, or mention of their particular predestination, Justice,
or preseuerance, or name it self, is once remembered in any Revelation or word
of God, the only Rule and ground of faith.

Again these Protestants that ascribe Iustisication to their supposed
assureing faith, do also teach, that such faith and good works Articl. An.
Dom. 1562. confirmed in Can. Reg. can. 5. Conference sup. page 41.
cannot be separated. So they have agreed in their reconfirmed canons. And also
that every grievous syn depriueth of grace, and justification. Then that this
opinion of Protestants is not true in this point, I further argue in this
manner. All Protestants, or others whatsoever, that be assured by faith, that
they are Just, must likewise be as certainly assured, that they have good
works, live in obedience to Conference page 29.
God, love toward their neighbor, follow their vocation, and are, void of
all grievous sin, as they have tanght us before: But no Protestants will or
can truly affirm so of themselves: Therefore they neither are, nor can be
certain in such manner, that they are Just. The Mayor is evident; And for the
Minor all men know they are in the contrary condition and state, that is in
great and generally grievous sins. And themselves freely and truly acknowledge
their most wicked and sinful lives. First D. Couell tells us plainly, that
charity Couell modest examination page 144.
fails in the Protestant Clergy. Then that Protestant Clergy cannot by
their own doctrine be just or justified by faith, for iustifieing faith, as
they teach, is not, where charity fails, or is not. And yet it is the
Protestant clergy which cheefely and principally patronizeth and defends
that doctrine of only faith assureing to Justify, and the others but as
taught and instructed by them. Further, those Protestants that write against
the puritans, as D. Bilson Protestant Bishop of Winchester, D. Couell, D.
Sutcliffe, M. Ormerode, M. Powell, M. Parkes with others commonly and
undoubtedly esteem them, either as Heretics, Schismatics, or such as cannot
be in state of grace: and the Puritans condemn as generally and absolutely the
Protestants of the like, and other great damnable syns, as I have in other
places entreated, and is known unto all that have perused their writeings.
Therefore I will only at this time cite the testimony of M. Hull, who speaks
generally of all Protestants, Puritans or not Puritans: his words be these:
These are the days Hull Romes polocies, in prefat.
whereof our Savior Christ and his Apostles so long ago fore prophesied,
wherein charity should wax cold, and faith should scarce appear, wherein
man should be slidebacks from Christ, and Apostals from his true Religion,
wherein they should be lovers of themselves, coue^ous, cursed speakers,
disobedient, unthankful, unholy, truce breakers, false accusers, despisers of
them that are good, Traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasure, more
then lauers of God, having a show of godliness, but have denied the power
thereof; yea wherein men are become Users, Newters, Temporisers, Atheists, the
earth, the stable earth (he there alludeth to an earth quake lately chaunceing
as he cites) begins now to quauer, and to shake, as being over burdened with
our syns, and to weak to bear the weight of our Iniquities. Hitherto this
Protestant preacher, in his more then uncharitable book against Catholics,
witnesses of Prot. proof-part. 1. c. 9. cap. 8. etc.
his own brethren in Religion, the English Protestants. Of the more then
irreligeous and profane behavior of their clergy of English Protestants, in
abuseing, falsefieing, and peruertinge the holy Scriptures, Fathers, Councels,
and all Authorities for Religion, I have for this point sufficiently entreated
before, to prove that they are not just, or righteous, but most unjust and
impious by their own testimony. What other syns they are defiled with, let
their own lives and the world censure: But suer I am they are not void of all
grievous sins, which they must be, if they be justified and in grace: and such
they must be in deed, before they know themselves to be such, except they can
know that to be, which is not, as their sharp wits would seem to do in this
and other questions of Religion.

Then seeing it is to apparent, that Protestants are not just, either by their
Imagined assureinge faith, or howsoever: let us further examine by these
writers, and Protestant professors, whether it is in it self possible, that
this supposed faith should Justify. The contrary whereof thus I demonstrate
from their own writings. All men that pretend to be justified by this Imagined
faith, must needs be justified by some act or acts thereof: But no man is
Justified by any act or acts thereof: Therefore no man is justified by it. The
Mayor is manifest. The Minor is thus proved by Protestants. First D. Field with
Field page 177.
others does, and of necessity must affirm, that in this business of their
fantasied Justification, their devised faith has twoe, and only twoe acts:
One going before justification, teaching us to pray, entreat God, and humble
ourselves, when we are not just: and this act as he acknowledges it to go
before Justification, so he thus freely confesses, that it does not justify.
The second Act, as he tells us, does follow Justification, and so by no
possibility (because the cause cannot be after the effect caused by it) that
is able to justify: wherefore his own words of this Act of their invented
faith, be these: She does not actiuely Justify, but finds the thing done.
Therefore seeing they teach, there be but two acts in their new faith, the
first, and second te last which admit no more, and neither the one nor other,
nor both together, (because they grant there is no partial influence or
cooperation from them, to that purpose) does, do, or can justify, there is
no possibility of Justification by such idle faith, for so two
contradictoryes should be true: man is justified by some act of faith: man is
not justified by any act of faith. Which in Logic and nature is known to be
impossible, and a stupide absurdity to affirm it. This matter is further
proved by D. Couell: who rejecting Luthers Couell def. of Hooker page 42.
opinion, in this question, grants a seperabilitie, of faith and works, and
that faith, as they commonly grant, does not justify. Then Justification
cannot possibly be by only faith, which in an other treatise he declares by
example in these words: Faith is the fowndation of spiritual buylding of Gods
house, charity the Roof, without which the best are, Couell against Burges
page 148.
but as howses uncovered, that cannot long continue. Then justification which
is the Roof of our spiritual buildinge in this world, is and musts needs be
the work and buildinge of charity, and not of faith alone. Which
demonstratiuely is true by his grant, that faith, and the works of charity
may be separated: for they consent that without such works man is not
justified, therefore not possibly by this their Poetical faith.

Further, both the present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury D. George Abbot
against D. Hill, and D. Field also, does often tell us, that the Greek Church
is the true Church of Christ. Then supposing from my first chapter in the first
part of this work, by the grant of the same D. Field, Protest. proaf. part.
1. cap. 1.
D, Couell, D. Sutcliffe, M. Wotton, and M. Ormerod, that the direction thereof
is to be followed, her Judgment to be rested in, that it has authority to
command her children, the Judgment of it, is a very special grownd of faith,
supporting the truth, as a pillar does vnderpropp a building, is a diligent
and true keepr of doctrines committed to her, changes nothing, diminishes
nothing at any time, adds nothing superfluous, loses not her own, usurps
not things belonging to others: and that there is no salvation, remission of
syns, or hope of eternal life out of the Church. All which be the very words
of those last cited Protestants related in that place. From which graunts thus
I argue. No doctrine or opinion, that is a thing most horrible, unworthy any
Christian, against the law of God, and light of nature, is, or can possibly be
true: But the paradoxe of Protestants, that this their supposed only faith
does justify is such: Therefore it neither is, or can be true. The Mayor is
evidently true, and to affirm the contrary is to deny all true Religion, and
the Authority of God: for if he should, or could teach, or reveal to men to
follow doctrine that is horrible, unworthy a Christian, against his own
law, and natural light, such doctrine could not be true, nor he honored as
God, but to be accoumpted a deceauer and seducer. The Minor or second
proposition be the express words of the Greek Church, so true, to be obeyed
and followed in doctrine by these Protestants as before is cited. For Hieremias
Patriarch of Constantinople cheef in Hieremias Patriarcha constant in censura
cap. 5.
that Church in his censure against Protestants uses these words in this
article. The doctrine that only faith does justify, is a thing most
horrible, unto or thie any Christian, against the law of God, and the light of
nature. Therefore these men mayntayning so horrible doctrine by the censure of
the true Church, as they teach, and out of which, as they affirm before, there
is no salvation, remission of syns, or hope of eternal life, are so far from
being just, justified, or to be saved by faith or any other means in their
proceedings, that by their own confession, they have left unto themselves, no
hope of eternal life, or salvation at all.

Moreover I argue thus: Nothing which cannot be defended without granting and
mayntayninge, more new and strange absurdities, and impossibilities, is or can
be true doctrine: But this Protestant assertion, of their only assuring faith
justifying is such: therefore it neither is, nor can be true. The first
proposition is evidently true, for every truth may, and is defended without
any absurdity, or inconvenience: The second proposition is also manifestly
proved from D. Field and others before: To whom I add M. Wotton, who
laboureing what he can to defend this his forged faithes justification, and
answer that place of S. Paul: How shall they call on him, in whom they do
not believe: being urged to Romans 10.
prove that faith goes before prayer and other good works, without which they
teach a man is not justified: and which themselves urge in a sense like to
that, as they (though untruly) suppose, against prayer to Angels and
Saints, in whom we do believe: (yet the believing, allthough not in them,
that it is lawful to pray to them, suffices in that case) he makes his
supposed faith a very chimericall fiction, and no true real thing of that
nature: but is forced to this absurdity, to say: assuring faith, and prayer
proceeding after Wotto^ def. of Perkins page 209.
faith, be simul tempore, both together in the same instant of time. Which is
impossible, being diverse distinct acts, specified from diverse objects, produced
by diverse powers and operations of the soul, one precedent going before, the
other following and (to use his own words, proceeding after. Therefore by
himself, except before and after Prius and Posterius, be simul and simul
tempore, together, and together in time, which every young logitian in
Cambridge will tell him is most childish and absurd, both this his Answer is
a new gross absurdity, and that his former doctrine, that cannot be otherwise
defended is of like quality: which will more appear in the next argument by
this man's divinity also.

Therefore I argue fur^her thus: Nothing that wants assurednes, but has
doubteinge, and is not without doubt, can be a matter of faith: But this
Protestant position, even by their own confession wants assurednes, has
doubting, and is not without doubt: Therefore it is no matter of faith, or true
faith. The Mayor or first proposition is so certainly true, that Protestants
generally acknowledge (as the truth is) that nothing can be more certain and
undoubted then faith: for being grownded upon the infallible word and
Revelation of God which it most undoubtedly certain, true, assured, and
without all doubt impossible to be otherwise, ^f God be God and truth it self.
How can there be any place of doubt of any thing of that nature? and therefore
that common sayeing, Dubious in fide est infidelis, he that doubts in faith
is an Infidel: so much as in him lies making God vnworthe to be believed, is
ordinaryly allowed with Protestants. The Minor proposition is also proved by
Protestants, and M. Wotton himself wittnesseth of this their Imagined faith in
these words: Without doubt it is not. And again in this Wotto^ def. of
Perkins page 135. 152. page 161.
manner: I may grant the faithful ordinarily are not assured of their
salvation by such a faith, as has no doubteing in it. And further thus; our
faith is not without some doubteing, and our feeleing not so strong, as it
should, and may be. And they have spoken so long in defense of this their
fantastical faith, that they proved themselves not to have a sownd and
certain faith of those things that of all others are most generally believed
of all (excepting Atheists) that there is a God: for among Protestants the
same Protestant faith, there be such doubts: Whether there be a God, or no.
Wherefore M. Parkes a Protestant writer among them might justly speak of his
English fellows in Religion, in this manner: Heresy and Infidelity Join and
labor to subvert Parkes Apol. pref.
and overthrow all grownds of Christian Religion. Thus he of these
Protestants.

Again I argue in this manner from the 16. article of their Religion. Where it
is thus Artic. 16.
defined: After we have received the holy Ghost we may depart from grace, and
fall into syn. And after, it teaches that true repentance procures forgiveness
of syn. Now this true repentance either goes before, or follows this their
Imagined iustifieing faith. If it goes before this their faith, then that
faith justifies not, because man is made just before any Act of that applying
faith is exercised. If this Repentance follows, then again that their
supposed faith does not justify, for by their own doctrine a sinner
Impenitent is not just. For their applying faith is to apply (as they say) the
promises of Christ unto us, but Christ in scriptures is so fare from promisinge
salvation to man impenitent, that he promises and denownceth damnation. That
both these Acts should be together, is impossible, as I have demonstrated
against M. Wotton, in the like case before. This is also proved by the
Arguments concerning predestination, in the former chapter; for those
Protestants which hold this Justification by faith, defend also assurednes of
predestination, teaching that every one that is at any time just, is
predestinate, and so the one is as well known unto them, as the other, and
either of them a matter of faith with these men, Again faith and hope be
distinguished; faith is the grownds of things to be hoped. Faith, Hope,
Charity, these three. But where there is assured faith to obtain a thing, or
having a thing, Hope is there euacuated. Again: These Protestants with the
scriptures grant, that the just, and justified are in heaven. But faith is
not in heaven, being euacuated by beatificall vision, therefore Justice is not
by faith. Again: faith is not discursyue; D. Field Field. page 226. Couell
def. of Hooker page 85.
writes as truth is, that private Interpretations bind not; and D. Couell
says, doctrines derived are not the word of God: then they are not matter of
faith. But all these pretensed faithes of these Protestants are only their
own private interpretations, applications, and derived doctrynes: for no
scripture says, that any one Protestant in particular, D. Willet, D. Powell,
or other, is justified, or shall be saved: Therefore no faith, much less
justifying faith.

CHAPTER III. WHEREIN BY THESE PREsent English Protestant writers, the
Catholic doctrine of Justification by inherent grace, and Justice, is proved
against the same Protestants, and their opinion.
NOW it will be no difficulty, for a Christian man to believe doctrine of
inherent grace, justice, and justification by good works: if he will, as all
Christians do, are ought, grant and believe any justification at all. For the
contrary opinion of Protestants, being even by Protestants our Adversaries
themselves confuted, that of the Catholic Church must needs be true. In which
question the Council of Trent for Catholics Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 11.
defines thus. If any shall say, a man is justified either by only Imputation
of the Justice of Christ, or the only remission of syns, excluding grace, and
charity, which is diffused in their hearts by the holy Ghost, and is inherent,
or that the grace whereby we are justified, is only the favor of God, let
him be Anathema. For proof of which doctrine even by my contry Protestants,
and to procure their conformity (as they ought) first I argue thus.

Wheresoever there be degrees of Inherent Justice, and man more or less
accordingly so justified, there must needs be inherent Justice, and
justification by it: But when a man is justified, there be such degrees of
inherent Justice, and more or less justification by it: Therefore there is
justification by inherent grace, and Justice. The Mayor and first proposition
is manifestly true: The second is proved by D. Field: who Field page 118.
acknowledges the denial of inherent grace, to be untruth, and is so far
ashamed of the Protestant opinion in this point, that he writes thus. Luther
never denies inherent Righteousness to be more in one, then in an other, and
more in Mary the Mother of Christ, then in any other. Then of necessity there
is inherent Justice and grace in men justified, and men be justified by it,
otherwise it is not Justice or righteousness, if it does not make men just and
righteous: for being inherent as he confesses, it must needs denominate the
subject wherein it is, as all inherent and intrinsecall forms and qualities
do. Heat, cold, beauty etc. make men and bodies wherein they be inherent, to
be, and be called truly, hot, cold, bewtifull etc. And seeing in just men
there be degrees of this inherent grace, and Justice, increase and access of
it, there must needs be inherent grace, and Justice, for new degrees of
increase are not, where the thing increased is not. Neither the comparatiue
degree, (more) but where the positive is: No man or thing can be said to be
better, fayrer, colder, hotter etc. then it was before, except before it was
good, fair, cold, hot etc.

Again I argue in this manner: whatsoever is the cause of glory and increase
thereof in heaven, is the cause of Justice and Justification, from which such
glory comes: But inherent grace is the cause of glory in heaven, and the
differences thereof: Therefore it is the cause of justification in earth. The
Mayor is evidently true: And the Minor is proved by D. Field in these words:
From this Imparitie of Inherent righteousness, it is, that there Field page 116.
are so different degrees of Joy and glory, fownd among the Saints of God,
that are in heaven. Then seeing the difference and excess of glory, and Joy,
in heaven proceed from the imparitie of inherent righteousness, or Justice, and
righteousness or Justice is the cause of glory, inherent Righteousness or
Justice must needs be that, by and for which we are justified in earth, and
glorified in heaven.

Thirdly from the same Protestant Doctor I argue thus: All Justice and glory
of man comes either from inherent grace, or imputed: But not from imputed:
Therefore from that which is inherent. The Mayor is evident: for all grace must
needs be inherent, or not inherent: and if not inherent it is by imputation, if
any way at all. The second proposition is proved by D. Field: who does not
only renownce the error of equality of Joys, and rewards in heaven, taught
by Iouinian, and seemeing to follow upon the Protestant doctrine of
Justification and glory by imputation of righteousness: but clearly also
confesses with Catholics, and the recited Council of Trent, Joys and reward
in heaven for inherent Justice, and not imputed righteousness: his words be
these: That there is an equality Field page 140.
of joys, and reward in heaven, imputed to Iouinian, we do not hold. Where
his word (we) and plural number proves he speaks generally for
Protestants. And concerning the second he writes thus: from imputed
righteousness no imparitie of Joy can flow. Then seeing the first sentence
grants an imparitie of Joy and reward: and the second affirms, it comes
not from imputed righteousness: The third and conclusion must needs be this:
That both Joy and reward in heaven, and their degrees, imparitie or
inequality, proceed from inherent Justice.

My next Argument is this: All grace wherewith men's souls in Sacraments, or
otherwise be filled, and is infused into them, must needs be inherent: But
grace of justification and sanctification is such: Therefore man is justified
by inherent grace. The Mayor is evident, for fillinge and infusion, is by
putting in of things, and not by imputation: for no such thing can fill any
thing. The Minor is thus proved by D. Field speakeing of children baptized:
and the like reason is of others. His words be these: Children when they are
adopted and made Field. page 179.
the sons of God, when they are instified and sanctified, are filled with
habits or potentiall habilities, of these virtues faith, hope, and love. The
same Field l. 1. c. 4. page 10.
doctrine he teaches in an other place to be cited hereafter, when I shall
entreat of the grace and efficacy of Sacraments: where this Article will be
more declared. For this time it is further confirmed by D. Couell who also in
plain terms approves Couell def. of Hooker page 114.
habitual, and real infusion of grace, and concerning justification auoncheth
thus: The doctrine of Luther in this point was not unjustly called Page 40. sup.
into question, by those of the Roman Church. And seems to labor to
reconcile that, which he esteems the best opinion of Protestants in this
matter, to that of the Church of Rome.

Further I argue thus: All that is a gift of God a quality in the soul, an
internal habit, and infused from God, is inherent: But the grace of
justification is such: Therefore it is inherent. The first proposition is
manifestly true* the second is proved by M. Wotton def. of Perk. page 81. 82.
Wotton in these words: Grace is some gift of God, which is a quality in the
soul. And a little after. The habits of grace be infused from God.

Lastely in this matter I reason thus: whatsoever makes every true Christian
to be righteous in the sight of God, is true Justice: But Inherent grace makes
every true Christian righteous in the sight of God: Therefore inherent grace is
true Justice. The Mayor is manifestly true: And the Minor thus plainly proved
by M. Wotton, in Wotton def of Perk. page 12. page 186.
these words: We acknowledge every true Christian to be righteous in the sight
of God, by inherent Righteousness. And answering for Protestants and writing
this for their acknowledgment in the plural number would have us take it for
their common opinion. And thus Catholic doctrine of inherent grace is
directly and demonstratiuely proved to be true even by Protestants. And their
denial thereof together with their conceit of imputative righteous, also by
themselves convinced for false and erroneous. Which is further confirmed by M.
Higgons in his Sermon at Paul's Cross, wherein speaking of the just, he
calls them. Parsons having Theoph. Higg. Ser. 3. mart. 1610. page: 24.
grace dwelling in them. And again: We have inherent righteousness in our
selves. Then seeing forms inherent, do, and must needs denominate the
subject, in which they inhere, and be subjected, as heat, cold, whitenes,
blacknes, and the like, are the true cause, why those things in which they are
subjected, be named, and truly are things hott, cold, white and black: so
Justice, inherent and subjected (as these men tell us) in the souls of men,
must needs make them, both truly named, and truly and really to be just. And
this is evident through all the theological virtues faith, hope, and charity
or love of God (all one) as in other virtues. For as by prudence or wisdom a
man is named, and truly is prudent, and wise: by temperance temperate, and so
of the rest: So by theological virtues resideing and inherent in us, we are
named, and truly be, as their denomination, acts, and effects are. Of faith
and belief, we are only named, and are faithful, and beleeinge; by hope,
hopeful or hopeinge; by charity or love of God, loueing of him, and keeping
his commandments, which is man's justification, as M. Wotton shall be wittnes,
in Wotton def. of Perk. page 175.
these his words: Righteousness says Austin is nothing else, but not to syn:
not to syn, is to keep the commandments of the law: that is as himself
presently expownds it. To do none of those things, that are forbidden, and to
do all those things, that are commanded. Therefore faith (though it be
necessaryly required) is not as Cambridg says, the whole cause of
justification. Yet there is more hereafter of this matter.

CHAPTER IIII. WHEREIN THE CATHOLIC doctrine of the efficacy and validity of
good works, done in grace, their meritt and reward is proved by these English
Protestants.
CONCERNING the validity, and efficacy of good works, done in grace,
sufficient to justify: the Doctrine of the Church of Rome to be holy and
sincere in this matter, has been sufficiently proved by our contry
Protestants, in the former chapters. But to take away all pretense of
exception, I will a little more particularly speak of this Question: Wherein
the Council of Trent has thus defined. Eternal life is to be proposed to
those, that work well Council. Trid. sess. 6.
to the end, and trusting in God, both as a grace mercifully promised to the
children of God by Jesus Christ, and as a Reward by the promise of the same
God, faithfully to be rendered to their good deeds, and meritts. And a little
after, yielding a reason, for the dignity and worthiness of such good works,
adds thus: Christ Jesus himself as the head to the members and vine to the
branches, does continually inflowe virtue, anticipateth, accompanies, and
follows always their good works, and without which they could by no
means, be grateful, and meritorious to God. Hitherto the words of the
Council, for Catholics. Now to prove how Protestants do accommodate
themselves to this doctrine, first I argue in this manner.

Good works should have justified in the state of Innocence if Adam had not
fallen: Therefore they can justify being done in the state of grace, by
Christ: The paritie and consequence is proved by the dignity and value of
Christ's passion, and meritts, restoring for this purpose, that which we lost
in Adam. The Antecedent is justified by D. Couell, who comparing the good
works of Christians by grace in Christ, repayring the fall of Adam, with
works in the state of Innocence, writes thus: Had Adam continued in his
first estate, man's absolute Righteousness, and integrity in all his actions,
Couell def. of Hooker page 40.
had been the way of life to him, and to all his posterity. And seeing this
integrity in man's Actions, had tended but either to the keepeing of the
precepts, or doing works of perfection, both which by Protestants here after
be possible, this reason concludes. Secondly I argue thus: whatsoever
procures pardon for sins does justify: But good works done in grace, procure
pardon for sins: Therefore they justify. The first proposition is evidently
true: for as nothing but syn makes man unjust; so that which takes it away,
must needs leave him just. The second proposition is thus proved first by D.
Couell writing in these words: Couell def. of Hooker page 42. Field page 116.
Good works, Humiliation, Fasteinge, and Weepeing are means to blott out syn.
And by D. Field also in this manner: Good works done in grace procure pardon
for sin. Again thus I argue: That which is able to justify perfectly, in
the sight of God, and did justify Abraham, the Father of the true believers,
and justified, does also iustifye us: But good works are of that efficacy,
and did justify Abraham, our Father: Therefore they justify us his children.
The Mayor is manifestly true. For first both that power and ability is in
vain which never is acted, as that common grownde in learning teaches: and
the Protestants make the manner of the iustifyeing of Abraham, a form of our
justification. The second proposition is proved by M. Wotton, who Wotton def.
of Perk. page 241. see Wotton page 174. 175. and infrac. 5.
speaks thus in the name of Protestants: We teach, that those that are in
deed adjudged good works, are able to justify a man perfectly in the
presence of God, and to deserve everlasting life. Whereby he does not only
teach justification by works of grace, but that they deserve euerlasteing
life; but of this their worthiness and meritt I will dispute hereafter. And the
same M. Wotton in the same Wotton sup. page 240. Wotton sup. page 203.
his defense of M. Perkins, writes thus: M. Perkins professes that Abraham
was justified by works, even before God: not only before men. This a little
before the same place. And for himself concerning the iustifieing of Abraham,
his words be these: Abraham was justified long before God made him the
promise, and before he came out of the land of Chanaan. Which was before his
faith so much urged by Protestants in this question, was so commended.

Further I argue thus: Nothing that is error, is true doctrine: But the denial
of justification by good works, is error: Therefore not true doctrine. The
Mayor is evidently true: for truth and error are opposites. The Minor is thus
proved by D. Couell, whose words be these: To say we claim nothing by any
duty we do, or any virtue we find Couell def. of Hooker page 42.
in our selves, in the best construction, makes but an harshe sownde, and
discovers the error, which they of the Church of Rome have thought us to
hold. Where he directly calls that error, which the Roman Church has
charged Protestants with, in this question; and expresses it to be, in
extenuating good works so far, that they and virtue in us were not
sufficient Title to claim reward for them of God: which could not be, except
they were of a iustifieing and deserving nature and power.

Moreover thus I reason: That which is the observation of the law, is
righteousness, and Justice: But good works done in grace at the observation of
the law: Therefore they are righteousness and Justice. The Mayor is evident.
The Minor is proved by the Couell def. of Hooker page 42.
same Protestant Doctor in the same place, and in these words: Amongst
creatures in this world, only man's observation of the law, of his nature is
righteousness: only man's transgression syn. Which might also be sufficient for
an other Argument: for if only transgression of the law, is sin, and
injustice; then good works the keeping of the law, must needs be Justice. And
in an other place thus the same Author speaks of prayer, a part of good
works: Prayer is the best means both to Couell modest. examinat. page 176.
testify our dutiful affection, and most effectual to obtain, whatsoever
we wanting can desire at Gods hands. D. Sutcliffe thus commends this good
work. By prayers we obtain remission of Sutcliff ag. D. Kellison page 72. 73.
sins. By prayers we obtain Gods grace. And yet it is evident even in
Protestants doctrine, that they which have remission of syns, and Gods grace,
are just, and righteous, in their phrase of speakeinge. Good deeds done in
grace, meretoreous, by English Protestants


Now that good deeds done in grace are also meritorious, thus I argue:
Whatsoever is rewarded, rewardable, binds an other to give for it, was by
antiquity, and now also properly called meritt, is meritorious: But good
works done in grace, are such: Therefore they are meritorious. The Mayor is
evident: And the Minor thus proved first by D. Couell which speaks thus: That
Couell def. of Hooker page 51. 52.
works of perfection to which we are not bownde, have greater reward, then
keeping of the precepts. Then both the one and other must needs have their
reward, the one great, and the other greater: and consequently be so
meretorious, and deserueing; for even in our vulgar language, and propriety
of speech, reward is not but where deserueing is; signifyeing a Retribution or
payeing again for a thing. Again the same Protestant Doctor writes thus in
Coueli sup. page 40. 44.
plain terms: Rewards do always presuppose such duties performed as are
rewardable. It was the phrase of Antiquity to call our virtuous attaynment by
the way of meritt. The phrase of the Latin does properly make one to meritt of
an other, and as it were to bind him to him, who does any thing which
pleases, and delights him, for whom it is done. Which sufficiently proves
that second proposition. And from this grant, this matter is thus, further
demonstrated by their Articles to which they have, all subscribed, Articl. of
Relig. Articl. 12.
where it is thus defined: good works which are the fruits of faith, ar
pleaseing and acceptable to God in Christ. Upon which words, good works do
please God, their public gloss is in these Rogers in art. 12. pr^pos 1. page
53.
words: God has commanded them to be done, and requires righteousness, not
only outward of the body, but also inward of the mind, and has appointed for
the virtuous, and godly, rewards both in this life, and in the world to came,
and to the wicked punishments, spiritual, corporal, and of body and soul,
eternal in the pit of Hell: And for this doctrine cite these scriptures:
Matthew. 5. 16. Ioh. 15. 12. Phil. 2. 14. etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. etc. 2. Tim. 2.
19. James 2. Matthew. 5. 22. 26. etc. And all these Protestant Confessions,
Heluetia. Basile, Boheme, France Belgia, Ausburge, Saxony, Wittemb. Sueue.
Therefore we need not be doubtful of it, by Protestant proceedings.

But to make it further, and without all exception, most apparently true: I
further argue in this manner. That which was taught by the true primative Church
in this point, is true doctrine: But meritt of good works was then taught by
it: Therefore it is true doctrine. The Mayor is evident before. And the Minor
is proved thus, by these Protestants. D. Morton from Caluyn acknowledges,
Morton apolog part 1. page 275. 276. Couell modest. exam. page 120. Sutcliff
subuers. page 50.
that the word meritt was used of the Ancient Fathers, in obtaining reward.
D. Couell assures us thus: Diverse both of the Greek, and Latin Church,
taught freewill, meritts, and invocation of Saints, as Catholics do. D.
Sutcliff tells us, that within the first 600. years (time of truth with him
and other Protestants) the doctrine of meritts and good deeds was taught. And
M. Wotton acknowledgeing that the ancient Fathers used the name of meritt, in
this question concludes thus: The doctrine of meritts, as it was held and
taught by the ancient Christians, we acknowledge, and embrace. Therefore
seeing Protestants (as M. Wotton generally Wotton def. of Perk. page 339.
undertakes in their name) acknowledge for true the doctrine of the Fathers
concerning meritts, and (as before by Protestants) the Fathers and the present
Roman Church agree in this point, Protestants also must subscribe unto them.
And not to make these Protestants singular in this consent, I will add M. Bell
to their number: he Bell trial of the new Religion cap. 9.
writes thus: True it is, I freely grant, that the holy Fathers do often use
the word, meritt, and do often call the works of the faithful, meretorious.
And does not only yield; that, to be worthy, and meretorious, is all one, but
that such works of the faithful, are rewarded with heaven. I Argue again in
this order: works that are rewarded in heaven, may or ought to be done in
respect of reward, and bring a special worthiness unto the workers of them,
are meretorious: But the good deeds of Christians done in grace, be such:
Therefore they are meretorious: The Mayor is evident before, both by the
description of reward, by the grant of Protestants, and in respect that M.
Bell last cited, has assured us, that, to be worthy, and to be meretorious,
is all one. The Minor is thus proved: first M. Ormerode writes thus: You
(meaning Catholics) Ormerod paganopapis. page 53.
do notoriously slander us (Protestants) beareing the world in hand, we
teach that none ought to do good in respect of reward, be it known unto you,
we are far from teacheing, that a man ought not to do good in respect of
reward. M. Wotton has these words: God will reward the Wotton def. of Perk.
page 302. page 334.
least good work of any of his children. And again: They that are justified,
shall have a special worthynes in themselves, when they shall come to receive
their inheritance, because they shall be truly, and fully sanctified. Where not
only a reward is granted to good works, but that they make the doers of them
meritinge, and worthy of their eternal inheritance, and that this worthynes is
caused by grace, and Justice whereby they are justified, and bring forth
works, of such worth, value, and deserueinge.

And to clear further this name of reward, which some of them would violently
wrest from the true and proper meaneing thereof in this question: Thus I argue
again: whatsoever is so effectual, that reward, or stipend cannot be denied
unto it, without injustice, is meretorious: But good works done in grace, are
such: Therefore they are meretorious. The Mayor is manifest, for that which is
due by justice, is due by Title and worthiness: for the proper act and office of
Justice is, to render to every one his own, and due. The Minor is thus proved
by M. Wotton, who entreateing of the crown Wotto^ def. of Perkins page 337.
338. 2. Timoth. 4. v. 8.
of Justice, which according unto S. Paul's doctrine, God as a just judge is
to render, writes thus: S. Paul reckons up his good services: and good
reason: for the reward is not due to any by promise, but to them that do good
works. For else what should be rewarded? But why should it be called a crown
of Justice? because it is given to the just, according to their just works. And
in that respect God is called a just judge, in giueing this crown: because he
gives good for good. And again: we wholly subscribe to S. Wotton sup. page
339.
Augustine, that God cannot but reward our good works, because of his promise,
and because they are such, for the substance of them, as he has enjoined: and
so (as I have said often) in general Justice, they that do well, must have
well.

Lastely in this Question I argue thus: That which deserves condign, or
worthy reward, is meretorious But good deeds done in grace, be such: Therefore
they are meritorious. The Mayor is evident: because Meritum ex condigno, Meritt
by condignietie, is the greatest, and that which has been most impugned by
Protestants. The Minor is concluded by his majesty, in his approbation of the
Accidence, before the Grammar, usually taught in England: where speakeing of
schoolemasters deseruings, for the teacheing, and instruction of children, his
regal and resolute sentence, for this matter, is uttered in these words: you
shall Approbat. of the Accidence init.
deserve of almighty God condign reward. Where both deserueing, which is
meritt, and the reward to be condign, is testified. And thus much, for this
question, out of their private Authors and Doctors, Now let us cite somewhat,
out of their public Theater. Theater of great Britan page 342.


In which they deliver unto us first the common opinion of that primative age
of Christianity in this point, generally in these terms: It is not to be
wondered at in that these times, the holy Acts of men, which no doubt were
many, and the habitt of monks, the accounted holy garments of humility, were
so meritoriously respected and reputed in the devout hearts of the Religeous.
Where we see, that this doctrine of the meritt of good works, was so
general, and universal, that no man might wonder at it: Their reason shall,
be answered in his proper place; Therefore seeing this universal doctrine of
meritts, was in that unspotted time of the Church, as these men have often
granted, it may be wondered at, with what color, or pretense of truth, these
men against their own Rule, and Judgment should now deny it, or bring it into
question. Especially seeing they assign through all their work, this cause of
meritt and satisfaction to have given the chief grownd, and original, to so
many holy, and Religious fowndations, in England, to meritt and procure pardon
of God, to satisfy for the syns of themselves, the fownders, their friends,
Ancesters, and posterities. As we may understand by these few Examples, which
they propose unto us in this order: Oswy King of Northumberland Theat. page
338. n. 2.
having cruelly slain King Oswyne of Deirans, in that place afterward for
satisfaction of so heinous an offense, a monastery was built, as upon like
occasions, many the like fowndations were laid. And of him again (partly
cited in an other place:) This King Oswy having raygned 28. Page 338. n. 8.
years falling sick, stroke with remorse for the death of good King Oswyne,
and the blood which he had spilt, vowed a pilgrimadge to Rome. So they
describe Page 339. n. 3.
unto us, K. Wlfhere his works of satisfaction, in building Churches, and
monasteryes, for his Murdering, or Martyringe his sons Wlfald and Ruffin.
And again: Ethelbert of Kent in fowndinge Page 302. n. 4.
S. Paul's Church in London, in his charter has these words: Ethelbert Rex
Deo inspirante pro animae suae Remedio, dedit Episcopo Mileto terram etc.
Ethelbert King by Gods Inspiration, for remedy of his soul has given to
Bishop Miletus the land called Tu^lingham for the Monastery of Page 343. n. 4.
S. Paul. And again: King Ethelbald living a wicked life being reprehended
by the epistle of Boniface an English man, and Archbishop of Mentz, in
repentance released and privileged the Church from all tributes to himself*
and built the Abbey of Crowland in Lincolneshire, for the pacifyeing of Gods
wrath toward his syns. And again: King Offa in testimony of his
Repentance, for the blood he had Page 345.
spilt, he gave the tenth part of all his goods unto the Church men, and unto
the poor. At Bathe he also built an other Monastery, and in Warwickshire a
Church, where the adioyninge town, from it and him bears the name Offa
Church. In great devotion he went to Rome, where he made his Kingedome
subject to a Tribute then called Peter peace, afterward Rome-scot. In honor of
S. Albane, and in repentance of his syns over against Verolamium in the place
then called Holmehurst where that Proto-martyr of Britain for the constant
profession of Christ, lost his head, Offa built a magnificent Monastery,
endoweinge it with lands and rich revenues for the mayntenance of an hundred
monks. And thus again: King Ethelstan having consented Page 363.
to his brother Edwynes death, repented the same; for besides his seven years
penance voluntarily undergone, to pacify the ghost of his betrayed brother, he
built the two monasteryes of Middleton, and Michelnesse, goeing into the North
against the Page 364.
Danes, as he was a man much devoted to godward, turned a side to visitt the
Tomb of S. John of Beuerley, where earnestly praying for his prosperous
success, for want of richer iuells, there offered his knife, voweing that if
he returned, he would redeem it with a worthy price. Which as they tell us,
he truly performed, though they mention not, what it was. But to putt us out
of doubt, that both this doctrine of Meritt, and satisfaction, and the
execution of it, by such meritorious good deeds, was both grateful, and
pleaseing to God, and honorable with all good men, first they testify of this
last recited King in these words: relateing of a strange miracle wrought by
Page 364. sup. n 8. 10 and page 365.
him, thus they add: The enemies by craft and subtlety comeing to his camp,
he awakeing boldly rushing upon his enemies, putt them back with the death
of five petty Kings, twelve Dukes, and well near of the whole Army. He joined
Northumberland to the rest of his Monarchye, and returninge to Beuerly redeemed
his own knife. His dominion was the largest that any Saxon before him had
enjoyed, and his fame the greatest with all forreyne princes, who sought his
frendshipp both with love and alliance by matching with his scisters, and
presenting him with rich and rare presents: for Hugh King of France besides
other inestimable Iuells, sent him the sword of Constantine the great, in the
hilt whereof, all covered with gold, was one of the nails that fastened Christ
to the cross, and of the spear, and crown of thorns. Before him they make
King Elfred the most worthy, and after him, King Edward a Saint, and yet
make them both in doctrine and practice of meritt, and meritorious works to
be renowned. Of the first they Page 351.
write in this manner: Elfred the fourth son of King Ethelwolfe and lady
Osburge his wife, a child of five years old, was sent very honorably attended
to the city of Rome, where Leo then Bishop confirmed him, was his godfather at
confirmation, and anointed him to the expectation of a Kingedome: grown in
years he grew so in discretion, magnanimity, and favor of all men, that in
the successiue Reigns of his three elder brethren, he ruled as a viceroy, or
secondary King under every of them, and Page 357.
after them at the last succeeded in the English monarchye: He was a most
worthy prince. Gurmund or Gurthurne the danish King with thirty of his
chief nobility came to conditions with King Elfred, and are christened. His
buildings were many, both to Gods service, and other public use, as at Page
359.
Edelingsey a Monastery, at Winchester a new Minster, and at Shastesbury a
house of Nuns, wherein he made his daughter Ethelgeda the Abbess. His other
holy works and meritorious deeds are to many to be remembered in this place;
but they conclude of him in these words: The Page 359. sup. n. 25. 28.
virtues of this prince are matchable to any, that ever reigned before him, and
exceed the most, that ever reigned after him, both in service of God etc.
Concerning K* Edward syrnamed the Confessor, it would be to tedious to make
recital, but of part of his holy virtues, and meritorious works, in this
place I only add from these men: The 40000. pownds yearly of Dane guilt was
remitted by him, paid for 40. years continuance, Page 397. 398. 399. 400.
401. 402.
out of the lands of all, except only the cleargye, because (say our ancient
laws the Kings reposed more confidence in the prayers of holy Church, then in
the power of Arms. His words of Q. Editha his wife openly upon his death bed
were: ^hee was his wife, but in secret embraceings as his scister. K. Edward
(and his successors after) miraculously cures the disease called struma, now
the Kings evil, with other prophetical and heavenly guists he was endowed.
He vowed a pilgrimadge to Jerusalem, for dischardg whereof he built the
Church of Westminister etc. These Protestants conclusion of him is this: Kiuge
Edward a prince of much virtue and integrity of life, reigned with such
Justice and piety, that he obtained the venerable name of Saint, and unto
posterities is distinguished from other Edwards, by the adiunct, Confessor. o
how happy were it, if either Catholics, or Protestants could truly write so
much of Protestant princes, neither friends to the doctrine or favors of
exercise, of meritts, and meritorious deeds. Therefore the university of
Cambridge, by their own Doctors were ouerseene, to say: We houlde charity to
be no concurringe cause of justification with faith. Yet somewhat more of this
matter, is, contained in the next chapter.

CHAPTER V. WHEREIN IS PROVED BY these English Protestants, that the
commandments of God are possible to be kept by grace: may, and ought so to be
kept.
CONCERNING the keeping of Council. Trid sess. 6. can. 11.
Gods commandments, The Council of Trent has thus defined. No man ought to
use that temerarious saying, and condemned by the Fathers, under Anathema, that
the precepts of God are impossible to be kept of a man justified, for God does
not command impossible things, but commanding does admonish, both to do
what thou can, and to ask, what thou can not do, and does help that thou
may be able to do, whose commandments are not heavy, whose yoke is
sweet, and burden light, for they which are the children of God, do love, and
they which love him, as himself wittnesseth, keep his sayeings. Hitherto the
Council of Trent, for the doctrine of the Roman Church: now that the English
Protestants by their own writings, are, or ought to be of the same opinion, in
this question, thus I argue.

Whatsoever all Christians Justly vow to keep and perform, that in all true
doctrine they are able to keep, and perform: But by the opinion of English
Protestants, all Christians vow to keep the commandments: Therefore they
may, and must keep them. The Mayor is manifest by Protestants, graunteing with
the holy scriptures, and Fathers, that just vows be both of things possible,
and must be kept: for if the just promise of man to man binds, how much more
a just promise to God, which is a vow obligatory and byndeing? The Minor is
proved by the public Protestant English communion book, reconfirmed by his
Majesty's authority: which both teaches, that we are bownde to Communion
Book tit. chatechisme, and tit public Baptism.. well beloved friends.
keep the commandments, and all that are baptized vow to do it. Then
seeing all English Protestants, do either swear, or subscribe unto, and daily
follow and execute the doctrine, and prescription of that their authentical
Rituall, and Directorie, as they cannot by their oath or subscription deny it
without perjury or denial of their faith: so by the rule it self, they committ
sacrilege in rejecting that doctrine.

Secondly I argue thus: All things that are of necessity to be observed, or
kept of men, in Religion, are possible: But the commandments are of
necessity to be observed, and kept: Therefore they are possible. The Mayor is
so evidently true, that if it were false, all Christians of necessity must be
damned, and none saved, not being able to do that which of necessity they
must do, or else not be saved, but damned. The Minor is proved by the present
Protestant Archbishops of Canterbury, and D. Feilds allowed Greek Church:
which censureth thus: The commandments of God of necessity are Hieremias
patriarch. constant. censur. cap. 5.
to be observed. Therefore if they would deny their communion Book it self,
which before has proved the same, for vows justly made are of necessity to
be kept: yet if D. Field and such will be members of their allowed true Church,
they must be of this opinion: and I the rather hope so, because, D. Field with
others say: out of the Church there is no salvation. Thirdly that doctrine
which is Field sup. paert. 1. cap. 1.
so absurd, that by Protestants opinion, no man teaches it, is not true: But
this of the vnpossibilitie to keep the commandments is such: Therefore it is
not true. The Mayor is manifest: The Minor is made as manifest by these words
of D. Sutcliff: Sutcliff ag. D. Kellison page 74. 91.
No man does teach, that the commandments are absolutely, and symply
impossible. Therefore they may be kept.

Further I argue thus: All that grant the doctrine of the Church of Rome
(expressed before out of the Council of Trent) to be true in this point, and
that God exacteth of us to keep the commandments, must needs grant the
possibility, to do it, and consent herein with Catholics: But English
Protestants do, or must do so: Therefore they must grant this possibility,
and consent to Catholics. The Mayor is evidently true: The Minor is proved by
D. Couell thus: Couell def. of Hooker page 55. 58.
The Church of Romes opinion is true concerning committing or auoydeing syn.
And again: God exacteth we should keep all the commandments. Page 57.
And further in these words: If we be not ourselves wanteinge, though we
cannot avoid all syns: yet we may, and shall avoid all great and
presumptuous syns. And to make this matter more clear, if it needed, he
adds: Because S. Page 58. sup.
James says, he that keeps the whole law, and offends in one, is guilty
of all: some thought, all syns to be imputed to him, that committed any one:
But S. James only tells to us, that God exacteth a keepeing of them all.
This then is the Conclusion, that though no man be without all syn, yet many
are without many presumpteous syns, which trough prayers, and good means they
avoid. What these men teach of venial syns, and the distinction of them from
mortal, and grievous syns, agreeable to Catholic doctrine, I shall entreat
hereafter: In the mean time further I argue thus. If true charity such as
keeps the commandments, may be had in this life, them they may be kept: But
such charity may be had in this life: Therefore the commandments, may be
kept. The first proposition is evidently true: for the sufficient cause being
putt, the effect must needs be possible, otherwise the cause were not
sufficient, contrary to our supposition: Wotto^ d^f. of Perkins page* 15.
The Minor is thus proved by M. Wotton writeing in this manner: True charity,
though not perfect, may be had in this life, and by it the commandments of
God may be, and are kept, though not perfectly. Therefore (which he grants
in express words) the commandments both may, and be kept. Therefore may be
kept, for things impossible neither are, nor can be done. Ad impossibilia non
est potentia: There is no power to things impossible. And the same Protestant
writer, speakeing of inherent Justice writes thus: Neither do we
(Protestants) deny, that this inherent Righteousness Wotton sup. page 174. 175.
is such, as might enable us to keep the law, and shall when it is perfect.
Righteousness says Austin is nothing else but not to syn: not to sin, is to
keep the commandments of the law: That is as himself presently expownds it,
to do none of those things that are forbidden, and to do all those things
that are commanded. To him I may add D. Barlow Protestant late Bishop of
Lincoln, who Barlowe Answ. to a name less Cath. page 304.
relates two things which may serve this purpose: The first is how princes
have the greatest Temptations and are most unlikely by that means to keep
the commandments, and keep themselves from great syns: his words be these:
Kings have many occasions, which may allure the^ to syn, especially having that
privilege in scripture, whether exgratia or de facto: whether by exemption
from God, or fear of men: that no man may say unto them, why do you thus. And
the second thing concerning keepeing the commandments, and lyueing without
great sin, he writes of Queen Elizabeth (no more confirmed in grace then
other princes for any thing he writes, or any man can conjecture) in these
words: Queen Elizabeth never in her life committed helish crime. Therefore if
she a princess, and Barlow^ sup. page 73.
Queen, by this man's testimony (though I take it not as a revelation) liueing
in that dawngerous stafe of those of her rank, by his Judgment before, never
committed any sin deserueing Hell, I hope he will, or must grant, that by
his Judgment, others not in such case of dawnger, and some of them also that be
of that place, may live without syns hellish, or if they committ any in their
life, may do pennaunce for them, keep the commandments, and be saved. And
thus much of this matter: And I hope a full dischardge of the scruple of the
University of Cambridge, in their last question, by their own learned Doctors
and professors.

CHAPTER VI. WHEREIN THE CATHOLIC doctrine of free will in man, is proved by
these English Protestant writers.
THE Council of Trent for Catholics, entreateing of the fall of Council. Trid.
sess. 6. can. 1.
man, by the syn of Adam, has thus declard in this Question. Men were so much
the Servants of syn, and under the power of the devil, and death, that not
only the gentiles by the strenght of nature, but neither the Jews by the
letter of the law of Moses, could be delivered, or rise from thence, allthough
free will was not extinguished, but weakened in power, and declined in them.
And thus again: The beginning of Can. 5. sup.
justification in them, that be of discretion, is to be taken from God, by
Jesus Christ, by grace preventing, that is from his calling, by the which when
they had no meritts, they are called: That they which were auerted from God by
syns, by his excitatinge and helpeing grace, to convert them, are disposed to
their justification, freely assenting to the same grace, and cooperating: So
that God touching the heart of man, by the illumination of the holy Ghost,
neither man himself does nothing at all, receiving that inspiration, when he
may abject it, neither not withstanding without the grace of God, can move
himself to Justice, before him, by his free will: Whereupon in holy scripture
it is said, be you converted to me, and I will be converted Zachar. 1.
to you, was ^^e admonished of our freedom: when we answer, o Lord convert
us to thee, and Psalm. 84.
we^ shall be converted, we confess we are prevented by the grace of God.
Hither to that holy Council, which I have related more at lardge, in regard
that many Protestants have (and I fear sometimes voluntarily) mistaken and
reported the doctrine of the Roman Church in this Question. And after this,
the same sacred Council defines against the Council. Trid. sup. sess. 6. can.
6.
enemies of free will, in this manner: If any m^n shall say, that the free will
of man, after the syn of Adam, is lost and extinct, let him be An^^hema. Now
let us hear, how these English Protestant writers will agree with this
Catholic sentence. In which matter thus I argue.

Where there is freedom in will, from coaction, and necessity, there is free
will: But in man's will after the fall of Adam, is this freedom: Therefore in
him there is free will The Mayor is evident by Protestants graunteing such
freedom to make free will: The Minor is proved by D. Couell Couell def. of
Hooker page 35.
writing thus: Notwithstanding all the wownds given to humane nature, by the
fall of Adam, Ignorance, Malice, Concupiscence, and Infirmity: ^et the will is
free from necessity, and coaction, though not from miserye and infirmity*
where he does most plainly teach a freedom of the will from syn: for where
no necessity and coaction is, there must needs be liberty and freedom: and
in the will, freedom in it, and free will. And to make Protestants agree with
the recited Council of Trent in this matter, thus he speaks again in their
name: In supernatural things we say, the Couell sup. page 37.
will of man has not obtained grace by freedom, but freedom by grace.
Meaneing that by the grace of Christ man is made free to do all duties, in
supernatural and religeous affairs, of themselves above the natural power,
before it is assisted by spiritual, and supernatural help and grace. And
concerning the natural power it self, before the coming of grace, he
speaks in this manner: There is in the will of man, naturally that freedom,
whereby it is apt, to take or refuse, any particular Couell sup.
object whatsoever, being presented unto it. And from hence I argue further
in this order.

That without which man's actions are neither good nor evil, must needs be
granted: But free will in man, is such: Therefore it must needs be granted.
The Mayor is evident: for if men's actions were neither good nor evil, there
could be no reward for virtue, because nothing should be virtue, where nothing
is good: nor punishment for syn, because nothing could be syn, where nothing
could be evil. The Minor is proved by D. Couell, who ascribes to this
freedom of man's will, the goodness and malice of humane actions, as if he
would say, if man had not freedom, and liberty of will, his Actions could not
be praised for good: nor condemned for evil: his words be these: All the
unforced Actions of Couell sup. def. of Hooker page 49. 50.
men, are voluntary* and all voluntary actions, tending to their end, have
choice: and all choice presupposes the knowledge of some cause, wherefore we
make it: And therefore it is no absurdity, to think, that all Actions of men,
endued with the use of reason, are generally either good, or evil. Where we
may see, what a creature man is made by them that deny free will unto him, that
even in Protestants Judgments, by that denial, not only his actions (as
before) be neither vice, or virtue: and himself thereby deprived of the power
of choice and election, is denied to be a reasonable creature, and proved by
their own deductions, to be a beast and wholly mortal.

Again I argue thus: All that grant, and acknowledge the truth, of the
doctrine of the schoolmen, and of the Church of Rome in this point, and
further, that man has liberty to virtue, and vice, must needs grant free
will in man: But these English Protestant writers following, grant these
things: Therefore they must grant free will in man. The Mayor is both too
manifest, and copious: The Minor is proved by these Protestant citations, D.
Couell writing of Couell def. of Hooker page 34.
the fall of man in Adam, sets down his opinion in this o^der: We must
needs confess, that by syn he has lost much: who is now able to comprehend
all that he should? But we dare not affirm, that he has lost all, who
even in this blindenes, is able to see some thing, and in this weakness,
strong enough, without the light of supernatural iustifyeing grace, to tread
out those paths of moral virtues, which have not only great use, in humane
society, but are also not altogether of a nature oppositely different from
man's salvation. And further thus he writes: Though syn has given (as the
Couell sup. page 35.
scholemen observe) four wownds unto our nature; Ignorance, Malice,
Concupiscence, and Infirmity: the first in the understanding, the second in
the will, the third in our desiring appetite, the last in the Irascible: yet
the will is free from necessity, and coaction, though not from misery, and
Infirmity. For (as S. Bernard says) there is a threefold freedom, from
necessity, from syn, from misery; the first of nature, the second of grace,
the third of glory. In the first from the bondadge of coaction, the will is
free in it own nature, and has power over it self. In the second, the will
is not free, but freed from the bondadge of syn. And in the third it is freed
from the servitude of corruption. Now that freedom, by which the will of man
is named free, is the first only: And therefore we dare say, that the wick^d,
who have not the two last, (being captives to syn in this life, and to misery
in the life to come) yet for all this, want not the freedom of will. And to
make plain demonstration, that in this question he joins with the Church of
Rome: as he has before followed the scholemen in Part. 1. cap. 2. Couell sup.
def. page 35. 36. 37.
general, cheifest Agents and foretops of poperye (as they are called by
Protestants before, so in particular he appealeth to the Authority of Petrus
Lombardus, Master of the Sentences. To Albertus, Bonauentara, Scotus, S. Thomas
etc. For decision hereof. Whose opinion to be the same with the present
Catholic Church no man can make question. To this man I add the forenamed
approuers of the Greek Church to be the true Church, D. Abbots the present
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury D. Field etc. For this Greek Church
censureth in these words: Man has Hieremias Patriarch. constant. Censur. cap.
18, ^. 19.
free will to eternal salvation. And again: Virtue and vice be in the power
and choice of man. We may avoid all syns. It is against the nature of things,
that to be esteemed virtue, which a man does by necessity. For every virtuous
action must proceed from the liberty of the will.

I argue further thus: That which was the doctrine of the primative Church in
this point, is true: But to grant free will was the doctrine thereof:
Therefore it is true. Both the Mayor and Minor be proved before. Part. 1. cap.
9. part 2. c. 4. Couell mod. examinat. page 120. Sutcliff. subu. page 50.
The Mayor in the first part and this also. The minor in the 4. chapter before
out of D. Couell and D. Sutcliff. And so nothing in this argument requires
proof any further. Therefore I make this new argument. All men granting unto
man, liberty to syn, or, not to syn, to be saved, or not to be saved, must
needs grant free will in man, as Catholics do: But the Protestants following
grant such liberty, and freedom to man: Therefore they grant unto him free
will, as Catholics do. The Mayor is manifest: and the Minor thus proved by M.
Wotton, who defendeinge M. Perkins, Wotton def. of Perk. page 67. page 68.
compareing a sinner out of grace, to a prisoner, adds thus for himself: He
that is chayned by syn, may choose whether he will do such an Action, or no.
And again thus: Liberty in the state of grace, to will spiritual good, we
thank fully acknowledge. And Wotton sup. page 85.
further in these words: A man may with hold himself from breaking into gross
syns. We deny not, that it is in the power of men, to make choice of life. We
acknowledge that the fault is in every man, that Page 86. Page 88.
is not saved.

I Argue further: That which true Relygion does not deny, and was consented
unto, by the primative Church, is not to be denied for true: But the doctrine
of free will in man is such: therefore not to be denied for true. The Mayor is
manifest. And the Minor both confirmed by D. Couell and D. Sutcliff: and now
proved by M. Wotton, Wotton def of Perk. page 88.
who both confesses, that the ancient Fathers in the primatyue time consented
with Catholics, in this question: And concludes thus: We say with Austin
both in words and meaneing, Sup. page 90.
that true Religion neither denies free will, either to a good, or bad life.

My last Argument against all English Protestants is from their own public
decree, and framed thus. Whosoever by their own public decree, and
subscription in Religion, agree with the Council of Trent, in this question,
do grant free will: But all English Protestants be, or ought to be such:
Therefore they grant free will. The mayor is manifest by the recited degree of
the Council. The Minor is thus demonstratiuely proved: for the Book of the
Articles of their Religion (as before) confirmed by his Majesty, to which all
Ministers have subscribed, or so ought to do, by their own proceedings, does
teach them thus: The condition of man after the Artic. 10. of Religion.
fall of Adam is such, that he cannot turn, and prepare himself by his own
natural strength, and good works, to faith, and calling upon God: Wherefore
we have no power to do good works, pleasent, and acceptable to God, without
the grace of God pr^uenting us, that we may have a good will, and working with
us, when we have that good will. Then with the Council of Trent it supposes,
that by grace man is made free even to supernatural things: and before grace
is by nature free. And this is sufficient for this Question.

CHAPTER VII. WHEREIN THE CATHOLIC doctrine, of the distinction between
precepts, and cownsayls, and how they bind, is proved by these English
Protestant writers.
THE common doctrine as well of the Church of Rome, teaching a distinction
between precepts, and counsayles, the necessity of the one, and not the
other, as also the contrary generally taught by Protestants, are sufficiently
known to all, acquainted with the controversies of this time; wherefore
without needles repetition further, to prove that these English Protestant
writers, do or by their own writings ought to agree, and consent to
Catholics in this question, Thus I argue, and but briefly, because it is so
plainly yielded unto, by these men.

All that consent with the Roman Church, in this question, grant this
distinction of precepts and counsayles, as it does: But these English
Protestants accounted learned writers, among which are cited hereafter, do so
consent with the Roman Church: Therefore they grant, or ought by their
doctrine to grant this distinction of precepts, and counsayles. The Mayor is
manifest: The Minor is proved by these Protestant Doctors. First D. Field
confesses it Field. page 241.
thus: Besides precept^ many things were delivered by the way of counsel, and
advise only to the Churches. Secondly I may add all those which before have
granted unto us, that the commandments of God may be kept, the denial of
this distinction and doctrine, being but an accidentarie, and subordinate
error, defended, to uphold that falsehood, that the commandments are not
possible to be observed: wherefore, I will thirdly cite D. Couell a man
plainly delivering his own consent, and of his fellow Protestants also, so
far as he can allow their Religion, in this matter: his words be these.
Precepts and Counsels have this difference, that the Couell def. of Hooker
page 51. page 52.
one is of absolute necessity, The other left unto our free election. To cast
away wholly the things of the world, is no precept of necessity, but an advise
of greater perfection. He that obeys not a precept, is guilty of deserved
punishment: but he that fails of these counsayle^, only wants without
syn, that measure of perfection. For it is not a fault, not to vow, but to
vow, and perform is praise. He that performs the one, shall have greater
glory, but he that fails of the other, (without repentance) shall have
certain punishment. Neither is it said, says S. Augustine, as thou shall not
committ adultery, thou shall not kill: So thou shall not marrye, for those are
exacted, this is offered. This if it be done, is praised: Those unless they be
done, are punished. For says S. Hierome, where it is, but advise, there is
left a freedom: But where there is a precept, there is a necessity. Pr^cepts
are common to all: counsels to the perfections of some few. The precept
being observed has a Reward, being not observed a punishment: But a counsel
or advise, not observed has no punishment: and being observed has a greater
reward. And yielding, as it were a reason, why, according to my former
assertion, some Protestants and others, have denied this doctrine, he adds
thus: In these points Couell sup.
all have not holden the same opinions; some thought these cownsailes to be of
the same necessity with precepts: as those Heretics called Apostolici, others
esteemed them as things indifferent. Others as things forbidden, which error is
accused by some of our Adversaries, to be an opinion of our Church. There is
none of any second Judgment in our Church, which does not think, that willinge
poverty, humble obedience, and true chastity, are things very commendable,
and do bring with them great aduantadge, to the true perfection of a
Christian life. By these we do more, then without these we should. And
before he makes a long discourse, how the Couell sup. page 50. 51.
states of poverty, chastity, and obedience, belong to these perfections:
Which is also evident in his words recited.

Wherefore out of this graunts thus I argue again: what soever Catholic
doctrine is so certain, and allowed, that it is warranted by the word of God,
the law of reason, by S. Augustine, S. Hierome, the primative Church, and
denied by no Protestant of Judgment, by Protestant testimony, that without all
doubt is true: But this Catholic doctrine is such, so allowed and warranted:
Therefore it is true. The Mayor is without all question true: for those Rules
of true doctrine, the word of God, primative Church etc. Neither in Catholic
or Protestant proceedings can deceive us: The Minor is proved by the very words
of the Protestant Doctors before cited. Therefore I will conclude with this
Argument following.

Whatsoever Church, or congregation, grants, so many works, and estates of
perfection, as before they have recompted, Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience,
and yet in life and execution do not practice any one of them in any condition,
company, fraternity, or congregation, in any, one place or contry in so long
time, as Protestancie has Reigned, but spoiled, abandoned, persecuted, or
overthrown all Monasteryes, howses and communities living in such perfection,
neither is, nor can be the true, and perfect Church and spowse of Christ; but
that which proceeds in the contrary course: But the Church or congregations
of Protestants are in this case, as all men know, and the Roman Catholic
Church in the contrary disposition and state: Therefore the Protestant Religion
is not true, but only the Catholic. How holy and Religeous this our
Kingedome has been in this high degree of sanctity, in times of Catholic
Religion, how many hundreds of Monasteries were fownded to such purpose, how
many glorious Kings, Queens, and Princes, forsakeinge their Kingedomes,
Diadems, and Honors, have embraced this state of perfection, in chastity,
poverty, and obedience, and became Monks and Nuns, may in sort be gathered
out of the Protestant late Theater, where you shall find the number to great
to be cited. I will only allege their words in one place to give some trial
of it, which are these: Not only priests T^^at. of gr. Britan. page 305. n.
16. 17.
and lay men vowed and performed pilgrimadges, to Rome. But Kings, Queens, and
Bishops also did the like. So great a devotion was in their hearts, and so holy
a Reverence held they of the place. King Egbert succeeded his uncle Ceolnuph
in the Kingedome ruling with peace and pi^tie twentye years foresooke the
wo^ld, and shore himself a monk, as diverse other Kings in those days had
done, as Inab, Ethelred, Kenred, Sigebert, Sebbi, Offa, Cronulph etc. Some Page
17. 25. 37. 47. 298. 301. 308. 338. 351. 360.
of the Queens were these: Q. Aelfrith, Cuthburga, Elemner, Andrye, Quinburge,
Eadburge, Eve, Segburge, Ethelburge, Cuthburga, Oswith, Kinswith Ethelwith,
E^fride, Eanifled, Erminhild, Ethelswith, Edgiua, Elfgine, with others. The
examples of the sons and daughters of Kings, with such great princes, would
requier a volume to give them due remembrance. I will only recite two or
three relations, from these Protestants, how honorably these works of
perfection with their vows were then esteemed, and how barbarous a thing it
was then, to violate them. They write of King Etheldred in these words: The
remorse of conscience for the Page 341. n. 4
blood he had spilt, and the places of Oratoryes by him destroyed (besides his
Intrusions into an other man's Right) struck so deep a wound into King
Ethelreds breast, that ever he bethought him what recompense to make. First
then building a goodly Monastery at Bradney, and that most fruitful seated
in the county of Lincoln, thought that not sufficient to wa^ aw^^ ^he scarrs
of his foul offense, but determined in himself to forsake the world, for that
was the term attributed to the monastical life. But such was the Religion
then taught, and the goldy zeal of the good princes then raigneinge, whose
works have manifested their virtues, to posterities, and faith in Christ, the
salvation of their souls, in whose paradise we leave them, and Etheldred to
his deuent intent: who to reconcile himself first unto Kenred, bequeathed the
Crown solely to him, allthough he had a son capable thereof: then putting
on the habit of Religion, became himself a monk in his own monastery of
Bradney where he lived in a regular life the term of twelve years, and
therein lastely died Abbot of the place, when he had reigned 30. years.
Chelred the son and heir apparent of this King Ethelred, entered into
Religion, when he Page 341. n. 6.
was of sufficient years to have succeeded his Father in the Kingedome. Of the
miraculous victory of King Osway by his vow to dedicate his daughter to
Christ in perpetual virginity, they write in this manner. Penda the merciless
Pagan King inuading King Oswy refuseing all Page 338. n. 4. 5.
Iuells and offers of peace, King Oswy seeks help of God by prayer. And with
such zeal as was then embraced, vowed his young daughter Elfled to be
consecrated in perpetual virginity to him, with 12 farms and their lands, to
the erection, and mayntenance of a monastery; And his enemies army being
thirtye times his and of well appointed and old tried souldyers, Penda lost
his life, with discomfiture of all his mercian power. Of Ethelwald son of
Ethelbert Page 360. n. 3
thus they write: He enters now rebellion, and besides the alleadgeance due
to his prince, in sacriledgeius manner brake the hests of holy Church, in
deflowring, and taking a votarist to wife. But fearing the Army of K. Edward
bad in the night winborne (which he had taken) and his Nun adue, flyeinge to
the Danes in Northumberland. Where we se that this point of Protestant
doctrine is by their own sentence, sacrilege, a breaking of the hests of holy
Church, Joining it self against God and contry, with Rebellion and
infidelity. And a thing though used by Infidells, yet a monster and seldom
hard of among Christians: for of those Infidel Danes they add in these words:
Hungar and Page 354. cap. 35. n. 5.
Hubba began with fire and sword to lay all waste before them spareing neither
parson, sex, nor age. The places respected for public good, and sacred
temples consecrated only to God, which all other Tyrants have forborne, the
sauadge men as the earthes destroyers cast down, and trampled under their
profane feet: among which for note were the goodly Monasteryes of Bradney,
Crowland, Peterborough. Ely, and Huntington, all laid in level with the
ground, and their votaryes as well the Nuns as the Monks, murdered with
their inhumane and merciless swords: to avoid whose barbarous pollutions, the
chaste Nuns of Coldingham deformed themselves to their lascivious eyes, by
cutting of their upper lips and noses: but to everlasting remembrance they
remain most fair and well beseeminge faces of puer virgins. Then if the
glory, and honor of such vows, works of perfection, their vowers, votarists,
and professors are so great, and estimable with God, and good men even in the
Judgment of these Protestants. And those that have (though but in small things
in respect of these Protestants) afflicted and persecuted them, are worse then
tyrants, sauadge men, earth destroyers and profane; what is become of those
Protestants that destroyed so many hundreds of holy Temples, Monasteryes, and
places consecrated to God, which all other tyrants have forborne? And what hope
can be to these, that live, persisting in those stepps of their forerunners,
and daily adding new, and more afflictions to the sacred Priests, and holy
professors of that Religion, and perfection therein? God of his infinite mercy
grant them true penance, and turn away his so much deserved vengeance, from
this nation: And that as these men have much exexceeded the Infidel Danes in
offendinge, so they may in some kind imitate them in satisfaction and
repentinge: for they themselves in this Theater are wittnes, that their Theat
of gr. Britt. page 391. 392.
greatest King Canutus (whom I choose to exemplify in) for satisfaction of
such his syns. Went on pilgrimadge to Rome to visit the sepulcher of S. Peter
and Paul. Built many Churches and Abbeyes, greatly reverenced S. Benett
(whose Monasteryes were so persecuted) he offered up his crown upon the
Martyrs S. Edmunds Tomb. Most rich and royal Jewels he gave to the Church
of Winchester, whereof one is recorded to be a cross worth as much as the
whole reuenewe of England amounted to in one year. He set his crown, on the
head of the picture of our Savior on the cross, at Winchester, never
weareinge it more. Unto Couentry he gave the Arm of Saint Augustine the
Doctor: which he bought at Papia, in his return from Rome, and for which he
paid an hundred Talents of silver, and one of gold. With his own hands he
did help to remove the body of Saint Alphegus at the translation of it from
London to Canterbury, whom the Danes (not withstanding his Archiepiscopall and
sacred calleing) before had martyred at Greenewich. Gunhilda daughter of this
King, and Emma his wife, was the first wife of Page 393. n. 24.
Henry 3. Roman Emperor, her surpassing beauty bredd in the Emperor Ielousy
of her Incontinencye, the matter to be tried by combatt, her champion was her
page, but a youth brought out of England, against agyantlike man, but the page
cut of his head. The Emperesse refuses the Emperors bed, and took the holy
veil of a Nun in Flaunders where she spent the rest of her life. O how
happy had it been, for K. Henry 8. and his daughter Q. Elizabeth, themselves,
for us, and all posterities in England, if as in synninge they imitated and
exceeded the vnbeleeueing Danes, so in repenting and satisfaction they had
been Imitators of their piety.

CHAPTER VIII. WHEREIN THE CATHOLIC doctrine, of the distinction between
mortal and venial syns is proved by these Protestant writers.
IN this Question thus I breefely make demonstration, for the Catholic
doctrine, by these Protestants: All men that grant, and do not deny this
difference of syns, some to be mortal, depriueing of grace, others venial,
not depryueing of it, but consisting with it, do grant this distinction, and
do, or ought to agree with Catholics therein: But these English Protestant
Doctors, and writers do thus: Therefore they do, or ought to agree with
Catholics therein. The Mayor is evident: For as matters of faith may never
(without that great horrible offense, of denial of a man's faith) be denied,
so they ought according to the obligation, and duty of some times professing
our faith, be also some times confessed: But the rest of the Mayor which is
sufficient in this argument is expressly affirmed, and the Minor thus proved.
First the public Protestant Conference at Conference page 41.
Hampton Court, assures us thus: Among syns some be grievous, or mortal,
which deprive of grace, others venial, or which do consist with grace. Which
is the same which the Church of Rome teaches, in this Question. And D. Field
entreateinge of this matter, writes Field page 116.
thus in the name generally of Protestants: We do not deny the distinction
of venial and mortal syns, but do think, that some syns are rightly said
to be mortal, and some venial: some do exclude grace, out of that man in
which they are fownde, and so leave him in a state, wherein he has nothing
in himself, that can or will procure him pardon; others do not so far
prevail, as to bannish grace. Couell def. of Hooker page 56.
D. Couell disputing against the Heresies, of English Puritan Protestants,
uses these words: Your three false conclusions, seem to establish a threefold
error, contrary to the doctrine of all Churches, that are accounted Christian.
First, that all syn, is but one syn. Secondly that all syns are equal. Thirdly
that all syns are united. The first making no division of the kinds of syn;
the second no distinction, of the qualities of syn; and the third no difference
in committing sin. Against these we say, (and we hope warranted by truth)
that syns are of diverse kinds: of diverse degrees: of diverse natures. From
which, thus I argue again.

Whatsoever doctrine, is contrary to the doctrine of all Churches accounted
Christian, is erroneous, and in the contrary to that, which is warranted by
truth, is not true: But that Protestant doctrine, which denies the diverse
kynds, degrees, and natures of syns, is such: Therefore it is not true. The
Mayor is manifest: for true doctrine cannot be contrary to all Christian
Churches, to truth, nor can be erroneous, opposite to truth. The Minor is
expressly in plain words, proved by D. Couell before, who makes it so
odious, that in his opinion, none accounted, or to be accounted a Christian
will defend it. And the same doctrine of distinction of syns thus he
confirms in these words: Yt is not all one, to be ^ foot, Couell def. of
Hooker page 57. 58.
and a rodd wide. And therefore the law that forbad but one thing (thou shall
not kill) forbad three things, as Christ expowndeth it; Anger to thy Brother:
to call him fool: to offer him violence: these having every one as their
several degrees, so their several punishment. This Heresy then we leave to
his first Authors Iouinian, and the rest.

From which sentence thus I argue again: Nothing that is Heresy, and was for
such condemned in the Heretic Iouinian, and others for such, can be true
doctrine: But this Protestant puritan doctrine here confuted by D. Couell in
his I^dgment is such: Therefore it cannot be true. The Mayor is evident: for
true doctrine, and Heresy, be contrary. The Minor is proved in the last
Protestant citation. Lastely I argue thus.

That doctrine which has scandalized all Churches, and leaves many followers
of that Religion, wherein it is taught, ill satisfied, cannot be true; But the
doctrine of diverse Protestants in this question, is such: Therefore it cannot
be true. The Mayor is evident, for truth cannot scandalize all Churches, nor
leave the Professors ill satisfied. The Minor is proved by the Protestant
Relator of Religion, who entreating of this, Relation of Religion cap. 48.
and other such Protestant paradoxes, writes thus: Touching the eternal
decrees of God, the quality of man's nature, the use of works, some of their
chief Authors have scandalized all other Churches withal, yea and many of
their own to rest very ill satisfied. Therefore the former Catholic
doctrine in this point is true, and Orthodoxe, even by these Protestants. Which
shall suffyce in this question, perhaps not so generally received by English
Protestants, especially in the Articles of their Religion: to which they have
subscribed.

CHAPTER IX. WHERE THE DOCTRINE OF the Roman Church concerning the use and
reverence of holy Imadges, is proved by these English Protestant writers.
NEXT unto these Questions, so nearely concerning the Internal sanctity,
Justice, and sanctification of man: I would willingly give contentment to my
contry Protestants, from their own Doctors, and Professors in Religion, in
those Articles which they most dislike in the Roman Church. Wherefore as is
it sufficiently known, that the Protestant Relator of Religion, is by his
profession in his writing both a professed Enemy unto Catholics, and among
Protestants a man of reputed worthiness, and taking upon him an experimental
knowledge of Religeous causes: so I hope no exception will be taken unto me,
if I first make Answer, and give satisfaction unto his demand: which to make
an union between Catholics and Part. 1. cap. 2. Relation of Religion cap. 48.
Protestants, in only on the behalf of Catholics (as I have also before
remembered) is thus set down in his own words: To give over worshippinge of
Imadges, offering supplication to Saints, offensive Ceremonies, Indulgences,
and vseinge of strange languadge, not understand in our devotions. These be
all which he wills Catholics to relinquish in their Religion, among so
many controuersyes in essential things, as their styled Professor D. Willet
and other of their writers have registered: And consequently wills Protestants
to conform themselves to the Roman Church in all the rest. To whom I will
Answer in every particular, even by his English fellow Protestant writers,
and himself also: And first in general, upon his own grant and desire I
argue thus.

When two Churches are at difference in Religion, and by grant of both, one is
the true Church of Christ, and differ in many great questions, and many of
essential points by the grant of Protestants being one of the Churches, and
the other Church by their Judgment only to have an union needs to relinquish
five things, and none of them essential, but dispensable all, and the other
Church to submitt in all others, then by thas doctrine which Protestants have
taught us in the first chapter of the first part of this work about the
Infallibility of the true Church, and generally that it cannot err in any
essential thing, that Church which is by the Adversaries confession in this
state of truth in all things essential, is the true Church, and the other
false: But by the Protestant Relator before, the Roman Church is in this state
of truth, and the Protestants Church in the contrary: Therefore the Roman
Church is true, and that of Protestants false. Both the propositions be
evidently true, and proved before. Therefore lamentable is the condition of
that Protestant Religion, defective, and to be reformed by their own sentence
in so many and essential Questions. And this Protestant Relator, and all
Protestants with him, may certaynely know, (considering what they have written
of the true Churches privileges Part. 1. ^. 1.
from error before) that their so deformed congregation is a false Church, and
the Church of Rome which so long time has been accused by Protestants of a
general Revolt, and Apostasy, and now by her enemies Judgment needs to
amend only five dispensable things, so small a blemishe and spott to be washed
away, does also want those deformities, and Protestants eyes are dazeled as
well in those few now, as in so many before now recanted. But to give him and
all other Protestants of England particular satisfaction by their own writings
both in those five, and all other chief questions between us, I will now
first begin with that, which he names first, worshippinge of Imadges, as he
terms it.

The Council of Trent entreating how holy Imadges, are to be used and kept in
Churches, expresses the reverent respect to be observed toward them, in this
manner: Not because it may be believed, there is any divinity Council. trident.
sess. 9.
or virtue in them, for which they are to be worshipped: or that any thing is
to be asked of them: or any trust to be placed in the Imadges: as of old it was
done of the gentiles: which placed their hope in their Idols: But because the
honor which is given unto them, is referred to the Prototypa which they
represent: So that by the Imadges which we kiss, and before which we putt of
our hats, and kneel down, we adore Christ: and reverence the Saints whose
similitude they bear. Which is that which is established against oppugners of
Imadges, by the decrees of Counsels, especially the second Synod of Nyce.
Hither to the opinion of Catholics in this question, being the same, and no
other, but that, which the second Nicene Council had decreed 900. years ago.
Wherein a relative worship, or Reverence of holy Imadges, was defined. Then
supposeing what I have cited before from D. Field, D. Morton, D. Sutcliffe D.
Willet and others that a general Council has the highest bynding Part. 1. c.
6.
Judgment, and that neither the Protestant Church in England, or all places of
Europe where it is, ever had, or can have any such Council, by their own
confession, but every Rule they have, or can have, Prince, Parliament, or
Convocation, is fallible, and has erred, as is proved in the first part of
this work; This, I say, supposed thus I argue.

That which is confirmed and allowed by a general Council, the highest
commaundinge Rule in the Church, is to be observed, and received before any
Protestant article, or position, allowed by no such, but by a deceitful Rule:
But this Catholic doctrine was so confirmed and allowed, and the contrary of
Protestants only by a fallible and deceauing Rule: Therefore the doctrine of
Catholics, and not of Protestants in this Question is to be observed. The
Mayor is evidently concluded forth of these Protestants before, and so much of
the second proposition that the Protestant doctrine of these men neither in
this or any one Article has been allowed by any such highest or bynding Rule.
That which remains to be proved is only this, that by Protestant testimony
this Catholic position has been allowed and confirmed by general Council:
which is performed by D. Willet, writing thus: The Greeks in a general Willet
Antilog. page 169.
Council held at Ny^e confirmed and allowed the Adoration of Imadges, about
the Time of Adrian the first. And their Theater has like words:

Again thus I argue That doctrine which the true Church (by Protestants
Judgment) embraces, is by them to be received, and believed: But the doctrine
of the Roman Church is the same in this point, with that of their true Church,
the Greek Church: Therefore it is to be received, and believed of them. The
Mayor is proved before: And the Minor by the Relator of Religion Relation of
Religion cap. 54.
himself who seeks this Attinement: for speaking of the Christian Gretians,
he writes thus: They hold the worshipping of picture. And their own
Patriarch in his Censure of Protestants, delivers his sentence in this order:
We do honor and are prostrate, to Hieremius in censur. cap. 21.
their Imadges, not with that worshipp which is proper to God, but relatiuely,
and with a certain respect to the Exemplars. Therefore by these Protestants
the doctrine of the Roman Church is true in this Question. Thirdly I argue
thus.

All men allowing honor or reverence to be due, and done to things less
significatiue of God, Saints, or holy things, must needs allow it to things
more significatiue and representing: But these English Protestants allow such
honor or Reverence to things less representative, and only under that
formalitie of representing; Therefore they ought to allow to things more
representinge, holy Images etc. The Mayor is evident being an Argument
affirmative from the less to the greater; The Minor is thus proved by these
Protestants, by citeinge from them how they allow honor and reverence to
things less representinge, then Images, that is to books, to the name of a
thing to be honored, To sacraments which they say are only signs, D. Field
entreating of the reverence done to Imadges writes thus: it is Field page 152.
like to the honor we do to the Books of holy scripture. To this I add their
commanded reverence in their service and Churches to the name of Jesus when it
is read in the gospel. Comm. Book confirmed.
Which custom of reverence the university of Oxford in their Answer to the
Puritans Millinarie petition confirms and defends in these words: Reverence
done at Answer to the Millinarie petition page 14.
the name of Jesus, to be our Inward subjection to his divine Majesty, and an
apparent token of our devotion. Then needs must the reverence done at a picture
and Imadge be such. Concerning the signs in Sacraments with them, M. Perkins
probl. page 163.
Perkins the famous Sacramentary writes thus. Honor, veneratio, reuerentia
exhibetur Sacramento, quatenus signum est. Honor, worship, reverence is given
to the Sacrament, as it is a sign. Where honor, worship, and reverence is
allowed not only to a sign, but under that formalitie, quatenus signum est,
as it is a sign; and when we come to examine this Protestant, it is no
immediate sign of Christ, but of grace by him, only a quality spiritual, as
their definition of their Sacraments: signs of grace, does witness.
Therefore Articul. Relig. 25.
an Imadge the Immediate sign, representation, and expression of Christ (and
so of other holy Imadges) and more perfectly representing, is rather to be
honored, worshipped, reverenced, as his words be.

Fourthly I argue thus: All men allowing Honor, Reverence, or worship to the
sign or Imadge of the Cross of Christ, must allow it to his immediate and
perfectly reprenting Imadge: But these English Protestants allow it to the
sign or picture of the cross of Christ: Therefore they ought to allow it to
his Imadge; And so of others by like proportion. The Mayor is sufficiently
proved before, as also that the sign of the cross is less figuring and
presenting Christ, then his own Imadge: The Minor is proved thus by their own
writings. First in the Kings Canons the sign of the cross is named, an
honorable badge: therefore Can. 140.
it may be honored: for whatsoever is honorable, worthy of, and deserving
honor, may be honored. D. Couell writing against Burges the puritan, denying
the use of the sign of the cross writes thus: There was a Couell against
Burges page 115.
reverent use, and estimation of the sign of the cross in the Apostles time.
Therefore it is still to be as then, used and esteemed with reverence. And thus
again he writes of the sign of the cross: It is a lawful outward
ceremony, and Couell sup. page 116.
honorable badge: and the very name of the cross has and shall be honorable
amongst all true Christians to the worlds end. And again: It was so far
honored Page 126. sup.
by the holy Ghost, that it often expresses, the whole meritt of Christ's
passion. It seems to be an Apostolical tradition. It had then honor, was an
ancient and reverend sign. M. Perkins writes Page 139.
in these words: The wood of the cross in the Church of Constantin: in the
feast of the exaltation Perkins probl. page 79. Page 83. sup.
of it, was kissed and worshipped, adoratur. The cross was reverenced, and
worshipped within the first 400. years. And to that purpose he cites
Prudentius, Paulinus, S. Hierome, Euagrius, alleging diverse public
examples, in that sense.

Further I argue thus out of M. Burges the puritan: what soever honor was
given to the sign of the cross by the primative Fathers, may now be given by
Catholics to the Imadge of Christ: This is proved before: But as much
reverence as Catholics use was used to the sign of the cross by the
primative Fathers: Therefore Catholics may lawfully use their reverence to
holy Imadges. The Mayor being before proved: The Minor is justified by M.
Burges in his Burges apol. apud Couell page 146.
Apology, writing, that the Ancient Fathers, Origin, Tertullian, S. Ciprian,
S. Hierome, S. Athanasius, and S. Augustine did allow as much reverence and
virtue to the sign of the cross, as Catholics Wotton def. of Perk. page 594.
do. And M. Wotton confesses thta Lactantius approved the worship of the
Cross.

Fiftely in this Question I argue thus: whatsoever doctrine about Imadges was
practiced by S. Basile and the primative Church, is true, and may still be
practiced: But such use of Imadges as is with Catholics now was then
practiced: Therefore it may still be practiced. The first proposition is often
proved and granted before: And the Minor thus proved by these Protestants:
Wotton def. sup. page 594.
first. M. Wotton grants from S. Basile, these words: I honor the history of
Imadges, and do properly worshipp them. Therefore they Perlins probl. page 78.
may be so still used. M. Perkins writes thus: The use of Imadges was public
in Churches within the first 400. years. And again: The Imadge of Mary the
virgin was wont to be carried in solemn pomp, solemni in pompa efferri. And so
no doubt reverenced, as whatsoever is so solemnly carried and borne in pomp and
honor, must needs be used: The very bearing it self in such order being a
reverence.

Lastely I make this Argument: such use of Imadges as was practiced by the
Jews in the time of the law, is still lawful for Christians: But the Jews
in that time did practice without reprehension the worshipp or reverence of
Imadges: therefore it is now lawful. The Mayor is evident, for all dyuines
grant, that the prohibition to the Jews (prone to Idolatry) was as severe or
more to them, then to Christians. The Minor is thus granted by M. Wotton: The
Jews in the Temple before Christ, Wotton def. of Perk. page 581. 582.
did worship the pictures of the Cherubyns. Then if the pictures of
Cherubins, being mere Creatures, were publicly in the temple worshipped, how
much more is the picture, and Imadge of their and our Lord, Jesus Christ to be
had in reverence, and so to be used: And so of Imadges of his servants, and
Saints in their due proportion: Because the Saints themselves may be honored,
and prayed unto, as I am to prove by these Protestants in the next chapter. And
this is further proved by these Protestant Theat of gr. Britt. page 342. n. 2.
Bishop in their Theater, where they testify in these words: By the clergy
that are accounted the light of the world, in a Council at Rome held under
Pope Constantyne the first, it was decreed and commanded, that carved Imadges
should be made to the memorial of Saints, and should be set up in Churches,
with respective adoration. Which is, to be referred unto, and terminated in the
prototypa, Saints, represented by such Imadges, and by such Images yielded unto
them, and in them ended. And in an other place they call such Imadges Monuments
of Christian Religion, and sufficiently prove, they were even from the time of
Christ both used for the memory, and reverence of Christ, or his Saints, whom
they represented. Their words of the miraculous Imadge erected in honor of
Christ, by the woman in the Gospel cured by the hemm of his garment touched,
and reverenced by her, testified by Eusebius, and others are these: Julian (the
Apostata) destroys all monuments of Theat. page 266.
Christian Religion, among others the Imadge of Christ made of brass at
Caesarea Philippi, where the miraculously curing herb grew. And they condemn
him for this wickedness, in overthrowing that Imadge, erected to the honor of
Christ, and miraculously confirmed, both to be religeously erected to his
honor, and so continued. But let us come into our own nation, where they will
give us some light, (though by them misted what they can) in what reverence
these have been used in this Island, even from the first conversion of the
Brittaynes, and ever after, both with Kings, and subjects. Of Subjects thus
they write: In Diocletian his time a thousand Saints suffered Martyrdom at
Lichfeild, in Theat. page 206. n. 19.
memory whereof the city bears arms to this day, in an Eschacheon of
Landscape, sundry parsons diversely martyred. Of our Christian primative Kings
Page 207. n. 22.
first they write thus: Our Kings ranked for sanctity before all other
potentates of the earth, as Vincentius Page 206. n. 20.
records. Then thus: The virgin Mary with her son in her Arms, in the
ensign of Arthur, so often desplayed for Christ does show the badge of that
ages Christianity. And again: In Page 207. n. 21.
the ancient Charters of the fowndation of Glastenbury it is called Origo
Religionis in Anglia: in an other: Tumulum Sanctorum, ab ipsis discipulis
Domini aedificatum fuisse vener abilem. The beginning of Religion in England,
that it was a grave of Saints builded by the disciples of our Lord, and vener
able King Arthur benefactor unto it, his Arms there an Escucheon, whereon a
cross with the virgin Mary in the first quarter is set, and held to be the
Arms of that Abbey. And further of our English Kings in this order from the
year of Christ 643. they testify, how they honored these holy Imadges, in
their most honorable Ensigns, and badges of honor. King Oswy gives Page
385. n. etc.
a plain cross in every part a Lion Rampant. The next King Wlfhere a S.
Andrews cross. So these Kings following King Ethelred, Kenred, Chelred,
Ethelbald, Offa, Egfride, Kenwolfe to the year 800. And so they recompt after,
of King Egbert, Ethelwolfe, Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelred, Elfred, Edward
syrnamed the elder, Ethelstan, Edmund, Edred, Edwy, Edgar, Edward syrnamed the
Martyr Ethelred, Edmund syrnamed Ironsyde, and Edward the Confessor. And of
these English Kings, in an other place they write in this manner: The Saxons
before King William his time used only Page 424. n. 60.
to sign their Charters, with guilt crosses, and such marks. So great and
respective regard our blessed Kings of that happy age bore unto such Imadges,
signs, and remembrances of our Savior, and his holy Saints, that even in
their temporal actions they ever had them in presence, and memory. Much more
in Churches and places of holy worshipp, where they used them in as religeous
respects, as the Roman Church does at this time; as we may gather by the very
words of these Protestants in this book, where they write of King Inas
esteemed a Saint by these men themselves, in these Theat. page 298. 299.
words: King Ine builds the renowned Abbey of Glastenbury most stately to
the honor of Christ, Peter, and Paul, where formerly stood the old cell of
Joseph of Aremathea, which this King Ina after a most sumptuous manner new
built, the chapel whereof he garnished with gold, and silver, and gave rich
ornaments thereto: as Altar, Chalice, Censor, Candlesticks, Basin, and holy
water buckett Imadges, and pale for the Altar of an incredible value. And how
these Imadges were used, so placed in cheifest place of adoration, and with
such other Instruments of Catholic worshipp we cannot make a question; If
we should, they will direct us, and make it evident, that such reverence as
Catholics now use, was then used unto them. Their words of King Canutus are
these: Canutus the Danes Theat. page 205. n. 17.
greatest King, so soon as he became a Christian in England, held it his
cheifest majesty, to be the vassal of Christ. And with such devotion as then
was taught, crowned the Crucifixe at Winchester, with the crown he wore: and
never after, through all his Reign, by any means would wear the same.

CHAPTER X. WHEREIN THE CATHOLIC doctrine of prayer, and honor to Saints and
Angels, is proved true: by these English Protestants writers.
NEXT I must by the Protestant Relator his order, entreat of Supplication to
Saints: and to Angels consequently. Of this matter thus we read in the
Council of Trent. The holy Council does command Council. trident. sess. 9.
all Bishops and others, which have the office and chardge of teaching; That
according to the use of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, received from
the primative times of Christian Religion, and the consent of holy Fathers, and
decrees of holy Counsels cheefely, that they diligently instruct the faithful
of the Intercession of Saints Invocation, honor of Relics, and lawful use of
Imadges: teaching them, that it is good that the Saints which reign with
Christ offer their prayers to God, for men: and that it is profitable, humbly
to call upon them: and to fly to their prayers, aid, and help, to obtain
benefits of God, by his son Jesus Christ, our Lord, who alone is our
Redeemer and Savior. Hitherto the doctrine of Catholics in this Question. Now
let us argue from these English Protestants to the same purpuse.

First I argue thus: All that be in blessedness in heaven, and instate of
excellency with God and worthy of honor, and both hear or know our prayers,
and doeings, and pray for us, are to be honored, and may be prayed unto: But
the Saints and Angels in heaven be such, and in this condition: Therefore
they are to be honored, and may be prayed unto. The Mayor is apparently true,
and with those conditions granted by these best Protestant writers: The Minor
that the Saints and Angels in heaven are in that state, is thus proved by
these English Protestants. D. Field writes thus: The Field. l. 3. c. 31. page
143.
Saints in heaven do pray for all in general. And thus again of Vigilantius
the Heretic: If he absolutely denied, that the Saints departed do pray for
us, we think he erred: for we (Protestants) hold they pray in genere. Then
it is proved, the Saints be in heaven and glory a state worthy honor, and
that they pray for us: now I will prove they hear our prayers by these
Protestant writers, because they teach us that they know our Protestations,
Professions, and expect our seruyces. D. Field to make us know, that he
thinks they know these things, (for Field page 192.
a Doctor may not make things that understand not, to understand, and be made
witnesses of things they know not has these words: We protest and profess
before God, men, and Angels: his friend D. Willet writes thus: Willet Antil.
in epist. dedic. anglic.
That the Angels expect his Majesty's faithful service. Then they know his
service: And if they know the deeds and services of princes, and Kings are to
do their service faithfully. No doubt but they know the deeds of Subjects
also, and in doing faithful service the subject is not to be freed, where the
Sovereign is not exempted. And concerning Prince Henry his son, thus their
Theater prays. upon whose parson I pray that the Theat of gr. Britt. page
37. n. ^.
Angels of Jacobs God may ever attend, to his great glory, and great
Britaynes happiness. And as these for the King and his son. So the Protestant
Bishop of Lincoln D. Barlowe enueying against his Catholic Adversary not
writing of Q. Elizabeth, as himself did, Barlowe Answer to a nameles Oath page
69.
freeing her from all mortal syn in her whole life, has these words: o
blessed Trinity, and all you glorious Angels can you endure this hellish
blasphemye, and brook these slawnderous us impieties, in silence and
unrevenged? Then I hope if a Protestant Bishope may invoke, and pray to the
Angels, to take reuendge, to hurt and hinder me: it will be as agreeable to
the laws of Charity, and true Religion, to desire their help, assistance, and
pray unto them to releyue our wants, in our time of necessity, or at any time
to honor them. The like unto this, is written by D. Wilkes, and other Wilkes
obedience page.. 3. Wotton def. of Perk. page 12.
Protestants: And M. Wotton proves the same of the Saints in heaven in this
manner. The Saints departed we love and honor; of their credit with God we
doubt not: their care of men we deny not. And to assure us, that they have not
a care of us only in general, but in particular also and so know our
actions, first M. George Close parson of black Torrington in devonshire, M.
George Close ser. before the Judges at Exeter.
in his sermon before the Judges, at Exeter, moving wicked lawyers, to
Repentance, urges it in these words: So shall the Angels rejoice in your
contrition, almighty God accept your Confession, and the whole world keep an
holy day for your satisfaction. Therefore if the Angels know our particular
internal Actions, such as Contrition, and sorrow of mind is, how much more
those that be external, and in no ways shrouded from their understandings.
And to this verity his Majesty himself gives testimony speaking Kings
speech die 21. Martij An. 1609. at Whitehall
thus: It is a Christian duty in every man, reddere rationem fidei, and not to
be ashamed to give an account of his profession, before men, and Angels as
often, as occasion shall require. Therefore seeing Auditors in taking Audite must
needs know the Reckonings, and Accounts, of their Accomptants, the Angels and
Saints cannot be Ignorant of our Actions, done before them, as his Majesty
expresses. And D. Couell in Examination of Puritaine, writes thus: Couell
examinat. page 195.
Does any man think, the Angels do not help us, being ministering spirits?
and seeing God has given his Angels chardge over us, may we not pray to have
their assistance. From whence thus I argue again.

They that be in glory, can help us, and have charge over us to minister, and
men may pray to have their assistance, and they attend to further our requests,
may be requested and prayed unto: But the Angels (and consequently) the Saints
in heaven be in these conditions toward us: Therefore they may be requested,
and prayed unto. The Mayor is evident: and the Minor also sufficiently proved
by this last citation from D. Couell, and thus confirmed again Couell exam.
sup. page 178.
by him. The Angels attend to further our Requests. Therefore we may request
their help.

Further I argue thus: That which is the doctrine of the L. Protestant
Archbishops, and D. Feilds true Greek Church, may not be rejected. But this
doctrine of prayer and honor to Saints, and Angels is such: Therefore not to
be rejected. The Mayor being before granted; The Minor is thus proved by the
Greeks in their censure of Protestants; where speaking of the one only true
God, they have these words: Hieremias in censur. cap. 21.
We do not acknowledge other for God besides thee: But we make all Saints
Mediators, and cheefely and excellently above all others, the Mother of God
himself, Mary the Mother of God. And we constitute all Saints Mediators, and
Advocates for us. And they pray not only for us, but also for those which be
dead, so that they dyed not in mortal syn. For in such a case, no Job, or
Daniell, though they should stand up to pray, should deliver their children.
We call upon our Lady, Angels, Archangells, that Precursor and Prophet of
our Lord, the Baptist, also the glorious Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, and holy
Pastors, and Doctors, also the Company of holy women, and all Saints, to make
intercession for us sinners. Hitherto the Censure of the Greek Church, both
teaching the same doctrine, with the Church of Rome, and preventing the
frivolous objections of Protestants in this point.

Again thus I argue: That which was the doctrine of the primative Church, free
from superstition (as his Majesty wittnesseth) Confer. page 69.
is true doctrine and to be embraced: But the practice and doctrine of the
Roman Church to pray to Saints was the doctrine of that time: Therefore it is
true, and to be embraced. The Mayor is granted, and proved by Protestants
before: And the Minor now thus proved by them. M. Perkins speaching of the
doctrine of that time in the Church, in this matter, speaks thus. There was
in the Church Intercessio singularium, Perlins probl. page 89.
prosingularibus, Intercession to Saints in particular, for men or things in
particular. This he testifies for invocation to Saints, and their prayers
for men in particular, (for he had with other Protestants granted before a
general Intercession of the Saints for those that live.) Page 88, sup.
And cites for particular invocation, the histories of Eusebius, and
Palladius. And adds further thus: The ancient Fathers were wont in their
Masses, (In liturgijs) to recite the names of Page 89. sup.
Martyrs and Saints, requiring further, and asking our Lord, that he would
grant this, or that, by their prayers, or intercessions. He might have Page
93. sup.
added more with truth, if it had pleased him, that those Ancient Masses or
liturgies had diverse particular prayers unto Saints. And this doctrine of
particular prayer, and invocation of Saints, was so generally used, both in
the public Masses, and by the Fathers of that time, That this Protestant
writer both freely acknowledges it, and calls it syn, and sacrilege in
them: his words be these: The ancient Fathers especially Perkins sup. page 93.
after 400. years of Christ did syn in the invocation of Saints: yea were
guilty of sacrilege. And for this doctrine so charge among others, these
holy and learned Fathers: S. Page 94. sup.
Paulinus, Fortunatus, S. Leo, S. Ephrem, S. Fulgentius, P. Damianus, Prosper
etc. And this is the strange Idolatry, wherewith some of these men have so
fondly accused Catholics: and therefore notwithstanding all their show of
desire to be tried by the Fathers, M. Ormerod seeing how they Ormerod pict.
pap. page 26.
condemn Protestants, for denial of this prayer, and invocation: speaks
thus of those holy, and learned Fathers: They did not ponderously consider of
this question. Is not this a ponderous consideration of so worthy a Protestant
writer, to condemn all antiquity of want of consideration, when the let not
with his humor? and yet he writes further thus: Allthough the Ancient
Fathers Page 27. sup.
had all jointly embraced this opinion: yet are not we therefore bownd to
receive it. Where he deals as old Protestants were used to do, not to
regard any Authority, but what pleases them. But to prove by the confession
of Protestants, that this was the doctrine of the primative Church, this is
sufficient. Yet I add M. Middleton, who writes Middleton papistom. page 129.
thus: Austin teaches us: That Christians celebrated the memories of Martyrs,
for these two intents: That we may be associate to their meritts, and helped
with their prayers. And D. Morton alleges: Morton Apol. part. 1. page 227.
228.
how all Antiquity taught invocation of Saints.

Lastely in this Question I argue thus: No doctrine which denies any Article
of our Creed, is true, or to be received: But the denial of Angels (and more
strongely of Saints whose Communion is in the Creed) to offer up our prayers
which we in earth make, is to deny an Article of our Creed: Therefore, it is
not true, nor to be received. The Mayor is evident by Protestants: The Minor is
thus proved by D. Couell, Couell against Burges page 89.
who disputing against Burges the puritan, who called this an usurping
untruth, and taxed the Book of Tobias, because there the Angel said, he
was one of the seven holy Angels, that offer up the prayers of the Saints of
God: Answers Couell sup. page 90.
in these words: If it be an an usurped untruth, for the Angels to offer up
the prayers of the Church, unto God, in the mediation of his son, we shall
(peradventure) deprive our selves of a great part of their Ministry, and
dissolve that communion of Saints, which we profess to believe as an Article
of Gods truth. Therefore I will by these Protestants conclude in this matter,
that the doctrine of the Roman Church herein is Orthodoxe and true: and the
contrary heretofore taught by Protestants, false and impious. And the rather
because it seems by the Kings Canons, to be excommunication Kings Canons. An.
1604. can. 8.
to deny this Catholic doctrine: for in these Canons it is excommunication,
Ipso facto, to affirm, or teach, that the form and manner of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests, and deacens, conteyneth any thing in it, that
is repugnant to the word of God. And yet the Protestant Author of the book
called Abridgment thus Abridgme^t An. 1605. page 30.
testifies of the oathe in that Book of ordination: The oathe of supreamacie
is thus concluded, so help me God, and all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.
Which the late edition by Barker Book of Make. Bish: etc deacons Oath sup.
has left out. The Churches that were dedicated to Saints in this Kingedome
even in the time of the Christian Britaynes, and Saxons after, the honor, and
worship, that was done, and due unto them, how they are named even by
Protestants the Tutelar patrons of our nation, there be to many Theat of gr.
Britan.
Examples in the late Theater to be recited.

CHAPTER XI. WHEREIN IS PROVED BY these English Protestant writers, that the
Ceremonies of the Roman Church, so much heretofore impugned by them, are now
contrariwise in their Judgment, adjudged holy, ancient, reverent, decent etc.
THE third thing which the Protestant Relator in this his desired Atonement,
requires the Church of Rome to give over, is to leave their offensive
Ceremonies, as he terms them, what they be in particular he does not
express, but by the writings of others, his Associates in Religion, we may
justly suppose, he most aymeth at the ceremonies used in the holy sacrifice
of Mass, crossings, candells, and such as I will justify by themselves in
this Chapter, particularly reciting them, or the cheifest, which I now omit in
this place to avoid Repetitions, to which I am often forced. And first
concerning Ceremonies, by what Authority, they may be ordained, and being so
duly ordained, of what authority, and reverent estimation, they ought to be,
ensues thus by these Protestants: Their public Articles have thus Articul.
Relig. 20.
sentenced: The Church has power to decree Rites, or ceremonies, and
authority in controversies of faith. Then much more must that her authority
needs extend to accidental things in Religion, such as these ceremonies are:
D. Couell Couell modest. examinat. page 64. 65.
tells us, they be to be had in such Respect, that (to use his words:) The
primative Counsels have condemned them as Heretics, only for being stiffely
opposite in this kind. And entreats Couell sup. page 56.
of them in these words following. We call them, Ceremonies, properly all such
things, as are the external Act of Religion, which have their commendation,
and allow ance from no other cause, but only, that in Gods worshipp they are
virtuous furtherances of his honor. And after he had thus defined, Page 58. 59.
or described them, he does also divide them, in this order, and in these
words:

All Ceremonies may be divided thus: some were for iustifications, such as the
law commanded, whereby the obseruer was made more purified, and more holy. In
place whereof afterward succeeded those, that were for ornament, and to
signify such virtues, as were requisite in those parties, that rightly use
them. Secondly in Respect of the Author, some were ordinances of nature, as to
look up to heaven, to lift up the hands, to how the knees, to knock the
breast, and such like, when we pray, things used in their devotion by the
Heathens themselves: others were appointed by God himself, some by the
Apostles, and Bishops, that succeeded in their place: thirdly some in the parts
of the immediate worship, as sacrifice, prayer, adoration, and suchlike: some
only dispose, as fasting, austere living: some are only instruments, as
Churches, Altares, chalices, and all those, which religeously being separated.
serve only to make the devotion more solemn, and that solemnity to be more
holy. Fourthly of these some, respect parsons, some times, some other concern
places, all which concurringe in a dyuine worship, are with Ceremonies by
separation made sacred, and so fitter to serve unto holy uses. Lastely some are
particular, some more general, and universal. And having thus entreated
Couell supr. page 65.
of the original, description, and division of Ceremonies, he writes further
of their necessity, in this manner.

There is nothing, can be a surer preserver of Religion, then to keep it from
contempt: a thing not easily done, where it is left destitute and deprived of
holy Ceremonies. For the principal excellency of our Religion being
spiritual, is not easily observed, of the greatet number, which are carnal:
and therefore we propownde not naked mysteryes, but cloathe them: that these
offeringe to the senses a certain Majesty, may be received of the mind, with
a greater Reverence. And therefore some of the Fathers, accounting them as the
shell to the kernel, have said, that noe Religion, either true or false, was
able to consist without them. Hitherto the words of this Protestant Doctor.
From which I first argue in this manner.

Whatsoever Religion omitteth, and neglects those things, which are so
necessary, for the preservation of true Religion, that it cannot consist
without them, cannot be the true Religion: But the English Protestant Religion
is such: therefore it cannot be true. The first proposition is evidently true
in the light of nature: for any thing that is necessary for the preservation
of an other, cannot be separated from it. The second proposition is likewise
Manifest, for the Protestants of England neither esteem so of Ceremonies, as
this Doctor tells us, they ought to be accounted of, neither retain such
Ceremonies, as his divisions comprehend, as is evident. Therefore the Roman
Church is true, and the Ceremonies thereof holy, otherwise there should be no
true Church, or Ceremonies practiced: and consequently no true Religion, by
this Doctor before.

Again, supposing, as before is granted by these Protestants, that either
their Church, Religion, and Ceremonies, or the Roman Church, Religion and
Ceremonies be true, I argue thus: No Church, or Religion, which omitteth, and
denies those holy Ceremonies which are parts of the immediate worship, and the
Instruments thereof, can be the true Church, and Religion: But contrariwise
that which embraces and allows them: But the Protestant English Church
omitteth, and denies ceremonies, parts of the immediate worship, and the
instruments thereof, that is, sacrifice, altares, etc. which D. Couell tells
us before to be such, and the Roman Church embraces and allows them:
Therefore the Roman Church and Ceremonies, and not the Protestants are true.
Both the propositions are manifest: Therefore the Ceremonies of the Roman
Church be holy, reverent, etc. otherwise no true Church and Religion could have
them, or be such.

Thirdly I argue thus: The true Church has power to decree Rites, or
Ceremonies, and consequently to bind others to receive them, and not reject
them: But by Part. 1. cap. 2.
the grant of Protestants in the first part, the Roman Church was the true
Church when it ordained all ceremonies now used in it: Therefore they ought to
be used and bind all men to receive them, and so are consequently holy,
decent, reverent etc. The Mayor proposition consists of the Articul. Relig.
20.
words of their allowed article before cited. And the second proposition
largely proved by these Protestants, as I have cited. And by D. Couells
citation it would have been accounted Couell modest. examinat page 64. 65.
Heresy in the primative Church to have been stiffely opposite in this kind.
Therefore Protestants may not deny them, under such peril in his Judgment.

Further thus I argue: Those which be the Ceremonies of that Church, which the
English Protestants acknowledge for the true Church, are to be received for
holy, decent, reverent etc: But the Ceremonies of the Roman Church that now
is, be the Ceremonies of the Lord Protestant Archbishops and D. Feilds and
others true Church, the present Greek Church: Therefore they are to be
received as holy, decent etc. The Mayor is manifestly true, out of their
Article before, and their writers Articul. 20. sup.
against the puritans. The Minor is proved out of the Protestant Relator of
Religion, who speaking of them of the present Greek Relation cap. 53. or cap.
54.
Church, writes thus: With Rome they concur in the opinion of
Transsubstantiation, and generally in the service, and whole body of the
Mass, in praying to Saints, in auricular confession, in offering of
sacrifice, and prayer for the dead, and in these without any, or with no
material difference. They hold purgatory also, and worshipping of pictures,
for the form and ceremonies of the Mass, they much Cap. 55. sup.
resemble the Latins. In crosseings they are very plentiful. Their liturgies
be the same that in the old time, namely S. Basils, S. Chrisostomes and S.
Gregoryes Cap. 53. or 54.
translated, without any bending of them to that change of languadge, which
their tongue has suffered. In sum all those opinions which grew into the
Church, before that separation, between the Greeks and Latins, and all those
ceremonies which were common unto both, they still retain, as their
Crosseings and Tapers with others. Thus they have proved, not only that the
Ceremonies of the Roman Church agree with, or be the same with those of that
Church, which they teach to be the true Church, but to have been used in the
primatyue Church, in the Masses of S. Basile, S. Chrysostom and S. Gregory
the great, Pope of Rome the last that added any thing to that Mass, which
the Roman Church now uses, and is also used among the Gretians themselves,
being translated into Greek, as this Relator wittnesseth: And this will most
plainly further appear in that he says, the Greeks agree with the Latins
and Roman Church in all opinions, and ceremonies used before their separation.
For to make manifest the Antiquity of these holy ceremonies by that his
prescribed time of separation: first D. Willet Willet Antil. page 169.
tells us, it was before the writing of the tripartite history, which he
cites to that end, and was twelve hundreds of years since. D. Downame is of
the like opinion, Downame Book of Antichrist.
denowncing it to have been in the days of the primative Church, before they
take any exception to the Church of Rome D. Field is of the same mind, all of
them assigning Field. l. 3. c. 1. page 62. Sutcliff subuor. page 89 and epist,
dedicat. Willet Antilog. page 263. 271.
it long before the 600. year: which D. Sutcliffe, D. Willet and others
allow for an unspotted time in Religion, and ceremonies thereof. And thus we
see, that those things which to their ignorant Readers, and Auditors, they will
seem to reprehend, themselves in their own Judgment, and Rule in such causes,
have most highely and vndenieably confirmed and justified.

Again I argue thus, from the Relator himself: Those Ceremonies which breed
order in the Church, avoid scandal, give propagation unto Religion, breed
unity, and do engender, quicken, increase, and norish the inward Reverence,
respect, and devotion, which is due unto sovereign Majesty, and power: and of
themselves, are decent, reverent, and significant, are to be allowed, retained,
and adjudged such as become true Religion: But the present Ceremonies of the
Roman Church, at this day are such: Therefore to be allowed, retained, and
adjudged for decent, holy, reverent etc. The Mayor proposition is without all
question true, and more then the Protestants require in this case. The Minor is
Relation of Religion cap. 47.
proved by this Relator, speaking of the Church of Rome, and the ceremonies
thereof in these words. For order in the world, for quiet in the Church, for
avoiding of scandal, for propagatinge and increase, of what great power that
unity is, which proceeds from authority, the papacy may teach. And again.
The outward state and glory of their service, does engender, Relation sup.
cap. 6.
quicken, increase, and norish the inward reverence, respect and devotion,
which is due unto sovereign Majesty, and power. Their outward gestures are
decent, Cap. 5.
reverent and significant. Then these holy Ceremonies having so great
allowance, from our Enemies themselves, for their decency, reverence,
signification, virtue, and antiquity, must needs be so embraced, preserved,
and exercised, and may not be termed offensive ceremonies by that or any
Protestant. And to exemplify particularly, in those ceremonies of the present
Church of Rome, which be most disallowed of our English Protestants: I argue
thus: Those ceremonies which were used in the primative Church of Rome when it
was in her best and florishinge state a Rule to all etc. ought, or may still be
practiced and observed: But those ceremonies which the present Roman Church
now observes, and are so much disliked by many English Protestants, are such:
Therefore they ought, or may still to be used, and with reverence practiced.
The Mayor proposition is often granted before, Articul. of Relig. 20. An. 1562.
by these Protestants, and thus defined in the 20. Article of their Religion.
The Church has power to decree, Rites or ceremonies, and authority in
controversies of faith. So that whether these ceremonies belong to faith, or
manners, being practiced, or ordained by our Mother Church of Rome, and the
governors thereof, when by all confessions, it was holy, and the true Church of
Christ, they are religeously to be embraced, and received.

The Minor proposition is thus proved by these men: M. Hull in his work
entitled Hull Romes polecies page 82. 13. 83. 84. 85. 86.
Romes polecies: thus recompteth them. Lent, embringe days, friday, altares,
lynnen, Albes, corporalls, priests Roabes, the feast of S. Peter's chains, the
feast of Candlemasse. The exaltation of the cross, the Saints fasting euens,
Annoyntinge the sick, annoynting Bishops, crossinge with Chrisme in Baptism,
Saints Shrynes, Hymns. pax to be carried about to be kissed, the paschall
Tapar on Easter Eauen, to be hallowed, organes and Church instruments, singeing
of psalms in order with Antiphones, Mass for the dead, canonical hours,
processions, processions to go rownde about the Church every sunday. Hitherto
the words of this Protestant writer. Others of them, as D. Morton, D. Couell,
M. Ormerod, Morton Apol. part. 2. page 141. Couell examinat. Ormerod pict.
parit. G. 2. 1. 3. 4. Theat of gr. Britan. page 298. 299. 351. etc.
do add holy water, holy fonts, interrogatories in Baptism, dedication of
Churches, introyte of Mass, wafer cakes to be consecrated in the holy
Mysteries, Gloria in excelsis, the Ringe in Marriadge. And others are added by
their Theater before, and other Protestants. And they tell us further, the
names of those sacred Popes and Pastors of the Church that used, approved,
constituted or confirmed unto us these sacred Ceremonies to have been in the
primative Church, when it truly was by his Majesty's grant in her best estate
and Mother Church, to prescribe unto other provincial Kings speech in parlam.
Churches, her daughters, and (as they then were and now should be) her
obedient children. And they name them as follows: Telesphorus, Calixtus,
Stephanus, Siluester, Sixtus, Hull. sup. page 82. 13. 83. 84. 85. 86. Morton
Couell Ormer. sup.
Vigilius, Honorius, Bonifacius, Sergius, Leo, Innocentius, Zozimus, Vitellian,
Celestine, Pelagius, Vrbanus, Agapitus, Damasus, Higinius, Pius, Celestinus,
Alexander. All which ruled the Church, and lived, long before Protestants
exception to the Church of Rome, K. in parlam. King in Confer at Hampton page
75.
and when it was in her flourishing and best estate, such as we may not depart
from it by his regal sentence. Of what higthest and commanding authority,
over others the Popes of Rome were, in those unspotted days of Christianity,
has been proved before.

To which I add, that D. Couell does not only tell us, that Metropolitanes,
Archbishops Couell modest. exam. page 111.
etc. came from thence, and who to whom should be obedient, and Superior, and
were so used before the first general Council, to testify that this
supreamacie was from Christ immediately, and not from Counsels: But he
further speaks thus: Either Euaristus Bishop in the Sea of Rome (in the
Couell supr. page 162,
year 112) or as some say, Dyonisius first assigned the precincts, to every
parish, and appointed to each Presbiter, a certain compass, whereof himself
should take charge alone. Hitherto his words.

Then if this supreme and binding authority, was in that chaste and
florishinge time of true Religion, in the Bishop of Rome, over all Priests,
Bishops, Archbishops, Metropolitanes etc. to appoint, constitute, and decree,
not only what ceremonies, and solemnities should be used in all Churches: but
to rate, and proportion out, what power, privilege, and jurisdiction, all
Pastors, prelates, and spiritual Rulers should enjoy, how far the compass,
precincts, and bownds of their Regiments should extend, whom to whom should
be obedient, and subject, who Governor and Superior: I trust no man will be so
obstinately wilful, as to resist the holy Ordinance of God, his holy spouse
our Mother Church, the sacred primative Pastors thereof, renowned Saints, and
Martyrs, and the sentence of our King himself, before cited, as to call these
Religeous Ceremonies now after so many hundreds of years into question.
Especially to use and conclude with D. Couell his words in this Couell ex^m
page 65.
point: The primatyue Counsels have condemned them as Heretics, only for
being stiffely opposite in this kind. And again of such English Protestants:
They have done nothing else, but until the Page 61.
house, that the Rafters, beams, and the main timber might with the violence
of tempests more speedely perish. And thus much of this Question.

CHAPTER XII. Of Indulgences.
AFTER these, by the Relators direction I am to entreat of indulgences, and
last of strange languadge in devotions: both which being by his estimation
of those things, which in Religion are dispensable, and not essential to be
believed, I might pass over as entreated of and allowed before by these
Protestants, in the last chapter, among so many other holy Ceremonies, and
accidental practizes, and customs in the Church of Christ. Yet to satisfy
all desires I will speak in particular also of these Questions: And first of
Indulgences, in which I argue thus.

Whosoever grant that the Church has authority and power both to forgive
syns, and to remitt the severity or punishment due for syn, must needs grant
the Catholic doctrine of Indulgence: being nothing else but such Relaxation:
But the English Protestants do, or by their writing must grant this
forgiveness of sin, and release of pain due for sin: Therefore they do, or
ought to allow the Catholic doctrine of Indulgence. The first proposition is
evidently Cai^^an. tract. 15. c. 5. Sot. did. 21. q. 1. ar. 3. Abul q. 90. in
16. Matthew. Ledes. p. Sot. and alij. Field l. 1. c. 17.
true, by the common acceptance and definition of Indulgence, both with
Catholics and Protestants, which is a Release of pain, for sin enjoined or
to be enjoined. The Minor proposition is proved from D. Field in these words:
The true Church admits and receaueth all that with sorrowful repentance
return, and seek reconciliation, how great soever their offenses have been:
not forgetting to use due severity, which yet she sometime remitteth. And
reciting the causes of such remission, he adds thus: The due and just
consideration, moving the Church to remitt some thing of her wonted severity
is, either private or public peril. And for proof of this doctrine, he
cites 1. Corinthians. 2. v. 8. 9. 10.
that place of S. Paul, to the Corinthians, of granting Indulgence or
relaxation of pain to the incestuous parson. Whereby manifestly appears that
in this Protestant Doctors Judgment, authority and power ought to be allowed
to the Church, to release and remitt severity, and punishment due for sin;
which is the same which is termed Indulgence. Neither can he find any evasion
by distinguisheing between penances enjoined, and not enjoined. For that power,
faculty, and authority, which can enjoin penance, and after it is enjoined,
rebeace it again, cannot be interpreted, but (at least, in that supreme
Pastor, to whom the highest prerogative of binding, loosing, and releacinge,
is committed) to have ability, to pardon, remitt, or releace it, before it be
enjoined. Secondly thus I argue: That doctrine and practice, which the ancient
primative Bishops of Christ's Church held and used, is true, and to be
continued: But the doctrine and practice of Indulgences is such: Therefore
true, and to be continued. The Mayor proposition is evidently true, often
granted before, by these Protestants: and the Minor thus proved by D. Field,
in these words: The ancient Bishops Field. sup. l. 1 c. 17. page 33.
were wont to cut of great parts of enjoined penance: which remission and
relaxation was called an Indulgence. And that is to noe purpose, which he
adds immediately in these terms: Out of the not understanding whereof, grew
the popish pardons and Indulgences. For first how more probable it is, that the
Bishops of the Roman Church, immediately and successively succeeding these
ancient Bishops, practizeing the true doctrine, and use of Indulgences, should
continually preserve it, and understand it, then those, which by interposition
of a thousand and more years, come after them, and without any order
episcopal, or preistly, but by usurpation and intrusion (as is proved by these
Protestants themselves in this treatice) teach, and of their own heads propose
the contrary? secondly his exceptiue addition destroys his intent for which
it is alleged, and Protestants opinion in this point: for the substance of
Catholic doctrine concerning Indulgences, to make it a releace of pain due
for sin, is the same with the practice of those ancient Bishops, by him
allowed, as is proved before, and in all congruitie he that both can inflict
and take away punishment, can much rather take it away without infliction: for
he that can do twoe things, can much more and with greater facility do one
of them: because this one is contained in those twoe, and power of doing the
one of necessity must needs be granted to him, that has power to do both:
especially the highest Ruler and Governor in such things.

Thirdly thus I argue: Whatsoever doctrine, or practice, these English
Protestants teach, or exercise, in their public and judicial courts, and
Consistories, that they may not deny to be lawful: But in such authoritatiue
places, and Judgments, they allow, and approve the Catholic doctrine
concerning Indulgences: Therefore they may not deny it. The Mayor proposition
is manifestly true, otherwise two contradictories might be true, and in
Religion which is impossible. The Minor also is as evidently certain, by their
ordinary and usual release, and relaxation of pain, and severity due for
sin, against the ancient primatyue Canons, allowed by them, and by no
pretext justifiable, but by way of Indulgence, as appears plainly in their
proceedings. And this even in cases and causes scandalous most requiring
satisfaction and penance in their own doctrine. If they think their
Relaxation or Indulgence therein to be frustrate, their dealings therein be
impious, and they deceauers: if they allow them for just, they also allow
Indulgences, being nothing else but a release of such penance and severity, as
before. If they will not blushe to say that the money or bribes given by the
penitents to them, their wives, or Servants does satisfy, this is frivolous,
and in the grownds of Protestants denying good deeds) if these were such) to be
satisfactory and meretoreous, more then foolish, and ridiculous to be affirmed.
And against D. Field his two Field sup. l. 1. cap. 17.
considerations moving the Church to such Indulgence, or release, which he
tells us be private or publi^ke peril; insinuating, that in his Judgment the
Indulgence or release as the nature thereof requires, must be free and
liberal, and not a commutation or change for gifts or money, which in
Protestants denying the enioyninge of penance, must needs be wicked and
Symoniacall.

Fourthly thus I argue: Whosoever grant, and allow Authority, to absolute
penitents in confession, both a paena, and culpa: from the punishment and guilt
of sin, must mayntaine the doctrine of Indulgences: But these English
Protestants grant authority to absolve both from the guilt, and punishment of
sin, therefore they must maintain the doctrine of Indulgences. The Mayor
proposition is often proved and allowed before. The Minor is thus
demonstratiuely confirmed, out of the communion Book, received in the Kings
Canons: where in the Com. Book Tit. visitat. of the sick.
treatise of the visitation of the sick, their Rule and direction is set
down in these words: Here shall the sick parson make a special confession,
if he feel his conscience troubled with any weighty Matter. After which
confession the priest shall absolve him after this sort.

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who has left power in this Church to absolve all
sinners, which truly repent, and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive
thee thine offenses: and by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee
from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Amen.

Where we see not only a Iuridicall, and authoritatiue absolution, from all
sins, given by Protestants divinity, by the Priests, as there they call their
Ministers, expressed in these Judicial and iuridicall words: the Priest shall
absolve him. Christ has left power in his Church to absolve all sinners. by
his authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all thy sins, etc. But
also as full and powerable authority, arrogated, and usurped of them, to give
plenatie pardons, and Indulgences of the severity, due for sin before by their
own confession, and that in more lardge, illimited, and ample order, then the
Pope himself teaches or practizeth. For first they generally hold, that
notwithstanding any punishment or severity that such a parson had deserved for
his sins, yett after their such absolution and authoritatiue Indulgence,
without any penance to be performed, either in this life, or in Purgatory,
(which they deny) presently after the separation of his soul from the body,
he is in heaven, and ever dureing happiness. Secondly their Rubricke and
Religion is, to give these plenarie pardons to all, requesting them. Thirdly
every private minister is allowed to give these plenaries, which neither
Priests nor Bishops themselves with us, can ordinarily do. Fourthly they give
these there plenary Indulgences, without any just cause, or any cause of piety
at all: which the Pope himself never does, concerning Bull. Martini. Extrau.
vnigenitus
such punishments for sins, as are paid in purgatory, or the like, as is
evident not only by the writings of all modern Catholics of this time, but
by these laws, Clement^^ 6. Bonau. d. 20. 1. p. q. vlt. Ric. ibidem q. 1. ma.
q. 2. Gabr. lect. 57. in can. Missa. Gerso^ q. de hacre. Aug. de Ancon. in
summa q. 30. ar. 4. and 5. Adr. Ca. Sot. Cord. Ledesm. q. 20. etc.
Canons and former Catholic Doctors here cited, and others.

Lastely thus I argue: whosoever teach the distinction of mortal and venial
sins, depriuinge, and not depriving of grace, allow severity, and punishment
for sin, both committed and remitted, and denying purgatory, say all the
elect presently after death are in heaven, must needs teach the doctrine of
Indulgences, and in more ample manner, then catholics do: But the English
Protestants before and commonely so teach: Therefore they must so allow of
Indulgences. Both propositions are evidently true, and confessed by
Protestants: and need no probation. Therefore the catholic doctrine of
Indulgences may not be denied by English Protestants: They themselves though
in words denying, yett in practice exercisinge it, in an higher measure, then
is used by the Pope himself, as I have proved before. And may further add, from
their communion book, where it is registered in these words: In the Com. Book
tit. commination Brethren.
primative Church there was a godly discipline, that at the beginning of Lent,
such parsons as were notorious sinners, were putt to open penance, and punished
in this world, that their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord, and
that other admonished by their example might be the more afraid to offend.
That the said discipline may be restored is a thing much to be wished. Where
they grant not only a punishment for example of others to take heed to
offend, and to satisfy their congregation, but to satisfy God for their syns
committed against him, by their words, to be putt to penance, and punished in
this world that their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord. For as
their friend M. Higgons publicly preached, and with privilege printed: As
Theoph. Higg. ser. 3. Mart. An. 1610.
there is a death in syn, and a death to syn, so there is a double
resurrection: the first a culpa from syn; the second a paena, from the
punishment, which follows therevppon. Therefore these men granting such
temporal punishments due for syn, even when and where the culpa, syn or guilt
is forgiven, and yett not exercising any such discipline, or punishment for
syn, must needs in their own proceedings allow of Indulgences, in a far
more large, ample, or rather prodigal, and presumpteous manner, then is, or at
any time was used in the Church of Rome.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the public Service of the church in Latin, or greek: and
not in the vulgar Tongues.
NOW let us speak of the Relators last scruple: a strange Tongue in
de^^tions, as he terms our latin church service. which allthough it be
both in it self, and his Judgment a matter ceremonial, in Religion, and so
entreated of, and proved before, yett I will breefely justify it by these
Protestants themselves, in particular, and argue thus.

That which was the practice of the church of Christ, from the first
conversion of nations unto him, until this age, of Protestants, is still to
be observed or lawfully may: But the public church service to be in the
latin tongue in this part of the world, wherein we live, was ever so used
and practiced: Therefore still it ought or may be so lawfully continued. The
first proposition is evidently true, and before often granted by these
Protestants. The second is thus proved by D. Dove Protestant Bishop of Dove
persuasion Page 23. 24. cap. of prayer.
Peterboroughe: his words be these, Until of late (sc. these days of
protestancie) throughout the west part of the world public prayers were in
Latin: in the east part in Greek even among those nations, to whom these
languadges were no mother tongues. And this the confesses, to have been the
custom from the first conversion of nations. For these two languadges, Latin,
and Greek, with the Hebrew, being the learned tongues of the world, (and the
Hebrews and Jews especially in Jury, for the most part remayninge in
incredulity) The learned and religeous Conuerters of contries to Christ, often
not understanding their barbarous languadges, but preaching and persuading by
Interpretors, yett vseing a public Liturgy, Mass or church service, could
neither practice it for themselves, or frame it for others, in their tongues
unknown. Of which D. Sutcliffe gives us a fit domestical example, of this
nation English: his words of S. Augustine coming hither from S. Gregory Pope
of Rome to convert us, are these: coming also into Kent, he was not Sutcliff
Feb. Page 19.
able to speak one word of English, nor to preach, unless it were by his
Interpretor. And yett he does, and must needs acknowledge, that S. Augustine
used a public Liturgy, and service, which could be none in any equal
Judgment, but that which was used in Rome, and he brought from thence. And in
no wise English for this he must either find among the Infidells, which could
not be: or else to be composed by him or his associats, or by them translated,
which cannot be Imagined, they neither (as before understanding our languadge
to compose it, for the Inhabitants, or use it for themselves. But this they
have confessed before.

Again thus I argue: Such church service, mass, or liturgy, and in such
tongue, as was sunge in the city of Constantinople it self the chief city of
Greece, and in the time of a general Council, and yett not in Greek, may
with as good reason, or more be now used in England, or any such nation: But
the latin Mass was then and there sunge. Therefore it may be still used in
England and other nations. The Mayor is evident: for by no probability the
commanding city of Greece and of the christian world at that time, and a
general Council there and then assembled, would have allowed a public
absurdity in Religion: having so much more show of authority to reprehend and
correct, even by Protestants sentence then they have. The Minor is proved by M*
Hull in these words: Latin Mass was sunge at the sixth Synod Hull Romes
polecies Page 83.
at Constantinople in the year. 666.

Thirdly thus I argue: all that allow of the public church service in a
strange and barbarous tongue to people not understanding, ought in all reason
rather to allow it in the latin, a learned and common tongue to all learned,
in this part of the world: But the English Protestants allow of the church
service in such a barbarous tongue unknown: Therefore by much more reason they
must approve of the public service in the Latin tongue, which always the
Priest and cheifest Auditors do understand. The Mayor cannot be denied: And
the Minor is thus proved from D. Dove a Protestant Dove persuas. page 24.
Bishop in these words: In Wales their mother tongue is welche, in Cornwall
cornish, in Ireland Irish, yett in all these places the public service is
read in English. And yett he will never prove, nor with all his Protestants
take such pains in catechizing, that the Ignorant people in those Provinces
(those that most need instruction) will ever be able to understand the
English service, used among them, or other more short and familiar things in
our languadge so strange unto the.

Fourthly supposing, as often is proved before, the primative Church, and
practice thereof to be a warrant unto us, as also that (which no Protestant
can deny) the privileges of the Latin Church to be at the least equal with
the Greek: and that which all experience and observation by living among
Greeks, and Romans proves that the present vulgar Greek languadge common in
Greece is altogether different from that learned tongue of Greece used in the
primative Church with the holy Fathers, of that Church in those times, as S.
Basile, S. Chrysostom and such others, thus I argue.

The present Greek Church (allowed for the true Church before by Protestants)
pu^lickly uses the Masses of S. Basile, S. Chrysostom, etc. Which the common
Grecians do not understand: Therefore the Contries under the Latin Church may
use their ancient Latin Masses, and Liturgies. The consequence is not to be
denied: And the Antecedent is proved from the Protestant Relator, who speaking
of the custom of the Greek Church, has these words: Their Liturgies be
Relation cap. 53. or 54.
the same that in the old time, namely S. Basils, S. Chrisostomes, and S.
Gregory's translated, without any bending of them to that change of languadge,
which their tongue has suffered.

Lastely in this point, supposing the main graunde of Protestants against
Latin service to be, because so the vulgar and ignorant not understanding it
remain without due Instruction, as they pretend, I argue thus. That Church
(whether it is the Catholic, or the Protestant) which by confession and
grant of the opposites and Adversaries, does much more duly, truly, and
diligently, instruct, and catechize young people, and the ignorant both by
word, and writing in their known and common languadge, then the other does, is
not to be condemned either of negligence or vnskillfulnes in this business: But
the present Church of Rome, by Protestants testimony is in this case:
Therefore not to be condemned. The Mayor is evident, and the Minor proved from
the same Relator of Religion, who speaking of Catholic Priests uses these
words: They be of excellency for piety, and reverence Relation cap. 27. sup.
toward God, zeal toward the truth, of love toward this people, which even
with tears they can often testify, they match their adversaries,
(Protestants) in the best, and in the rest far exceed them. And further to
the same of Protestants, and honor of our Religion, thus he writes: For
books of prayer and piety, all Contryes are Cap. 27. sup.
full of them at this day in their own languadge, Their opposites,
Protestants, by their weakness and coldness are enforced to take their books to
supply theirs. And again in this manner. Such is their diligence, and Cap. 28.
sup.
dexterity in instructing, that even the Protestants themselves (in some
places) send their sons to their schools, upon desire to have them prove
excellent in those arts they teach. This order has also their solemn
catechizinge, in their churches, on sondayes, and holidays, for all youth that
will come, or can be drawn unto it. But this point of their schools in
instructing youth, is thought of such moment by men of wisdom and Judgment,
being taught so by very experience and trial thereof, that the planting of a
good College of Jesuits in any place, is esteemed the only suer way, to
replant that Religion, and in time to eat out the contrary. Hitherto this
Protestant Relator, to his own and his Associats shame, and confusion in this
cause. And so I end his Questions: hoping that himself with others of his so
confounded Religion, will upon this so great satisfaction conform themselves
to the Church of Rome, and doctrine thereof, as he has before advised.

CHAPTER XIIII. CONCERNING REVERENCE of holy Relics.
WHEN I entreated before of the religeous use of holy Imadges, I would also
have spoken of this question, the reverence of holy Relics, being so near and
symbolizing doctrines, had not the Relator of Religion before referred me to
an other course. Therefore I will now speak thereof, in which case the
Catholic doctrine expressed in the Council of Trent, is this: Council. Trid.
Sesi. 9.
Veneranda esse afidelibus etc. The bodies of Martyrs etc. Are to be reverenced
of the faithful. According to which thus I argue, in this Article by these
Protestants.

That which was the doctrine of the primative Church in this question, is true,
and what it condemned for Heresy, is false: But the primative Church taught
reverence of Relics, as the present Roman Church now does, and condemned the
contrary of Protestants for Heresy: Therefore the Catholic doctrine is true
in this controversy, and the contrary of Protestants, false and Heretical.
The Mayor proposition is evidently true, by often grant before. And the Minor
is thus proved. First D. Willet cites and approves S. Ambrose thus speaking
Willet Antill. page 201. Sutcliff Subu. page 27. Page 50.
of Valentinian deceased. I will honor his Relics, and commend his gracious
memory. D. Sutcliffe wittnesseth that S. Gregory and S. Augustine, (that
converted this nation) esteemed much the relics of Saints. And in their time,
Churches were built in the honor of Saints, and their relics worshipped. And
D. Willet with others Willet Antil. page 13.
acknowledge (as they needs must) that Vigilantius was condemned of heresy for
denial thereof, in the primative Church, and by the authority thereof.

Secondly I argue thus again: That which was the custom and doctrine of the
primative Church, may, or is still to be kept and defended: But to pray at the
monuments of Saints, and reverence their Relics was the custom and doctrine
then: Therefore still to be kept, and defended. The Mayor is evident: and the
Minor thus proved. First M. Wotton Wotten def. of Perk. page 9
has these words: It was the manner of the primative Church to pray at the
Tombs of Martirs: and the Christians assembled ordinarily, where the Martirs
were buried. And to show what they did there (which he would willingly have
concealed, for he loves not prayers to Saints, nor reverence of their
Relics, for which causes the primative Christians so there assembled he
cites S. Hierome writing Wotten sup. page 544.
in this manner of holy Paula: she went into the Sepulcher, and kissed the
stone of his Resurrection, which the Angel had removed from the door of the
Tomb: the place of his body, where the Lord had lien, as if she had thristed
for the desired waters, she li^k^d with her faithful tongue. D. Downame
writes the like, of the holy pilgrimadge of that blessed woman. And to give
most conuincing instance, and proof in this matter, M. Perkins in his
Problema writes thus: Primitiua Perkins problem. page 81.
Ecclesia honorauit and veneratione prosecuta est reliquias mortuorum. The
primative Church did honor, and prosecute with reverence the Relics of the
dead.

Thirdly thus I argue: That vsadge and behavior which was lawful to the
Jews, and practiced of them toward their Reliks, is now in the time of grace,
given by Christ, as lawful for Christians, toward their holy Relics, and
things: But the true faithful Jews lawfully used reverence and honor to
their Relics: Therefore it is lawful to Christians to do the like. The Mayor
is evident, this being no ceremonial or legal thing, abrogated by Christ,
but rather confirmed, by making the things of his law and Gospel more
reuerentiall, then the figurative was: The Minor is thus proved by M. Wotton in
these words: You bring diverse Wotton def. of Perk. page 581.
proofs, that the Arc was had in great reverence: all needless for who
denies it? and again: The Jews, says Hierome, in foretimes worshipped the
holy of holies, because there were the Cherubins, and the propitiatory, and
the arc of the testament, Manna, Aarons rodd, and the golden altar, and
further in this manner: He speaks not of worshippinge the Page 581. 582.
Arc, but the holy of holyes, because of the things, that were in it. He
makes the Propitiatory, Manna, Aarons Rod, and the golden Altar, causes of
that worship, as well as the Cherubins. In the words followinge he counts the
Sepulcher of our Lord more worthy of wor^hip. Then seeing those Relics under
the law, and before Christ (the meritorious cause of all grace, and such
excellency) were so worthy of worshipp, and reverence, that they were not
only reverenced in themselves, but other things were worshipped and reverenced
because of them: and yett by this Judgment the Relics in Christianity (as the
Sepulcher, no part of Christ, but the place of his sacred bodies some few
hours lyeing there) are more worthy of worship, as this Protestant writer
confesses: we may not deny this Reverence, and the Catholic doctrine
thereof, to be holy, even by English Protestants sentence.

Lastely thus I argue, from the general practice of English Protestants: if it
is lawful to give civil reverence to the body of a noble man, or woman
deceased, because they were noble, and honored when they lived, much more
reason there is, to give religeous and spiritual Reverence to the body of a
Saint, holy and honored by God, and man, when he lived, and now in Joys, in
heaven, truly and for ever honorable: But the Antecedent is true, by English
Protetestants, who by their Heralds of arms allow, and practice, that all
Inferiors shall give and yield the same honor to the body of the honorable
parson deceased, that was due unto him, living his soul and body being
united; and this though in all moral Judgment the soul of such an one is
damned. And this is the custom and ceremony, not only with Heralds, but used
in Court, ratified by their Bishops, Doctors, and Universities, as many and
late examples teach, which I will urge no further, but desire all may live and
die well, that they may leave behind them sufficient, or some motive, either
to be honored, or helped by the prayers and devotions of the lyuinge. The
consequence is evidently true, and thus demonstrated* for as excellency is the
cause of honor, and civil excellency of civil and terrene honor: so
spiritual or religeous excellency of spiritual, and such honor. And much
more: for the civil honor and motive thereof is only ens rationis, an
invention, worthiness, and attribute of men, and nothing at all Inherent in the
body, or soul of the party so honored: when the other excellency and cause
of honor, is both permanent, and an Inherent dignity, as is proved before of
inherent Justice, and for ever remains in the soul glorified, in the
presence of God, his Saints, and Angels in heaven, and there by them esteemed
truly worthy of honor.

And how honorable such holy Relics have ever been, especially in this
nation, from the first conversion thereof to Christ, these Protestants
themselves in their Theate^ (though so much as they can suppressing all honor,
and memory of such things) will sufficiently testify. Concerning the often
and frequent pilgrimadges to Rome, to visitt and reverence the holy monuments,
and relics there, they have told us before in these words: Not only Priests
and lay men, vowed and Theat. page 305.
performed pilgrimadges to Rome, but Kings, Queens and Bishops also did the
like. And in particular in these words: King Kenred abandoned both crown Page
307.
and contry, and went to Rome, where of Pope Constantine he received the
tonsure and habit of a monk, at the Apostles tombs. Kings Cadwallader and
Page 164.
Chodwald (if not both one) abandoned their kingedoms about the year 682.
touke habitt of Religion in Rome, so King Iuor a Britain and King Iue a
Saxon. Ceadwalla King of the west Saxons goes on Page 298.
pilgrimadge to Rome. King Inas after he had reigned Page 298.
in great prosperity 37. years and odd months, professing voluntary
poverty, went to Rome, where in the habitt of a Religeous man he ended his
life in pore estate. King Osroy vowed a pilgrimadge to Rome. Page 338. 345.
Page 391.
King Offa in great devotion went to Rome. I have spoken before how King
Canatus went on pilgrimadge to Rome, to visitt the sepulchers of S. Peter and
S. Paul. And so of others. And Page 285.
for Jerusalem so far, and daungerously distant, thus they write: Yt was an
ancient custom to go to Jerusalem on pilgrimadge with a redd cross worn
on their back, whence the name crosse-backe, or in old English crouche-backe
was to them attributed. Whence Edmund Earl of Lancaster second son to Henry
3. got that name. So the crouched or Page 92.
crossed friars. And of Princes in particular thus they write: Lagman King of
man gave over his kingdom, took the cross wento to Jerusalem. They tell us
also of Q. Helena a most virtuous religeous Page 205. etc. 258.
british Lady, Mother to Emperor Constantine the great her pilgrimadge to
Jerusalem. And again: Offa heir to the crown of Eastangles upon Page 311.
a Religeous devotion took his pilgrimadge to the sepulcher of Christ. And
again: Swayne eldest son Page 400.
of Earl Goodwyn (so potent against K. Edward the Confessor) upon a remorse
of Conscience undertook a pilgrimadge to Jerusalem, and in his return dyed
in Lycia. Of Robert Father to King William the Page 413.
first, they write in this manner: Seeing at the city phalesia in Normandy a
most bewtifull damsel called Arlett, took her to his bed, he begatt on her
William his only son, and after upon a remorse of Conscience undertook a
pilgrimadge unto Jerusalem from whence he never again returned. Duke Robert
intending his pious pilgrimadge unto the holy Land, assembled all his
nobility, caused them to swear fealty unto his son William, being then
but seven years old. Entering Jury, not able to travail, was borne in a
litter upon the Saracens sholders, and near unto the city meetinge a
returning pilgryme, desired him to report in his contrie what he there saw,
which is (said he) I am carried to heaven upon the devils back. And to leave
foreign contries with their holy places and relics thus reverenced, this our
own nation as it visited other contries in this respect, so in the same also
it was visited and frequented of them. Thus they write: Charles King of
France congratulated Page 345.
King Offa, with letters of Gladness, both for his victories and Christian
piecie in his land embraced: desiring of Offa safe conduct for such his
subjects as come to his contry in devotion to God. In which among other places
Glastenbury was renowned, for, that Rectory (to use their words) was in the
Page 207.
charters of Edgar, Edmund, Elfred, Edward, Bringwalthius, Kentwin, Baldred,
Ina, Kenwall, the Conqueror Rufus and others continually termed THE GRAVE OF
SAINTS; THE MOTHER CHVRCH: THE DISCIPLES FOUNDATION. Of the hand of King
Oswald, thus they write: After his death Page 337.
it never consumed, but was shrined in silver in S. Peter's Church at Bedda, now
Bambrough, with worthy honor was worshipped for the miracles, and cuers that
Page 364.
it did, as likewise the earth wherein his blood was spilt. They tell us also
of the pilgrimadge, and reverence to the Relics of S. Ihon of Beuerly, Page
391.
both by Kings, and subjects. King Canutus before offered up his crown upon
the Martyrs Saint Edmunds tomb. And honored the body of S. Elphegus at the
translation 392. Page 83.
of it from London to Canterbury. The Relics of S. Cuthbert, at Durham were
visited in pilgrimadge, and reverenced by our Kings and others. They tell us,
how the bodies of Page 294.
the two young Princes Nephews to K. Egbert, were miraculously revealed,
(their names Ethelred and Etherbert) and greatly reverenced. Of K. Kenelme
thus they write: Page 307. 308.
Murdered, obscurely buried, but miraculously known, and afterward with
great honor and ceremony translated to the Monastery of Winchcombe, which his
father founded. And so of that glorious and noble Saint Neote, supposed to be
the son of Page 351. 352.
King Ethelwolfe, brought up at Glastenbury. He planted a Monastery in
Cornwall, whereunto he used for devotion and studious meditation (being one
of the first divinity Readers in Oxford) often to withdraw himself, which of
his aboade there, was afterward called NEOTESTOKE, and when he was dead, his
body was with great honor interred in the country of Huntington, at a place
then called ANVLFESBVRIE, and afterward in regard of his Interment, Saint
Neotes, and now Saint Needs. And in the same shire of Huntington at S. Iues,
Page 57.
they tell us, that S. Iue a Persian, an Heremite being buried, his body was
uncorrupted in Robes Episcopal. Had in great honor, and the town took
denomination of him. And so of others to many to be recited.

CHAPTER XV. Of the real presence of Christ, and transsubstantiation, in the
blessed Sacrament, of the Altar.
BECAUSE I would be loath to omit any one question, especially of moment,
wherein these Protestants take exception against the doctrine of the Church of
Rome: I will next make recital what their two great writers D. Sutcliff and
D. Willet most dislike therein, and Answer it unto them, and all others, in
whatsoever not before allowed, and justified, by their own writers.

D. Sutcliff making mention of those Articles, Sutcliff Subu. page 44.
which he supposes we cannot justify, only recites these, that follow:
Real presence, Transsubstantiation, the sacrifice of Christ's body for the
quick and dead, half communion, Popes supreamacie, Indulgences, worshipping
of Imadges, and Purgatory.

D. Willet (as before) assigns these that Willet Antil. page 264.
ensue: Transsubstantiation, the Sacrifice of Mass, worshipping of Imadges,
Justification by works, the supreamacie of the Pope, prohibition of Marriadge,
(in the clergy) which he calls the grossest points of popery. He adds
also, an equality of Bishops, onoly approves the Hebrew scripture:,
Justification by faith, and disliketh free will. These be all their
Exceptions: neither does the Book of Articles of their Religion make mention
of any other much material (except Sacraments whereof hereafter) then either
such as I have allreadie handled, or be comprised in these Cataloges:
Allthough all in these remembered are not the doctrine of the Parliament
Protestant Church of England. But Additions, and new Inventions of particular
Puritanes, as D. Willets Hebrew scriptures, equality of Bishops, etc. In which
(excepting that which I have spoken of the scriptures before consonant to the
Council of Trent) I must leave him to be censured as a perjured man (having
sworn to their Articles) by their own Religion, laws and proceedings. For
the rest, most of them be proved by themselves before, as Popes supremacy,
Indulgences, Imadges, Justification by works, or inherent Justice (not only
by faith) and free will. All the others I am now to examine. And first of
Transsubstantiation, and Christ's real presence in the blessed Eucharist,
Because it comprehends as well this manner of Christ's presence, and a true
Sacrifice, as they all grant, upon proof of that verity: as the question
also of D. Sutcliffs termed half communion; For if Christ be substantially,
truly, and wholly present in both kinds: Then it is not an half, but whole
communion, and receiving of Christ: for he must needs be equally received and
participated under the one, as under both kinds and forms: according D. Thom.
3. p q. 80. ar. 3. Gabr. lect. 84. Ric. d. 11. Caiet. 3. p. q 3. ar. 3. Sot d
12. q. 1. ar. 12. pet. Sot. lect. 20. Euchar. L^des Claud. de Saints Ruard.
and alij.
to the common opinion of schools, as well long before the Council of
Constance as after, teaching that no more fruit is communicated and given to
the Receauers and Communicants, by both, then by one kind. this supposed. I
Argue thus in this Question. Whatsoever doctrine the highest binding,
authoritatiue, and commanding Judgment which (by these Protestants before) is
a general Council, has determined, defined and concluded, is to be embraced
and mayntained: But the doctrine of Christ's real presence, and
Transsubstantiation, is such: Therefore to be embraced, and maintained. The
Mayor is evident, and often granted by many of these Protestants. among whom
D. Field writes thus: The Bishops assembled in a general Council, may
interpret Field l. 4. c. 16.
the scripture, and by their authority suppress all them that shall gain say
such Interpretations, and subject every man, that shall disobey such
determinations, as they consent upon, to excommunication, and censures of like
nature. The Minor is also proved Couell defof Hook. page 21 Parkes against
Limbom. page 176. Tom. ^. Council. in Council. Later. Bergam. hist. an. 1213.
Genebr. hist. an. 1215. Palmer. Floren. chron. an. 1215. Council. Lateran. cap.
1.
by them, directly in this manner: for first both D. Couell and M. Parkes cite
and allow the Council of Laterane, as a Rule of faith. And having present in
it the Patriarchs of Greece, Constantinople and Jerusalem, 70. Metropolitanes,
400. Bishops and other Fathers above 800. together with the Legates both of the
Greek and Roman Empire, with the Orators of the Kings of Jerusalem, France,
Spain, England (so especially binding us) and Cyprus: I trust the rest of them
cannot deny it to be general, if ever any was so termed, this being far the
greatest that ever was in the world: now that it defined Christ's real
presence in the blessed Sacrament, is evidently demonstrated by these express
words of the Council granted by Protestants: Verum Christi Corpus and Sanguis
in Sacramento altaris sub speciebus panis and vini veraciter continetur,
transsubstantiatis pane in Corpus, and vino in Sanguinem, potestate diuina. The
true body and blood of Christ is truly contained in the Sacrament of the
altar under the forms of bread and wine, the bread being
transsubstantiated into his body, and the wine into his blood, by the divine
power. Therefore all English Protestants are Field l. 4. c. 16.
suppressed by D. Feilds sentence before, from gain saying it. And to show
further that this was no new and strange doctrine, then first held, and
defined, but of the ancient primative Fathers, thus I argue again in this
question.

Whosoever held that there is in this Sacrament a conversion, mutation of one
thing into an other, and not in shape; but in nature, that bread is made
Christ's body, that the visible creatures are changed into the substance of
Christ's body, and blood, etc. Do and must needs grant transsubstantiation,
and Christ's real presence in the B. Sacrament: But the ancient Fathers do
this: Therefore they teach and grant Transsubstantiation. The Mayor is
evident, those terms being equivalent with transsubstantiation, and seem the
very same both in effect and name. The Minor is proved by M. Perkins in these
Perkins probl. page 153. 154.
words: The Ancients when they speak of the supper, have many forms of
speech, which show a conversion: Ambrose uses the name of conversion, and the
name of mutation. Ciprian says, it is changed not in shape but in nature.
Origin says, that bread is made the body by prayer. Gaudentius says, Christ's
body is made of bread, and his blood of wine. Eusebius Emissenus says, that
the Priest by secret power does change the visible creatures into the
substance of Christ's body, and blood. And that the bread does pass into the
nature of our Lords body. Anselmes says, that the breads does flitt into
Christ's body. Fulbertus says, it is transfused, Algerus says, it is
transiected and transferred into Christ's body. Hitherto this Protestants words
of those ancient Fathers doctrine in this point, to which he might have added
many more, and more conuincing: But he knew these too many, and manifest
against them, as appears by this his frivolous gloss upon their express
sentences, confounding and confuting himself in his own words, which be
these: But the Ancient Doctors where they speak of the conversion and change
of the bread, they understand the change of the use, and condition, not of
the substance. What man but impudent, and void of all shame, and grace, would
Father upon so many holy, and renowned Learned Fathers, so gross
equivocation, or rather flatt lyinge, to speak one thing, and mean an other,
as he speaks, and this in so chief and material article of Faith, and
Religion, wherein not the least equivocation may be used, if it could save the
life of thousands or millions of men. And to confound this Sacramentarie by his
own fellows: First D. Field Field page 150.
writes thus: The body of Christ is present in, and with the sanctified
Elements. The primative Church thought the sanctified and consecrated Elements
to be the body of Christ. Where he plainly confesses that those primative
Fathers meant as they spoke, and both spoke and meant, as Catholics now do,
that Christ is really present there. And that there was a substantial change,
or transsubstantiation of the bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ. Secondly D. Downame tolleth us, Downame l. 2. Antich. page 110.
that S. Ambrose, one of his cited Authors speaks thus: We adore in the
mysteries that flesh of Christ, which the Apostles adored in the Lord JESUS.
Then if the same flesh of Christ, which was adored of the Apostles, is both
present in this Sacrament, and to be adored, that Doctor did speak of a true
and substa^tial conversion and mutation. Thirdly he is so clear in this point
for Catholics, that M. Middleton not knowing how to gloss him, yett more then
inconsiderately angry with that holy and Learned Saint, and Doctor, for that
his doctrine, speaks of him in these profane terms: He is guilty of
presumptuous Middleton papistom. page 61.
and desperate blasphemy. Fourthly M. Perkins before cites and numbreth with
the other ancient Fathers, Algerus, who Alger. l. contra Bereng.
wrote expressly against Berengarius, in the question of transsubstantiation,
and in his book extant in that matter handeleth and confuteth the objections
of carnal reason against it, in the some order as the present scholemen do.
And it is so manifest that he taught this doctrine of transsubstantiation,
which the other as then an Heretic denied, that M. Middleton confesses, that
Berengarius Middleton papistom. page 94. 95.
in his Recantation beginning Ego Berengarius, etc. did so far aknowledg the
real presence, and Transsubstantiation, that he thinks the Catholics of
this time rather suppose he confessed to much, then to little in that Matter.
And the present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury speaks of him in these
words: Berengarius in deed was only called Abbots against D. Hill page 60
in question for denying of Transsubstantiation, in the Sacrament, and h^e
yielded once or twice, to recant, and abjure the doctrine, which he held. Then
they which write against him, and all those Learned Fathers cited by M. Perkins
before, consenting with them, as he confesses, must needs maintain the real
presence of Christ and Transsubstantiation. And those Protestants of England,
which defend the contrary, must needs be Heretics, for that cause, as is thus
by a new argument proved from their own Protestant Archbishop. Whosoever
maintain a doctrine publicly, and Iuridically reca^ted, and abiured be
Heretics: But al English Sacramentaries be such: Therefore they be
Heretics: and the contrary is true Catholic doctrine. The Mayor is evidently
true: And the Minor proved before by their cited Archbishop, teaching (which
they all confess) that the recanted and abiured heresy of Berengarius* is the
same which they defend. Again thus I argue: whatsoever thing, being Christ's
body, when it is received of us: and is with devotion to be received, because
it is his body: and is after an ineffable manner his body: and by grace made
Christ's body: and is his body present in the sanctified elements, is the true
body of Christ: But the B. Sacrament of the Eucharist, is so: Therefore it is
the true body of Christ. The Mayor is manifestly true: And the Minor thus
proved by these Protestants. First D. Dove Protestant Bishop of Peterborough
Dove persuas. page 28.
writes thus: As often as we be made partakers of the Lords Table, we
recreaue the Lords body because he has said it his owneself. We receive it
with reverence and devotion, because it is his body. And approves the
Catholic doctrine of Bishop Gardener and others, saying with allowance thus!
Stephen Gardener and the learned of their Church were wont to say, it was his
body ineffabili modo, after an unspeakable manner, after such a manner as men's
tongues could not utter. And so say all Catholics at this day, numbering this
among the great mysteries of Christian Religion, as the ancient fathers did.
Whereby the sacramentaries are confounded: For to say, or think that bread
and wine may be figures of Christ's body, and blood, as many other things are,
and diverse things be figures of others, is neither unspeakable, or not able to
be uttered, but a thing so easy to be conceived, and spoken, that every
ignorant man can both without difficulty conceive, and utter it. Again the
same Protestant Bishop thus writes of Catholics in Dove supr.
England: If they will receive at our hands, we will not be over hasty with
them to examine them, how they do expound the words, Hoc est Corpus meum, this
is my body. Which no man of conscience, and learning can write, much less a
pretender to be a Bishop and Pastor, except he does inwardly think the
Catholic doctrine of Transsubstantiation, and the real presence to be true:
otherwise he should admit both men that be unworthy, and in some of their
Judgments, Idolaters to the greatest Sacrament, which cannot be excused from
most heinous sin. To him I add M. Middleton speaking Middleton papistom. page
106.
in this manner: Though bread by nature be but a profane common Element,
appointed of God to feed our bodies: yett by grace it pleases the Lord to
make it his body. D. Field as before writes thus: ^he Field page 1^0.
body of Christ is present in and with the sanctified Elements. Therefore
there is a real presence and Transsubstantiation.

Further thus I reason: That which by the omnipotency of God, is made Christ's
body, and is that in which Christ is really present, and in which there is
probably taught transsubstantiation of bread into Christ's body, that which by
antiquity was said to be made Christ's body, and is the flesh, which was
given for the life of the world, is verily and truly the body of Christ: But
the Eucharist is thus: Therefore it is the true body of Christ. The Mayor
proposition is evident. And the second thus proved by D. Couell whose words of
this sacred mystery be these. The omnipotency of Christ makes Couell def.
of Hooker page 276.
it his body. We all agree in a real presence. And speakinge of the manner
how Christ is miraculously made present there, he writes thus: We must truly
believe, that Christ is there Couell def. page 116. 117. sup.
present. Which because some irreligeous men, at the first doubted: men have
been driven to find out, these reasonable satisfactions, or rather
satisfactions to humane reason, from his omnipotency, transsubstantiation, or
such like: whereas in deed we know that in many mysteries of our faith, it
is sufficient to believe the thing, though we cannot comprehend the manner
how. And cites there the high mystery of the Trinity, the Resurrection and
this blessed Sacrament to be of that kind. Then seeing by this allowance, it
is so certain, that Christ is really present there, that it is Irreligion to
doubt it, and it is a reasonable satisfaction, even to humane reason (from
whence Protestant arguments against it be deduced) that the manner is by
Transsubstantiation, as we Catholics teach, no man but Irreligeous, and
unreasonable, can call it into question. And he writes further of this matter
in these words: it is on all sides plainly Couell sup. page 119.
confessed, that this Sacrament is a true and real participation of Christ,
who thereby imparteth himself, even his whole entire parson. Therefore if the
whole entire parson of Christ which cannot be without his body and blood, is
there, and there imparted and received, damnable is that diminisheing doctrine,
wherein sacrame^taries would have it but a sign and figure: And he expressly
teaches, that they do not, or should not differ from the Roman Church,
concerning the true, real, and substantial presence of Christ, in this
Sacrament. Which he as plainly expresses, where entreatinge of the dignity
of Priests, he writes thus: To these parsons, God Couell sup. page 87.
imparted power over his mystical body, which is the society of souls, and
over that natural, which is himself, for the knitting of both in one, a work
which Antiquity does call the making of Christ's body. And in an other
treatise he speaks, of the same matter, in this manner: The power of the
Couell modest examinat. page 105.
Ministry by blessing visible Elements, it makes them invisible grace. It
gives daily the holy Ghost. It has to dispose of that flesh which was given
for the life of the world: and that blood which was powered out to redeem
souls. Hitherto this Learned Protestant: whose words be so plain in this
point, that no conclusion, but themselves, needs to be inferred from them.
And not only in this, but other Questions, as before, these Protestants of
England are so clear, for Catholics doctrine, and against that, which their
parlamentarie Religion does, or would seem to teach, that D. Willet Willet
apud Parkes against Limbom. page 20. 21. def first testim.
writes of them in this sort. They maintain traditions, free will, freedom
from sin, Justification by works, works of super erogation, of
transsubstantiation with diverse others. Therefore even by Protestants, this
sacred doctrine of the Roman Church is to be embraced, and defended: as well
taught by Catholics, Protestants, and D. Feilds true Greek Church also: from
which lastely thus I argue.

That doctrine which is taught by the true Church in Protestants Judgment,
which by them cannot err in any essential thing, is true: But the doctrine of
the Roman Church concerning the real presence and transsubstantiation is
such: Therefore it is true. The first proposition is proved and granted
before: And the second is manifest in these the express words of the Greek
Churches censure, upon Protestant doctrine: It is the Judgment of the Church,
that in the holy Hierem. in censur cap. 10.
supper after consecration, and benediction, the bread does pass, and is
changed into the very body itself of Christ, and the wine into that blood of
his, by the power of the holy Ghost. For our Lord in the same night wherein he
was betrayed, taking bread and giving thanks, brake it and said, take and
eat, this is not bread, or a figure of my body, but this is my very body,
and my blood. So that, both then and now the bread is transformed and changed
into his body, and the wine into his blood, as our Lord promised, and affirmed
in many places of scriptures. And this is more then sufficient of this matter:
especially seeinge not only Queen Elizabeth, in her Parliam An. 1. Elizab.
parl. 1. Jacob parl. 1. Edw. 6 c. both kinds.
first Parliament received this doctrine of Transsubstantiation, by allowing and
reviving the statute of King Edward, the sixth in that behalf, and this their
statute was never yett repealed: But also in the first parliament of his
majesty confirmed with the rest of Q. Elizabeth. The Protestant publishers of
Praefat. in Petr. Gallatin. Fra^c. An. 1602. Morto^ App. page 396. and page 395
Petrus Gallatinus, tell us, that the testimonies which he brings from the
Rabbynes before Christ, are undeniable, which allowed, D. Morton writes thus:
They are more plain and pregnant for transsubstantiation, then are these
sayings of transsubstantiators themselves. They make so directly for
transsubstantiation, that the most Romish Doctors for the space of allmoste a
thousand years, after Christ, did not in so express terms publish this
mystery to the world. Again D. Androwes Protestant Bishop Casaubon resp. ad
Card. Per. page 50. 51.
of Ely cited by Casaubon and Casaubon himself, from our King himself, (as he
says) affirm: Yt is Christ's body, the same object, and thing, which the
Roman Church believes. Therefore acknowledging there is a change in this
Sacrament, as commonly they do, that before the words of consecration it was
bread, and wine, and after, is the same object and thing which the Roman
Church believes, the body and blood of Christ. This change being from bread
into the body of Christ, and from wine into his blood, which is a change.
Substantiae in Substantiam, of one substance into an ohter, must needs be (as
we Catholics teach) Transsubstantiation.

CHAPTER XVI. Of the holy Sacrifice, of Christ's blessed body, and blood;
commonly called the Mass, daily offered in the Church.
AND hereby is not only proved the Catholic doctrine of this particular
question, of Christ's real presence in the B. Sacrament, and the manner how by
transsubstantiation of the elements bread and wine by power of his omnipotent
word into his most sacred body and blood: but those also which depend from
thence, as is before remembered, the sufficiency of communicating of such as
do not offer the holy sacrifice (first instituted and ever to be continued in
both kinds) in the one kind only: as also the true external and public
sacrifice of Christ's true Church, consistinge of the oblation and offering of
his most B. body and blood, in these holy Mysteries; for which, because it
has been so profanely and blasphemously contradicted by diverse of our
English Protestants, I mean to speak a little more particularly therein: and
from themselves first argue thus.

Whatsoever is the real and true body, and blood, of Christ, now inseparable
from his most blessed soul and is publicly offered unto God by the lawfully
called and authorized priests of his Church, is a true, public, and holy
sacrifice: But that which is commonly called the Eucharist, or blessed
Sacrament of the altar, offered by Catholic priests, of the Roman Church in
Mass, is such: Therefore it is a true public and holy sacrifice. The Mayor
proposition is evidently true and confessed of all men of learning in
Christianity, neither can be doubted of any, that is ignorant if he knows
the terms themselves expressly signifieing and showing the verity thereof
even by the light of nature. The second proposition is also more then
abundantly proved and verified by these Protestants in the last chapter: yet
to give it a further (though needles) confirmation, I prove it again in this
order to be a sacrifice external and public.

That doctrine which that Church, which is esteemed by Protestants to be the
true Church teaches, is to be allowed: But this doctrine of Christ's blessed
body, and blood, to be over public sacrifice, in the Church, is such:
Therefore it is so to be allowed. The first proposition is often granted
before; and the second of the Greek Churches opinion, and practice, both at
this present, and from the time of the primative days of christianity, to be
agreeable with the present Roman Church, is justified by the Protestant
Relator of Religion in the chapter of holy ceremonies His words (to make
Relation cap. 53. or c. 54.
a new repetition) of that Churches doctrine are these: With Rome they concur
in the opinion of transsubstantiation, and generally in the service, and whole
body of the Mass, in praying to Saints, in auricular confession, in offering
of sacrifice, and prayer for the dead, and in these without any, or with no
material difference. They hold purgatory also, and worshipping of pictures.
For the form and Cap. 55.
ceremonies of the Mass they much resemble the Latins. In crosseings they are
very plentiful. In sum Relat. of Relig c. 53. or 54 sup.
all those opinions which grew into the Church, before that separation,
between the Greeks and Latins, and all those ceremonies which were common
unto both, they still retain. Then this doctrine and practice of this
public sacrifice, being not only the use of these two Churches now, but
before their separation, which these Protestants in that place have told us
Cap. 11. sup.
to have beerie 1200. years ago, must still with reverence be observed. Which
this Protestant Relator shall here confirm again, Relat. sup. cap. 53. or 54.
speakinge of the present Greek Church in these words: Their liturgies be the
same that in the old time, namely S. Basils, S. Chrisostomes, and S. Gregory's
(which is the same that the Roman Church now uses) translated, without any
bending them to that change of language, which their tongue has suffered. M.
Middleton also Middleton papistomast. page 51. Morton Apol. part. 2. page 81.
tells us of the Masses of Basile, Chrysostom, and Epiphanius, and that in
them the dead were prayed for. D. Morton goes higher, to the days of the
Apostles, citing and allowing not only the Masses of S. Basile and S.
Chrysostom, but S. James the Apostle himself. Wherefore I hope he and others
will be the better pleased to accept the Censure of Hieremias the
Constantinopolitane Patriarch taking upon him to be supreme in that Church,
uttered in these words: The holy Mass is a sacrifice Hierem. in censur.
instituted of Christ in memory and commendation of all his mercy and
humility sustained for our sakes. Saint James the Apostle, called our Lords
Brother, first reduced into order that liturgy and Sacrifice, being so
instructed of Christ to do it. In all parts of that holy sacrifice, nothing
else is handled, but an universal order of things, which our Savior undertook
for our Redemption. How these primative Masses, liturgies or forms of the B.
sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, in all questions and articles of Religion
agree with that which the Roman Church now practizeth from S. Gregory, as
these men before allow, and others write from S. Peter the Apostle, is
apparent in those liturgies and Masses, and too long to be cited in this
place. And from hence thus I argue again.

That doctrine, and public practice of Sacrifice, or other, which was
instituted by Christ, practiced by his Apostles, and such holy Saints and
Doctors of the Church, as Saint Basile, S. Chrysostom, S. Epiphanius. and S.
Gregory were, may and ought still to be observed, kept, and used: But the
doctrine, and practice of our public Church Sacrifice, or Mass, is such.
Therefore it may, and ought still to be kept and used. The first proposition is
most evidently true, and cannot be denied by any true Christian: and the Minor
is before proved in these last Protestants allowed citations: and may further
be confirmed by these Protestant writers: D. Sutcl^ffe writes thus: We read
in Ignatius this phrase, offerre and, sacrificium Sutcliff subu. page 32.
immolare, to offer and immolate sacrifice, and like phrases in Irenaeus,
Ciprian, Tertullian, and Martialis, who mentions also Altares. And these
words, and the things, truly signified by them, Altar and Sacrifice, are in
the Greek and other tongues so unseperably joined, and knitt together, that D.
Morton does thus acknowledge: We cannot dislike the sentence Morton App. page
162. l. 2. cap. 6. Sect. 1.
concerning the mutual relation and dependence between an Altar and
sacrifice: but grant that altar does as naturally and necessarily infer a
Sacrifice, as a shryne does a Saint, a father a son. And again: it is truly
said Sacrifice and preisthood are Relatiues. Then, for altares he has hard
before, that they were in the Apostles time: and consequently Mass, the
Christian sacrifice was then: for he has told us they cannot be separated.
And his Protestant Bishops in their late Theater, will putt him out of all
doubt, that from the beginnynge of Christianity, even in England, such altares
for sacrifice were used of the Christians. Their words be these: It is reported
that Theater of great Brit. page 205. n. 12. page 204.
Patrick the Irish Apostle, and canonized Saint long before the Reign of
King Lucius preached the Ghospel in many places of Wales: And also that
Ninianus Bernicius of the race of the British princes converted the Picts to
the Religion of Christ. To which effect also the sayings of S. John Chrysostom
Bishop of Constantinople enforce. And among Islands expressly names this our
Brittayne: Whose Inhabitants (says he) have also consented to the word, which
is planted in every heart, in honor whereof they have erected their temples,
and Altares. Thus in the Brittans time; that S. Augustine brought in Altares,
Mass, and the ceremonies thereof is proved by these Protestants in other
places. And the Theater it self sets this for one of the Questions of S.
Augustine to S. Gregory: Gifts Theat page 330.
offerred on the Altar how to be distributed asked by Augustine of Pope
Gregory. And thus they write of King Redwald. After baptism returninge to
Idolatry, Page 333.
in one and the same temple after the manner of the old Samaritans, he erected
an Altar for the service of Christ, and an other little Altar for burnt
sacrifices, which stood unto the days of Beda himself. And long before again
in the Brittans time they tell us of Priests stayne standinge at the Altars.
And again in Page 291. Page 317.
Gildas time 1200. years since, oaths taken upon the Altars made of stome.
And to secure D. Morton what the sacrifice offered upon those Altars was, they
tell us, that in this primative time in this Island, among the brittans: The
Altar was called the seat of the Theater page 317. sup. n. 6.
celestial sacrifice. And again, whereas D. Morton has granted before, That
Sacrifice and preisthood are Relatiues, which be of an inseparable nature,
Both he, and all others that now so earnestly contend to have themselves
accounted Priests, must as much labor for this external sacrifice, which as
he affirms, is inseparable from preisthood. Otherwise if they shall again
fly up and down, to their fantasied spiritual preisthood, and sacrifice,
Queen Elizabeth (if her prayers and devotions had been as great) was as good
a Priest. As S. Peter was, and D. Mortons Mother, grandmother, beldame, and all
women of his kiudred, or in the world, (if their virtue were equal, were as
good Priests as he: if he were a true Priest, which I deny: And yet they all
agree, that all woman sex, and kind is incapable of holy preisthood. Again
D. Morton with his friend Theodore Bibliander Morton App. page in sacrif.
assuer us, that the Rabbis before Christ did teach, that those which received
the Messiah, should in place of the sacrifices of Moses law, have an external
sacrifice in bread and wine, and called it Thoda. Which is sufficient for this
place, and purpo^se, where I only prove, that there is in Christian Religion
an external sacrifice to succeed the sacrifices of the Law; for that this
sacrifice though begun in bread and wine, is the blessed body and blood of
Christ, I have proved by these Protestants in the former chapter. And this
which I contend in this place, is plainly granted unto me by Casaubon,
wrighting in Casaub. resp. ad Card. Per. page 51. 52. etc.
our Kings name, and by his command as he protests, and in these words:
neither is the King Ignorant, nor denies, that the fathers of the primative
Church, did acknowledge one sacrifice, in Christian Religion, that succeeded in
the place of the sacrifices of Moses Law. And according to this it is
confessed by other Protestants, allowinge also, the doctrine of the primative
fathers for a Rule to us: The words of M. Middleton are these: The sacrifice of
the Altar, Middlet. Papist. page 92. 113.
and unbloody sacrifice were used in the primative Church; and the ancient
fathers called the sacrifice of the body, and blood of Christ, a sacrifice. And
again: The primative Church did offer sacrifice at the Page 49. sup. Page 137.
138. 47. 45.
Altar, for the dead. Sacrifice for the dead was a ^radition of the
Apostles, and the ancient fathers. Then if this was from the beginning, true
and Catholic doctrine, to offer sacrifice, and say Mass for the dead, much
rather for ^he living, and so both for the living and the dead, in
Protestants Judgment. And so both the form of our holy preisthood. Receive
power to offer sacrifice in the Church for the living and dead: And also holy
sacrifice of Mass, offered for such purpose, by a duly consecrated Priest, is
holy and acceptable before God. And all English Protestants that shall deny it,
are not only within the Anathema of the Council of Trent in these words: If
any man shall say, that in the Mass a true and Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 1.
de Sacrif. Miss.
proper sacrifice is not offered, let him be Anathema: But subject to the
curse and condemnation of the primative Church against Ae^ius, the Heretic,
and his accomplices, as their own Doctors Field and Couell are witnesses in
this manner: Aerius condemned the custom of the Church, Field page 138. l. 3.
cap. 29. Couel. Exam. page 114.
in naminge the dead at the Altar, and offeringe the sacrifice of Eucharist
for them: and for this his rash and Inconsiderate boldness, and presumption, in
condemninge the universal Church of Christ, he was justly condemned. How much
more then are these present Protestants worthy condemnation, who do not only
contemn the doctrine, and custom of the present Roman, Greek, and
universal Church of Christ, in this so greatly concerning question, but
against their own Judgments, with rash inconsiderate boldness, and presumption
condemn the universal primative Church, an^ confederate themselves with
Heretics (i^ their own Judgment) justly condemned, against it. And
contrariwise this holy Catholic doctrine of Mass, or Sacrifice for the
living and dead, by our Enemies allowance, a Tradition of the Apostles, use
and custom of the universal Church of Christ, in the primative, and best
flourishing estate thereof, and ever since continued, is inuiolably to be
maintained.

CHAPTER XVII. OF THE SINGLE, AND CHASTE life, of Priests, and vows of
chastity.
NOw let us come to that doleful and heavy Question to these married
Protestant Church men; To prove by them also the ancient and true Catholic
doctrine, and practice of the single, and chaste life of Priests, and vows of
chastity: The contrary wanton, licentious and sacriledgeous liberty unto this
and other works of perfection, whillfull poverty, and obedien^e as it first
made way for Protestant here^es into the world, as appears by their Apostle
Luther, and the rest presently upon their revolt, for chastity, poverty, and
obe^ience, which they had vowed: for the most ^art giving themselves over to
their contra^es, Lust, Riches and Rule: so it is to this day ^ unpleasing a
thing in this Epicurean ^ct, that they cannot endure to follow the ^nons
either of the Latin Church, under whose obedience they should be, if thy will
show any at all, or to the Gre^ke Church either as will appear in this
chapter, howsoever they will seem to allow thereof, especially in this
Article, of later days using more liberty therein, then other Churches But to
omit all things of coffeehouse to this people I argue thus. That doctrine
and practice which is a work of perfection, profitable unto, or making perfect
the members of Christ's mystical body, his Church, ought to be allowed and
practiced of them: that call themselves the perfect, and reformed Church,
especially in that sort of people, or some great part of them, that are, or
would be esteemed the most perfect, reformed guides and directors to others,
as their ministers pronounce themselves to be: But the doctrine and practice
of single and chaste life, and vows of chastity. Be such: Therefore to be
embraced and allowed of these Protestants, otherwise they have not the perfect
and reformed but imperfect and deformed Church.

The first proposition is evidently true, and in the light of nature too gross
absurdities do follow in denying it. The second proposition is at lardge
proved by these Protestants in the chapter of precepts and Cap. 7. sup.
counsels before from whence at this time I will only show by D. Couells
testimony, that it is so absurd to deny it, that he would free all
Protestants from it. His words of the works of perfection be these. In these
points all have not holden the same opinions: Couell def. of Hooker page 52.
some thought the counsels to be of the some necessity, with precepts: as
those Heretics called Apostolici. Others esteemed them as things indifferent.
Others as things forbidden, which error is accused by some of our Adversaries,
to be an opinion of our Church. There is none of any sound Judgment in our
Church, which does not think, that willing poverty, humble obedience, and
true chastity, are things very commendable, and do bring with them great
aduantadge to the true perfection of a Christian life. By these we do more
then without these we should. Then these men granting the doctrine, and never
practizing the use of it, from whence this aduantadge to true perfection is
brought, are in a practical error, in this point and ought to reform
themselves. If any man will excuse their omitting of it: he must needs
answer, that it is, either because they will not, or are not able to perform
it. If it only proceeds of willfullnes, they are generally to be reproved
of wilful obstinacy, and sin against the holy ghost, universally refusing or
resisting such holy motions, Inspirations, and graces. If they say, it
proceeds from want of grace, spiritual power, and assistance to effect it,
they plainly prove, and thereby acknowledge themselves, and their Religion, to
be graceless, and not of God; not having that ability, and strength in any
one compaine, or society of men, or women, among them in so long time, to
embrace and practice that which so profits to perfection. And as strongely
grant, the Church of Rome, and the doctrine thereof for true, wherein that
grace has been given to thousands of societies, to profess, to live, and die
in perpetual vowed chastity; which has not been bestowed one any one
fraternity in their Religion. And thereby demonstrate to the world, that those
Catholic Priests of our nation, whom they persecute as enemies to God, are in
this great favor, and grace with him, in performing that perfect estate, of
continency which our Adversaries openly confess they cannot do. Which we are
so fart from acknowledging in us, that in great multitudes, we will solemnly
swear, we truly perform it.

And no man understanding the severe canons of Catholic Religion, for such
offenders, the great reverence we give to that most blessed sacrifice, which
we daily offer, and what Innocence of life at the least to be free from all
carnal and other mortal sin, we require unto it, and the ministering of all
other Sacraments continually practiced by us, can condemn our Order in this
matter further in this question I argue thus: That which was decreed by the
Church, within the first 400. years of Christ, is now to be observed: But the
vow of continency was then decreed to be annexed to holy orders: Therefore
still so to be observed. The Mayor is allowed before: And the Minor proved by
M. Perkins in these words: Continentiae votum, necessarium, and Perk problem.
page 192.
perpetuum, etc. The vow of continency, necessary, and perpetual, seems
first to have been decreed in the west Church, about 380. years after
Christ. Traely it was received before, but by the private devotion of some, not
by the public Judgment of the Church. If any man says, he acknowledges,
then only to be decreed though used before, and this in the west Church; it
suffices for this purpose, and is obligatorie to Protestants, both confessing
that a time of truth, the Roman Church then to have been the true Church,
and Mother unto others, and themselves under the Jurisdiction of that western
and Roman Church. And customs are not usually decreed, but upon
Transgression of them. But M. Middleton will tell us, That S. ^piphanius an
holy Saint and blessed Bishop of Greece, writes of such decrees, and Canons
to the whole Church, both to have been extant, and practiced long before that
time and from the beginning of Christianity, as his words (traditions) without
limitation argue. Epiphan. l. 1. to 2. co^tra her. Cathari apud Middleton
papistom page 139. 140.
Thus he is cited by him writing of the Cathari Heretics. Those Traditions
which were delivered peculiarly for the Clergy by reason of their
supereminencie in celebration of the divine mystery, These Heretics would
have all men tied unto, when they did hear that a Bishop ought to be
unreprovable, the husband of one wife, and continent, and likewise of Deacons
and Priests. For in truth since the coming of Christ, the doctrine of the
Gospel does not admit into these offices any, that have married a second
wife, by reason of the excellent dignity of preisthood. And this holy Church
does sincerely observe, yett does not the Church admit any into those offices
that is the husband but of one wife, whose wife is yett lyueing with him in the
fellowship of marriadge, sed eum qui se ab vna continuit, aut in vidui^^te
vixit. But him only that either was never married, or that after the death of
his wife lives unmarried, the Church receaueth into the office of a Deacon,
Priest, Bishop, or Subdeacon, which is especially observed, where the
Ecclesiastical Canons are sincerely kept. But thou wilt say unto we, that in
many places, Priests and Deacons do live in wedlock: But this is not according
to the sincerity of the canons. Hitherto, and further, be the conuincing
words, of this holy, and learned Father, of the Greek Church, whose evidence
is so plain for the Catholic doctrine, and practice in this Question, and
against Protestants, that M. Middleton flatly says: Epiphanius was too
partially Middleton sup. page 143.
affected in this point. And hereuppon thus I argue again: That doctrine,
which is so plainly, and directly held, and maintained, by the learned holy
fathers, of the primative Church, that the present Protestant Adversaries,
(otherwise seeming to allow these fathers) confess it to be their opinion,
and of the Church in their time is to be embraced and observed: But this
Catholic doctrine of Priests continency, and vows of chastity is such:
Therefore to be embraced, and observed. The Mayor is manifestly true, both
Catholics and Protestants in show at the least, allowing the primative Church
and Fathers thereof for Judges in questions of Religion. The Minor is thus
proved. First M. Middleton acknowledges S. Epiphanius, S. Hierome, S.
Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose, to be so plain against their Marriadge in the
Clergy and their doctrine against vows of chastity: that having written of S.
Epiphanius as before. he adds of S. Hierome thus: He made vnciwill
entroades against Gods holy ordinance, Middleton supra page 134. Page 138.
in this point. Of S. Chrysostom thus: Chrysostom in his vehemency goes
beyond measure in reprehending, and the Christians of his time in their
lightness went beyond measure in voweing. Of S. Ambrose thus: Ambrose had the
Apostolical Page 134.
dragon, the devil dwelling in him. And of the holy ancient Fathers in
general in this matter. He speaks in these terms: Neither Middleton sup.
page 133.
is it any thing to the purpose, that the ancient Fathers allowed vows of
chastity, and single life of Priests. And again: The Ancient Fathers are not
Page 334.
fit Judges to determine either of Priests Marriadge, or vows of chastity.
M. Wotton well perceauing, the doctrine and practice of the holy primative
Church, in those unspotted days, deals as freely with us in these words:
Such was the opinion of holiness in single life, Wotton, def. of Perk. page 491.
in the primative Church: that it is not to be looked for, that antiquity
should afford us any testimony, against the practice and Judgment of those
days. Then how graceless, and impudent are these men, to cite both fathers,
and Counsels, to prove that, which in their conscience, and knoweledge, they
both understand in themselves, and publish thus unto the world, they utterly
denied, and disallowed; wholly and clearly teaching the present doctrine of
the Roman Church, and the contradictorie to Protestants assertions? Whether
they were Greeks or Latins: and this in so serious manner, that such breach of
chastity vowed (which M. Perkins confesses to be above 1200. years old)
was called Incest and punished with excommunication. From whence I argue thus
further.

That which by holy fathers is called Incest, and by allowed general Council
in the primative Church, censured with excommunication, is not to be adjudged
lawful: but the contrary. But breach of the vow of chastity, now above
1200. years annexed to preisthood is such. Therefore it is not to be adjudged
lawful: But the contrary. The Mayor proposition is evidently true: And the
Minor thus proved, by M. Perkins, in these words. Epiphanius in his Perk probl.
page 201.
61. heresy says, they that marry after they vow do sin, and enioyneth them
penance. So Augustine and Hierome. viduit c. 9. After these Marriadges began to
be accounted of some for a more grievous sin, after the year 380. Basile
calls these Marriadges, Incest, the offense of whoredom and adultery, in
his hook of virginity; by the Council of Calcedon in the 15. canon they are
punished with excommunication. But they will say the later Greek Church uses
more liberty in suffering the use of Marriadge in holy orders: Though this is
nothing to us, that be under the western and Roman Church, by their own
confessions, yett thus I demonstrate, that they neither agree with the
ancient, nor present Greeks in this question, but make lust, licentiousnes,
and liberty to be their law. For proof whereof I argue thus.

That which is the cheifest law to the Greeks (being as D. Field writes,
the 13. Field l. 3. c. 18. page 101.
Canon of the 6. general Council, otherwise the 13. canon made in Trullo)
does only license Subdeacons, Deacons, and Priests, married before Orders, not
to be separated from their wives, but to abstain from them in the time of
their turn, that is in the time when they sacrifice, as the second Council of
Carthadge in the 2. Canon defines. But the Fathers say that they know it
delivered for a canon to the Roman Church, that Deacons, or Priests in their
ordination profess, that they will not any more company with their wives. But
both the doctrine, and practice of Protestants, are contrary marrying both
before, and after orders, not regarding any time of sacrifice, but denying it,
and being under the Roman Church, yet profess open disobedience to the
Canons of it. And not only to the Latin but to the Greek Church also. For in
the Greek Church neither their Bishops, Religious men, or women, or votaries
of chastity are permitted to marry: but for such to marry is adjudged
sacrilege in that Church, the words of their Patriarch Hieremias are these:
Whosoever Hierem. in cens in epilog.
shall not perform the vow of chastity, does incurr the most filthy sin of
sacrilege: and to perform such vows, is the most angelical and excellent
life that can be ledd on earth: therefore we must greatly extol monastical
life, and conversation. Therefore these Protestants, not only permitting and
tollerating, but inciting, provoking, and procuring Bishops, Monks, Friars,
Nuns, and all votaties to marriadge, are by this censure guilty of the
filthy sin of Sacrilege, and agree with no Church, Greek, or Latin, in this
point, and question.

But these men in their Theater and else S. Malachy, and in Speed in Theatr.
page 145. etc.
England in the time of S. Dunstan, our Archbishop of Canterbury. But they have
been told before, even from primative Saints, according to the sincerity of
the Canons. And answell by this kind of Argument, that such, and such things
have been, or now be, without proof that they are good, and ought to be,
they might prove murder, treason, Adultery, incest, sacrilege, blasphemy, and
whatsoever villainies, and Impieties to be holy or Justifiable things: for
these things were, not only in one, or two kingedomes, in one or two times,
but be, and have been with such wicked men, in all times, and kingedomes. And
to let them know by their own authorities, that it was so in this their
objection, wicked men that were thus married, or allowed it; and holy, and
Saints, that forbad, and condemned it, They themselves in this their Theater
wittnes, in these words: S. Malachy Theatr. sup. n. 9. page 145.
(whose life S. Bernard writes) prohibited Priests Marriadges in Ireland. And
to assure us further, that they were holy men, that forbad these Marriadges,
and the highest authority by their own Judgment before by which they were
forbidden, thus they testify in these words: Pope Gregory sends hither (into
England) Theat. page 421. n. 47.
his Bulls, with damninge curses, against the married Clergy: commaundinge
that none should hear their Masses. And thus again: Pope Gregory in a
general Synod excluded the married Priests from execution of their holy
offices, and forbad the lay men to hear their Masses. And our Archbishop of
Canterbury, Page 373.
then by their own sentence a Saint, condemned them miraculously as they
testify; so were they condemned by other Counsels and authorities. The
sanctity of S. Dunstan, Page 371. 372.
his miracles, gifts of Prophetie, and verified Propheties of the calamities,
and punishments which God inflicted upon the Princes and favorers maintayning
those wicked marriages, are in some part testified in their own Theater. The
Princes that Theat. page 377. etc. cap. 43. l. 7.
disallowed them were holy and Saints; among which was King, and S. Edward
the Martyr murdered and martyred by the favorites of married Priests Among
which was his Mother in Law Queen Elfrida, and her son his half brother
Ethelred after King by this Martyrdom. Where upon these men themselves have
thus registered: The hearts of the Subjects drawn from their Sovereign. Theat.
sup.
Dunstans Prophecy against their wickedness. A cloud of blood and fire, and
many extreme miseries of that time. Dunstan further prophesies of other
calamities to the Land after his death, Queen Elfrida, this great patroness
of those wicked Marriadges, and Murderesse of that blessed King, and Martyr,
acknowledged her error, and did perpetual penance for those Impieties: their
own words thereof be these: Elfrida the second wise of King Edgar, procured
the Theat. page 372. n. 17.
murder of King Edward, her son in law, that her own son Ethelred might
come to the crown: and afterward to purify his, and her husbands, ghost and
to stopp the peoples speeches, of so wicked a fact, she founded the Abbeis of
Amsbury, and Whorwell, in the Page 374. n. 10.
counties of Wiltshire, and South-hampton: in which later she lived with
great repentance, and penance until the day of her death. But both the life
and death of them that repented not, was by these men's relation, odious and
execrable. I will only exemplify in two Kings, Ethelred before related, and
King Edwyne before him, both maintayners of Priests marriadge. of King Edwyne
they write in these words: Theat. page 366. n. 7. 8. Page 369. n. 2. 3.
King Edwyne the day of his coronation before his nobles sittinge in counsel
at that age, not above thirteen years old, with shameless and unprincely
lust abused a lady of great estate, and his near kinsewoman. He was a great
enemy unto the Monkish orders, whom from the monastery of Malmesbury,
Glastenbury and others, he expelled, placing married Priests in their Romes.
Dunstan likewise the Abbot Saint of Glostenbury he banished the Realm, for
his ouerbold reprehensions, etc. His subjects deny him obedience, And set up
Prince Edgar his brother in Mercia, and Northumberland, not fully fourteen
years old. Edwyne then raigninge in a still decaying state, was held of such
is subjects, in no better esteem, then was Iehoram of Judah, who is said to
have lived without being desired: for very grief whereof after four years
of his Reign, he ended his life. His wife thought to be to Near in the
blood royal, to be matched with him in spousall bed, the subjects dislikinge
of the unlawful marriadge (the cause of Dunstans banishment) failed by degrees
to perform their duties to their King, and her, they likewise forced to a
separation in the third year of his regardlesse government.

The miseryes and punishments of King Ethelred, and this Kingedome for his
syns, they recompt in this manner: Ethelred not able Theat. page 376. 377.
to resist the Danes, his subjects not loueing him, pays unto them 10000.
pounds to depart. An other peace he purchases with 16000. pownds. The next
composition 20000. pownds. Then 24000. pownds. Then 30000. pownds, and lastely
40000. pownds, until the land was emptied of all the coin, the Kingdom of
her glory, the nobles of courage, commons of content, and the Sovereign of
his wonted respect and obseruaunce. The miseryes of this land, for the syns of
the patrons of such marriadges, as now be defended, and honored in England,
which then it felt, are to many, and lamentable to be remembered at this time.
And a man may justly call it a strange Example, that among other strange
punishments of King Henry the eight that great patron of Cranmer, that
married bishop (that mared Religion) and supreme head of such a Church, that
in his life time so iumbled, tumbled, and tumbled the world together, should
have no better commendation of these Protestants now, but to be ranked by them,
as the chiefest among wicked, and justly punished English Kings, in their late
published history of the world, in these words: Now for King Henry the eight*
if History of the world in pref.
all the pictures and patterns of a merciless prince were lost, in the
world, they might all again be painted to the life, out of the story of this
King. And because Protestants memoryes serve them not, to call to mind, the
holiness, sanctity, and Saints, that have been in our English Catholic
Clergy, but like filthy swyne desire to tumble, moyle, and root in dyrt,
let them cast over their accounts, through out the historyes of this
kingedome, beginning with their own Marriadges, and time, and so ascendinge to
the first conversion of this land to Christ, and it will be no difficult Auditt
to make, that they themselves* and those which were married, as these be, were
the most disordered, profane, and irreligeous that were in our English
Clergy; let them make the calculation, I may not now intend it, my method
will not allow it. Being fittest for such as be partakers of such impieties.
Only to begin their reckoninge, I must putt them in mind, out of their
Theater and other their own historyes, penned by Protestants. That as this
Kingedome, of our English, or saxon Christians, has been but twyse conquered,
and ouerrunne, once by the Danes, then by the Normans, the greatest miseries
and punishments it has endured; So the same their Theater, other histories,
and Protestant writings, never object unto us, more Married, and disordered
Priests, and clergy men, then at those times. God of his mercy grant, that
their third state of married ministers, presage us better bydeings, and bring
us greater comforts. Of vows and profession of perpetual chastity, and other
works of perfection it is further entreated in the proper question of such
holy and religious life and conversation.

CHAPTER XVIII. OF PVRGATORIE, AND PRAYER for the dead.
AFTER this, let us entreat of prayer for the dead, and Purgatory: And
because, these Protestants before have given so great allowance, to the Greek
Church, especially D. Field Intituling the 5. chapter of his third Field l. 3.
c. 5. in titul.
book: Of the nature of scisme, and kinds of yt, and that it no way appears
that the Churches of Greece, etc. Are heretical or in damnable schism. And it
is their common assertion, that the doctrine of purgatory is only taught by
the Roman, and not Greek Church, I will first thus argue from the authority
thereof. That doctrine which is taught by that Church, which is neither
heretical, nor damnably scismaticall cannot be heretical, nor damnable, but
orthodoxe, and Catholic: But the doctrine of Purgatory is taught by this so
Justified Church, the Greek Church. Therefore not heretical, nor damnable.
But orthodoxe and Catholic. The first proposition is evidently true: for it
is the doctrine, and practice of any company, or private parson, that gives
unto it, the denomination, Heretical, Schismatic, Orthodoxe, etc. The
second proposition is proved by these Protestant Testimonies following. First
the Protestant Relator, writing of this Greek Church, speaks thus: With Rome
Relation of Relig. c. 53. or c. 54.
they concur in the opinion of transsubstantiation, and generally in the
service, and whole body of the Mass, in praying to Saints, in auriculare
confession, in offeringe of sacrifice, and prayer for the dead, and these
without any, or with no material difference. They hold Purgatory also, and
worshipping of pictures. Therefore these doctrines of purgatory and the rest
must needs by their Judgment be orthodoxe and Catholic, and neither
heretical nor damnably scismaticall, otherwise against D. Feilds supposition,
and Title, his fellow Relator had proved it to be such. Again M. Middleton
tells us, that in the Middleton papistom. page 51.
Masses of Basile, Chrysostom, and Epiphanius (all Greek Fathers) the dead
were prayed for. But because they will perhaps look for the very name of
Purgatory, I deduce it from the time of the Apostles to have been taught, and
the doctrine thereof in the Greek Church: For M. Perkins tells us, that
Dionysius Perk. problem. page 178. The Protestant book of Homel. Bell. motiu.
fol. 133. etc.
(commonly called, and by Protestants, The Areopagite, S. Paul's Scholar) did
teach: In Purgatorio expiari peccata. That sins are purged in Purgatory.
Therefore he thought there was a purgatory, as Catholics do, and in that
satisfaction was made for sins. And there he sets down the prayer used for
the dead, recorded by the same S. Dionysius in these words. Dionysius Hierar.
Ecclesiast. p. 3. Perk. sup.
c. 7. Oration illa precatur diuinam clementiam, vt cuncta dimittat per
infirmitatem humanam admissa peccata, defuncto. That prayer does beseech the
divine Clemency, to forgive to the par^ie deceased, all sins committed by
humane Infirmity. To like purpose (as hereafter D. Bilson the Protestant
Bishop Bilson Survey of Christ's sufferings.
of Winchester cites, S. Iustine, Ir^naeus, Cyrill, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Ignatius, Clement of Alexandria, Eusebius, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Basile,
Gr^gorie Nazianzene, Damascen, Theophilact, etc. The glories of the Greek
Church. And therefore Gennadius Schol. the Learned Patriarch of that Church,
in his defense pf the Counc^l of Florence, writes thus of that matter. The
Cennad, Schol. defens. 5 cap. 3.
doctrine of Purgatory, prayer, and sacrifice for the dead was a Tradition of
the Apostles. That which the Latins call Purgatorium (purgatory) they of the
Greek Church name Catharterion. Signifieing a purging, cleansing or
satisfying place, of the Greek verb (...) to purge, cleanse, expiate, etc.
And proving this at lardge, by the ancient Greek fathers, he adds thus:
They were only Schismaticorum s^ctat^res, followers Gennad. sup.
of S^ismati^ks, which denied it. For such Masters in Religion will our
Protestants find out to follow, if any time, age, Church, or society had
them. Lastely in this Argument, the Censure of the Greek Church upon this
error of Protestants, is delivered in these words: That the souls departed are
to be Hierem. Patr. constant in ce^sur. c. 15.
relieved by prayers, sacrifices, and good deeds, of those which live, and that
it was decreed by the holy Apostles, that in the celebratio^ of the holy
mysteries, a memorit should be made of them, that were departed this life.

Again I argue thus: That which was the doctrine and Tradition of the
Apostles, and holy Fathers, of the primative Church, is to be embraced: But
the doctrine of Purgatory, praying, and satisfying for the dead, was such:
Therefore to be embraced, and observed The first proposition is often graunred
before. And the second also proved in this chapter, yett thus I add unto it. M.
Middleton Middleton Papistom. page 64.
says, that S. Chrysostom taught it to be the Apostles ordinance, to pray
for the dead. And confesses: It was a Tradition in the primative Church; Page
45. 46. sup.
received from the fathers to pray for the dead, and beg mercy of God for
them. And again: The Page 51. sup.
dead were prayed for in the public Liturgies (or Masses) of Basile,
Chrysostom, and Epiphanius. And further thus: The Church in Epiphanius time
used Page 47. 48. 49.
to crave mercy for the dead. M. Hull tells us that in the primative
Church, Leo appointed Hull Romans pol page 86 Morton apol. part. 1. page 329.
Morto^ sup. page 273.
Masses for the dead. D. Morton says of S. Augustine, that he prayed for his
Mother Monicha deceased. And from Calvin he wittnesseth generally thus: Ipsi
veteres preces fundebant pro defunctis. The ancient fathers prayed for the
dead.

Further I argue thus: whatsoever doctrine being denied overthrows an
Article of our Creed, and being granted confirms it, is true, by
Protestants: if they deny not the Articles of the Creed, as they will not
seem to do: But the doctrine of Purgatory being denied, destroys an
Article of our Creed, and being granted, confirms it: Therefore it is, or
ought to be esteemed true, by Protestants. The Mayor is evidently true, for
the Articles of our Creed be most true, and cannot by true doctrine and
positions be proved otherwise. I prove the Minor in this manner. Those places
both of scriptures and fathers, which the Protestants themselves against the
Puritans namely D. Bi^son (Protestant Bishop of Winchester with others) use to
prove the Article of Christ descent to hell, do prove purgatory, which is
made evident by citing some few. As that of the Prophet David. He ledd them
Psalm. 106. v. 14. 16.
forth of darkness, and the shadow of death: and brake their bonds. He
shattered in pe^ces, the brazen gates, and brake the Iron bars. And that of
the Prophet Zachary speaking of Christ's discending thither: Thou also in the
blood of thy Testament, Zachar. 9. v. 11.
have let out the prisoners from the lake. And David and S. Paul of his
ascending with these captives into heaven. Thou aidst ascend Psalm. 67. v. 19.
Ephesians. 4. v. 8. 9.
on high: thou tookest captivity. And in S. Paul: Ascending on high, he
ledd captivity captive, he gave gifts to men. And that he ascended, what is
it but because he descended also first into the Inferior parts of the earth.
Which sayings of holy scripture (that cannot be untrue) cannot be instified
of the hell of the damned, from whence none were delivered: because in hell
there is no Redemption. Therefore the same Protestant Bishop Bilson assigns a
third Bilson Survey page 552. 656.
place, besides heaven and hell, his words be: Abraham's Bosom was upward far
above hell. Neither did I make Abraham's bosom to be paradise or heaven. And
citing the fathers to prove Christ descent to hell, he brings them
ordinarily proving Putgatorie, or if not by that name, yet in effect, teaching
that Christ descended to a place of punishment, were many deceased were
punished, and detayned captyues, and delivered them from thence which (as
before) could not Bilson sup. from page 582. to page 665.
be hell. The very names of those Fathers proueing this doctrine, are toe many
and tedious to be related, their sentences may be seen in that his collection.

Lastely I argue thus: whatsoever doctrine is defined, or proposed to
Protestants by their highest commanding Rule of their Religion, as Communion
Book, Book of Articles etc. to which they all subscribe, they may not deny:
But this doctrine of Purgatory or prayeing for the dead is such: Therefore
they may not deny it. The Mayor is evident, and the Minor proved out of their
publicly allowed and reconfirmed Communion Book. Where in the Burial of the
dead their Ministers are appointed to pray for the party deceased in these
words: That we with this our Brother, and all other departed Comm. Book Tit.
Burial of the dead^ near the end:. almighty God.
in the true faith of thy holy name, may have our perfect consummation and
bliss, both in body and soul, in the eternal and everlasting glory: Amen If
this prayer, that people deceased may come to heaven body and soul (man has
no other part to be prayed for) is not to pray for the dead nothing can be
called praying for the dead, and for their salvation. And so I end this
Question, with this sentence of M. Higgons, in his public sermon, Theophil.
Higg. sermon. 3. Mart. 1610.
at S. Paul's Cross, giving a reason of this doctrine, in these words: As
there is a death in syn, and a death to syn, so there is a double
resurrection: The first a culpa, from syn: the second a paena, from the
punishment which follows thervppon. Which must needs be the temporal
punishment of syn, the grownde of Purgatory, and satisfaction, after death
being oftentimes not satisfied, answered, or (to use his own phrase) not
risen from, in this life. For the eternal punishment of hell, due for great
syns, is ever remitted, and risen from, in his resurrection a culpa, from syn.
Otherwise a man now entitled heir of the kingedome of heaven, and salvation,
should also be guilty of hell, and damnation, saved and damned, in heaven and
hell together. And upon this and other such holy grownds, these Protestants in
their late Theater recompt unto us so many hundreds Theat. of great Brit. etc.
of Religeous howses fownded by holy Kings, princes, and others in England to
pray for the souls of themselves, their Auncesters, posterity, and other
Friends.

CHAPTER XIX. TEACHEING HOW THERE be 7. Sacraments in number, by these
Protestants, according to the doctrine of the Roman Church.
HAVING ended all other Questions to the full satisfaction, and according to
the requests, and demands, of Protestants, desiringe to be satisfied therein,
and performing this from themselves, and own writings: I will proceed in the
same manner in the Articles of the holy Sacraments, and first of their number,
thus set down in the Council of Trent: There be seven Sacraments Council.
Trid. decret. de Sacrament.
of the new law, instituted by JESUS CHRIST our Lord, neither more nor fewer:
Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders,
Matrimony. For defense and proof of which doctrine, by these Protestants
themselves, thus I argue.

Whatsoever doctrine a confessed true general Council, having authority to
bind all by these Protestants before, has determined in this question is to
be received and followed: But the Catholic doctrine of the Roman Church
concerning seven Sacraments, is thus determined by such general Council, and
bynding authority: Therefore to be received, and followed. The first
proposition is granted before, and must needs be thought so equal to all
Protestants, that how soever they think of the infallible sentence of such
assemblies in matters of faith, yet none of them may be so partial, but to
prefer a general Council to any Protestant assembly, censure, sentence, or
decree. The second is evidently proved, supposeing what is written before even
by Protestants of the general Council of Florence, and for such with the
doctrine thereof not only acknowledged, by D. Willet and M. Parkes but Willet
Limbom. Parkes page 137. 180. Gennadius in defens. council. Flor. Council.
Florent. de Sacramentis nouae legis.
by the Patriarch of Greece himself in his defense thereof. Where it is thus
decreed, both with assent of Grecians, and Armenians: Nouae legis septem sunt
Sacramenta, scilicet Baptismus, Confirmatio, Eucharistia, Poenitentia, Extrema
Vnctio, Ordo and Matrimonium etc. There are seven Sacraments of the new law,
that is, Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders,
and Matrimony. Which do much differ from the Sacraments of the old law,
for they did not cause grace, but did only figure that it was to be given by
the passion of Christ. But these of ours both conteyne grace, and give it unto
them that worthily receive them. Hitherto the decree of that holy general
Council, received by all Christendom, Latins, Armenians, Iacobynes,
Grecians. From whence I further argue in this manner.

Whatsoever doctrine essential in Religion, (such as Sacraments be) is taught
by the true Church, that is neither heretical, nor Scismaticall, is to be
embraced: But the doctrine of seven Sacraments, as the Roman Church teaches,
is such, being likewise taught by the Protestants true Greek Church:
therefore to be embraced. The Mayor is also proved in the last Argument, and
further confirmed in the Censure of the Greek Church, upon Protestants in
these words: There is an holy Hierem. in censur. cap. 7.
Catholic and Apostolic Church, of all true Christian men. In this
Catholic and true believing Church there be seven divine Sacraments,
Baptism, the Unction of holy Ointment, holy Communion, Orders, Matrimony,
Penance, and the oil of Extreme Unction. And they further prosecute (as also
the cited general Council of Florence does) the institution, form, matter,
effect, and other things, belonging to these seven holy Sacraments, according
to the present doctrine, of the Roman Church.

Again, I suppose, that Catholics in their definition of the Sacraments of
the new law, requiring a containing and giueing of grace, by these holy
Sacraments, besides their signification thereof: (being only signs, Seals
etc. as the common Protestant opinion is) to be far more restricted, and
limited, then that of Protestants, because many more things be, and may be
signs of any thing, then both signs, and causes: as appears to be true in
all genericall and specificall differences. For example under animal a living
creature are contained more, then under animal rational^, a lyueing creature
with reason, only limited to man, who otherwise abstractinge from his
rationalitie, is with all other lyueing creatures comprehended, Under the Genus
Animal a lyueing Creature. So a Sign of grace as well agrees to the
Sacraments of the old law, as to those of the Gospel: but not to conteyne
and give grace. Only proper to those of the new Testament, as is recited
before from the general Council of Florence, and is at Council. Trident.
decret. d^ Sacramentis ecclesiae etc.
lardge set down against Protestants in the Council of Trent. This supposed
which no man can deny, I argue thus.

All things that agree with the definition of a Sacrament, be Sacraments: But
according to Protestants all those seven before remembered, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreame-Vnction, Orders, and Matrimony
agree with, and have the definition of a Sacrament: Therefore they are
Sacraments. The Mayor is evident, because in Logic the thing defined, and
definition, are conuertibles: as this: man and a reasonable creature.
Whoesoeuer is the one is also the other, being one and the same. The second
proposi^ion Dove persuas. page 27. 28.
is thus proved by D. Dove Protestant Bishop of Peterboroug in these words:
Concerning the number of Sacraments, we will not dispute, for according to
their (Catholics) definition of a Sacrament, there be seven. Then much more
as I have demonstrated, there must be so many by Protestants definition of
Sacraments. As for his overplus number, more then seven, which he adds, if
he can prove it, he shall deserve better, then in writing that book, in
findeing forth more holy instruments of grace, and sanctification then hitherto
have been known; in the mean time God grant him more and better knowledge
with grace. But in that he grants our number of seven Sacraments, according
to our definition, it is as much as we contend, and all which hitherto they
have denied: for when Catholics entreat of Sacraments, their number, grace,
form, matter, Character etc. they speak of them, according as they are
defined, and taken in the Catholic Church, and schools: and come not to
Protestants, either to define, or determine them, or any other question in
Religion. Yett, as before, except I am to old to remember my Logic, or this
Bishop never did, or now will not understand it, if the definition of
Catholics more particulare and limited extends to seven Sacraments: That of
Protestants more lardge or general, will stretch as far, and further: except
the less is greater then that which is greater then it, two more then three,
the Species more ample in Logic then Genus, and in grammar our degrees of
comparison be altered, the positive turned into the comparatiue, superlatiue
and contrary.

I argue again in this manner: wheresoever in controversy of any question in
Religion, between two societies, whereof one is in the truth, the adverse
part it self does grant that their opinion is not true by their own
proceedings. There the contrary is to be adjudged true, otherwise against the
supposition neither should have the truth but both be in error: But in this
question this is the case between Catholics and Protestants, the Protestants
acknowleding more Sacraments by their proceedeings then twoe: Therefore the
Catholic doctrine of seven Sacraments is true. The Mayor is infallibly true,
and so proved by Protestants, graunteing generally, either their Religion and
doctrine, or that of Catholics Petition of 22. preachers excep. 3. against
comm. Book. Survey of the Book of comm. prayer page 117. quaest. 26. and page
134 135. 132. 133. 120.
to be true. The Minor is proved by the 22. preachers of london, in their
petition, who resolutely affirm, that Protestants must needs yield to more
then two, by their proceedings; Therefore to the Catholic doctrine of seven
Sacraments, else their supposition should be false, and all Religions in error,
in so great a Question. Which is further confirmed by the Protestant Surueyors
of their communion book, teacheing the same doctrine, and expressly
iustifyinge it in Confirmation, Penance, and Matrimony. And to show their
opinion and censure in this thing to be just, I demonstrate both them and the
rest to be Sacraments, by English Protestant proceedings in this manner, by the
things they require to a Sacrament.

Whatsoever is a visible Sign, or ceremony, ordained of God, or a visible
sign with grace, is a Sacrament: But all those seven, taught by Catholics,
are such: therefore they are Sacraments. The Mayor is the Protestants
definition of a Sacrament, as the same 22. 22. Preachers in petition sup.
excep. 2.
Protestant preachers testify, even from their approved books of Articles,
and Communion, and the Book of Articles it self to which all Ministers
subscribe testifies in these words: Sacraments ordained by Articles of
Religion artic. 25.
Christ be certain suer witnesses, and effectual signs of grace, and Gods
good will toward us, by the which he does work inuisibly in us etc. All
which being not only granted by Catholics, but further expressly that to
the worthy receauers they conteyne and give grace ex opere operato, of
themselves, where due preparation and disposition is, as the Council of Trent
has declared: Council. Tride^t decret. de Sacram. sup.
which is all and more then Protestants ordinarily require to Sacraments, it
must needs follow by D. Dove his grant before, that all those seven, esteemed
by Catholics for Sacraments, conteyne all those things, which these
Protestants require unto Sacraments, because they agree (as he has confessed)
with the Catholic Dove supr. persuas. page 27. 28.
definition of Sacraments, which as before, conteyneth all, and more then
Protestants demand.

Further thus I argue: All of those other seven accounted among Catholics,
for Sacraments, which have a visible sign or ceremony ordained of God, as
Baptism, and Eucharist have, be Sacraments, as they are. But all those other
five, rejected by Protestants, have such visible sign, or ceremony, ordained
by God: Therefore they be Sacraments. The Mayor is the grant of their own
subscribed Article: wherein Articl. of. Relig. sup. art. 25.
admittinge Baptism and the Eucharist for Sacraments, in these words: (There
are twoe Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism and the supper of the Lord.) They refuse the others for this
only cause, as follows: Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to
say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, are not to
be compted Sacraments, of the Gospel: for that they have not any visible
sign, or ceremony ordained of God. So that all I have to prove by this
highest Protestant sentence, to prove them Sacraments, is: that they have a
visible sign, or ceremony ordained of God. For which I produce D. Dove again
granting our definition to agree with these: for our schools put a Sacrament
in genere signi: and so far hold, that they are all instituted by Christ,
that the Council of Trent defines thus: Si quis dixerit Sacramenta Council.
Trid. decret. d^ Sacram.
nouae legis non fuisse omnia a Jesus Christo domino nostro instituta, aut esse
plura, vel pauciora quam septem, videlicet Baptismum, Confirmationem etc.
Anathema sit. If any man shall say that all the Sacraments of the new law were
not instituted of Jesus Christ our Lord, or that there be more or fewer then
seven, that is Baptism Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction,
Orders, and Matrimony: or else that any of these seven is not truly and
properly a Sacrament, let him be Anathema. Again these Protestants will
further tell us, in particular, how every of those five has a ceremony
visible, or external, ordained of God: and so to be Sacraments: and first for
Confirmation, thus I argue.

Whatsoever has an external ceremony Confirmation proved a Sacrament by
Protestants.
instituted by Christ, signifyeing or giucing grace, is a Sacrament: But by
these Protestants, Confirmation is such: Therefore a Sacrament. The Mayor is at
lardge proved and granted before. The Minor is proved in this manner. The
communion Book reconfirmed in the title of Confirmation gives this direction
to the Bishop in these words: The Bishop shall lay his hand upon every child
severally: therefore there is an external Ceremony or sign: and that it was
ordained by Christ may both appear by their Conference at Hampton Court, in
these Conference at Hampto^ page 10. 11.
words: Confirmation is an Apostolical tradition. And that they mean it to be
sign, such as the sign of a Sacrament is, the Bishop is appointed to use
these words: We make our Communion Book tit. conf. sup.. Almighty.
humble supplications unto thee for these children, upon whom after the
example of the holy Apostles, we have laid our hands, to certify them by
this sign of thy favor, and gracious goodness, toward them. Therefore this
external sign, both delivered by the Apostles, used by their example, and so
far signifieing Gods grace, and favor, and certifyeing the parties thereof,
must needs be ordained by Christ, and a Sacrament no other external sign by
Protestants, being able to make such certificate: whis is further confirmed,
with this Protestant Argument, that follows.

Whatsoever sign external gives spiritual strength, to the receauers
thereof, and force to serve God is a Sacrament: But Confirmation does this:
Therefore a Sacrament. The Mayor is evident by Protestants, graunteing that
such spiritual force, and strength is not given by any sign, but such as is a
Sacrament: neither do all of them grant, that it is given by Sacraments. The
Minor is proved by D. Couell in these words: Couel Mod. Examination page 192
Remembringe the conflict we have undertaken (in Baptism) we come (to
Confirmation) for an addition of new forces: in Baptism we are regenerate to
life, but in Confirmation we are strengthened to battle. So that being an
external sign, and giueing grace as Baptism does, it must needs be a
Sacrament as that is, and the sign must needs be ordained by Christ, for none
other but God can ordeyne Penance a Sacrament by protest. Chapter of
Indulge^ces.
a sign to be a means of grace.

Concerning Penance, to be a Sacrament, I have made demonstration before in
the chapter of Indulgences, and it is evidently true in this order. Wheresoever
in any ceremony, and external sign, grace is so amply given, that not only
all guilt of sins by Protestants, but their punishments are forgiven, and by
authority from Christ, there must needs be both an external ceremony or
sign instituted by him, and a Sacrament: But thus it is in these Protestants
Judgments in Confession, and Absolution: Therefore a Sacrament. Both the Mayor
and Minor are abundantly proved in the recited chapter before. And to prove,
that such confession may be auricular, (as they term our Catholic confession
to a priest) though that kind of confession is not so needful to make it a
Sacrament: M. Hull writes thus: Auricular confession was Hull Romes polec.
page 89. 90.
used in the primative Church, before the time of Zozomenus the ancient
historian. And his Majesty in the Conference at Hampton Conference page 13.
witnesses: That the particular and parsonall absolution from syn, after
confession, is apostolical and a very godly ordinance. Therefore I thus argue
again.

That which was used in the primative Church, is an external ceremony,
forgiueing syn, an Apostolical, and godly ordinance, is a sign ordained by
Christ, and a Sacrament: But Penance is such: Therefore it is a Sacrament.
Both propositions are granted, and proved before.

And hence also is proved, that Orders is a Orders a Sacrament by Protestants
of England.
Sacrament. For: whosoever have power to give grace, and forgive syns, (except
in Baptism) by an external ceremony, must needs have, and receive that power
in a Sacrament: (for such extraordinary gifts be not given as Protestants
confess, by miracle: But priests as before, have this power: Therefore Order
and consecration is a Sacrament. Both propositions are manifestly true.

Further I argue thus: whosoever acknowledge, that in consecrateing priests, by
imposition of hands, by the Bishop, the holy ghost, grace, and power is given,
to give grace, and forgive syns, must needs acknowledge Orders or ordination to
be a Sacrament: But the Protestants of England do this: Therefore they must
acknowledge Orders to be a Sacrament in their proceedings. The Mayor is
evident. And the Book of cons. in Priests.
Minor expressly is contained in their authorized, and confirmed public
Book, of Consecrateing priests etc.

Again thus I argue: That external visible ceremony, by Imposition of hands
upon ordinary men, whereby power is given them, above others from Christ, to
translate from darkness into glory, to make invisible grace of visible
Elements, daily to give the holy Ghost, to dispose of the flesh, and blood of
Christ* and gives power which noe potentate on earth, can give, and the like
prerogatives, above all humane power, is to be esteemed a Sacrament: But (by
these Protestants) Orders has these, and such more prerogatives by Imposing of
hands, etc. Therefore to be esteemed a Sacrament. The Mayor proposition is
evidently true: for an external ceremony, giving, and signifying such power,
grace, and privileges, that no terrene power, and authority can give, must
needs be instituted by Christ himself, and so by that, which is proved before,
be allowed for a Sacrament. The Minor is proved by D. Couell, where entreating
of the power, and eminency of Priests, by their Couell def. of Hooker page 87.
function, and Order, in the external ceremony, of imposition of hands he
has these words: To these parsons God imparted power over his mystical body,
which is the society of souls, and over that natural, which is himself, for
the knitting of both in one a work which antiquity does call the making of
Christ's body. And in an other Couel mod. Examinat. page 105. Page 115. See D.
Couell def. of Hooker page 87. 88. 91. and cited cap. seq. of Character, etc.
Treatise thus: The power of the Ministry by blessing visible Elements, it
makes them invisible grace, it gives daily the holy Ghost. It has to dispose
of that flesh, which was given for the life of the world: and that blood which
was powered out, to redeem souls. And again: It is a power, which neither
Prince, nor Potentate, King, nor Caesar on earth can give: The Apostles leave,
and impart the fame power, to ordain, which was given to them. From whence I
argue further in this order.

That external and visible Ceremony, whereby the Apostles received
supernatural grace, power, and preeminencie, and left it to the Church, to
continue, being first instituted of Christ, is a Sacrament: But Orders is
such: Therefore a Sacrament. The Mayor is granted and proved before: and the
Minor also: to which I add the sentence, of their public Conference, at
Hampton Court, Conference at Hampto^
where it is concluded by authority, among them, that this power of Orders
given (as they pretend) by imposition of hand, is, Diuinae ordinationis, and
de iure diuino. The ordinance of God, and by his divine law. From which
doctrine granted by them, in so public assembly one of their own fellows
in Religion infers this conclusion in these terms. If the English
Protestants opinion be maintained, Certain co^s. page 46.
that Bishops Jurisdiction is de iure diuino, his Majesty and all the
Nobility ought to be subject to excommunication.

Neither do I vrdge these Protestants Authorities, The Authors intent. and
meaning by proving seven Sacraments by Protestants how to be understood.
either for this, or the other Sacraments, that I seem to grant unto
Protestants, that number of seven Sacraments, to be among them, to whom (as
to other Heretics of any other now want a true and lawful succession in
orders as they do) I can only allow two Sacraments, Baptism, and Marriage,
whereof the first for the necessity thereof may be in such cases of
extremity, (as this Inundation of heresy is) not only be administered by
Heretics, but Infidells themselves, retayning the true matter, form, and
Intention due in that holy Sacrament. And the other of Matrimony, not requiring
as of the essence thereof, the operation of the Priest: Yett do I not grant
the grace of this Sacrament to any Protestant, or other out of unity of the
Catholic Church, out of which as there is no salvation, so no grace to be
hoped for, bringing men to eternal beatitude. But seeing this number of seven
Sacraments, has been so much Impugned, by Protestants, and denied by them to
be in the true Catholic Church, which before I have proved the present
Church of Rome to be, I have now made demostration, by them selves, that by
their own proceedings, they ought to allow this number unto the Church of
Rome. And now I proceed in like manner to Matrimony, and Extreme unction: and
in the first I argue thus.

That which has an external, or visible Matrimony a Sacrament by English
Protestants.
sign, or Ceremony, instituted of God, signifying, or giving grace, and
sanctification, is an holy estate, and honorable representing the grace of
union, between Christ and his Church, is a Sacrament: But Matrimony is such:
therefore a Sacrament. The Mayor consists of the Protestant definition of a
Sacrament, wholly containing it and more them Protestants require unto it, and
so cannot by them be denied. The Minor is proved by their own public
directorie, where, in the treatise entitled The form of solemnization of
Comm. Book tit. Matrim.. dearly. etc.
Matrimony, it is called in these terms: Holy Matrimony, an honorable
estate, instituted of God, signifying unto us the mystical union, which is
between Christ and his Church: which holy estate Christ adorned and bewtified
with his presence, and first miracle. And in an other place it is named, holy
wedlock.. For as much, etc.
To which purpose tends, also that their prayer over those that be married,
in these words: God the father, God the son, God the Sup.. God, etc.
holy Ghost, bless, preserve, and keep you: the Lord mercifully with his
favor look upon you, and so fill you with all spiritual benediction, and
grace. Again thus I argue.

That external visible ceremony, or sign, that is consecrated of God, to
such an excellent mystery, as to signify the spiritual Marriadge betwixt
Christ, and his Church: and by the grace, and bond whereof, men are bound to
love their wives, as their own bodies, to leave Father, and Mother, (to whom
by nature we are so much bownde) and to be but one fleesh with his wiffe etc.
must needs be a Sacrament: But Matrimony is such by Protestants of England:
Therefore by them, to be esteemed a Sacrament. The Mayor is manifestly true,
in it self. And the Minor in those. o God.. all ye which.
words, and more expressly (to prove it a Sacrament) set down in that their
public directorie in the places here cited. And had not the licentious
wantonness of these men so much for their ownc lasciuiousnes mayntayninge
Marriadge, and accomptinge it an holy state in those of the clergy, in whom
the holy Fathers before name it incest, sacrilege and matter of
excommunication, disliked of the inseperabilitie between man and wife, which
being granted for a Sacrament it brings with it, they would never have
denied unto it that dignity and denomination. To which, so often and many
pluralities of wives in their ministry it self and some Protestant Bishops
among them (until a little restraint was ordained by his Majesty in
parliament) are more then The Sacrament of Extreme unction. Jacob. 5. v. 14. 15.
sufficient testimony in this case. That Extreame-Vnction, is a Sacrament, by
their Articles, and S. James, his doctrine in his epistle, ^eceaued by them,
for canonical, is more then manifest. And so manifest, that (except credible
Protestant Testimonies deceive me) greater Protestant Authority has so
granted, then these their Doctors may contradict. In which I will be silent;
and only add in this place, that their Communion Book it self, and their
common doctrine contained in their Catechism there, set down to be believed
of all, sufficiently insinuate, that either there be seven Sacraments, as
Catholics believe, or at the least, more then two, according to their
Article doctrine before. For in proceedinge dialoguewise, by question, and
answer, their words be these. Question. How Communion Book Tit. Catechism.
many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church? Answer. two only, as
generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism and the supper of
the Lord. Where the words, generally, and necessary to salvation, do emply,
that there be others, not generally to be received of all, as Matrimony is
peculiar to the married, Orders to clergy men; etc. neither are these
absolute necessary to salvation, otherwise the unmarried, and virgyns could not
be saved; all women which are incapable of preisthood, should be damned, and
none but clergy men saved etc. And these Protestants do not hold, that
those words, generally, necessary to salvation, are essential to the
definition of a Sacrament, which they define in the next words followeinge in
this manner. By this word Sacrament I mean an Catechis. supr.
outward and visible sign, of an Inward and spiritual grace, given unto us
ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof. Which as well, proves the Catholic doctrine, that
Sacraments give grace, of which hereafter, as also that, which I have urged, in
this place.

CHAPTER XX. PROVING BY THESE PROtestants, the Catholic doctrine, of an
Indeleble Character, in the Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders.
CONCERNING the Catholic doctrine, of the Church of Rome, teaching a
spiritual Character, to be impressed in some of these Sacraments, and
hitherto denied by Protestants: The Council of Trent has thus defined: In
three Sacraments, Baptism, Confirmation, Council. Tride^t. Sess. 7. cap. 4.
and Orders, a Character is impressed in the soul, that is, a certain
spiritual and indeleble sign, that they may not be iterated. For proof of
which doctrine, by English Protestants, I argue in this Manner.

That doctrine, which is taught by the Greek Church, neither heretical, nor
Scismatical, but orthodoxe by these Protestants, ot by a general Council,
whose decree, and sentence binds all, is to be allowed by them, much more,
if both those their Rules so confirm it: But the doctrine of this Indeleble
character, in the Sacraments of Baptism, Confirmation, and Orders, is taught
and approved both by the Greek Church, and a general Council, that of
Florence, for such allowed by them before: Therefore it ought to be embraced
by them. The Mayor is evidently true, by their grant before. And the Minor
thus proved. First the Greek Church, by Hieremias their Patriarch, in their
Censure Hierem. in censur. cap. 11.
upon Protestants, in the eleventh chapter, has so censured. And the general
Council of Florence, with the assert of the same Greek Church, Armenians,
Iacobines and all Christendom has defined it in these words: Inter haec
Sacramenta, tria sunt, Baptismus, Council. Flor. in union. Arm.
Confirmatio, and Ordo, quae Characterem. i. spirituale quoddam signum a
caeteris distinctum, imprimunt in anima indelebile, etc. Among these
Sacraments, there are three, Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, which impresse
in the soul a Character, that is, a certain spiritual sign, distinct from
others indeleble: whereupon they are not Iterated in the same parson, but the
other four do not Impresse a Character, and admit Iteration.

To be breife, I argue thus once for all. That doctrine, which is generally
maintained, not only by all professors of it, but also acknowledged, and
defended by them, that be esteemed learned among the enemies thereof, and
profess the same Religion with them, is true: But this doctrine of a Character
is such: Therefore it is true. The Mayor is evidently appare^t, for no more
then friends, and Adversaries learned, can consent to any truth. The Minor is
thus proved, by these Protestant Doctors, following, Joining in Religion with
them, that impugn and persecute the Church of Rome. First D. Field Field. l.
1. cap. 15.
acknowledges a Character in Baptism, and to remain even in the
excommunicate: And so indeleble. D. Couell affirms the same of Baptism, and
Orders, and seems to insinuate it, of Confirmation. He writes of it in
these words: It is not amiss both termed a kind of Mark, Couell def. of Hook.
pa. 87. 88. 91.
or character. And confesses it to be Indeleble. And for Orders he adds
thus: For ministerial power is a work of separation, because it seuereth
them, that have it, from other men, and makes them a special order,
consecrated unto the service of the most high, in things wherewith others may
not meddle. I call it indeleble, because they which have once received this
power, may not think to putt it of and on, like a cloak, as the wether
serves. And again in this manner. Where there is a change of estate, with an
Sup. page 91
Impossibility to return, there we have reason to account an Indeleble
Character, to be imprinted. This says the Church of Rome, is in Baptism,
Confirmation, and Order, This form, figure, or Character is called Indeleble,
because that is not to be reiterated (as Protestants confess of Baptism,
Confirmation and Orders) from whence it comes. The Character of Order is an
active power, as the schoolmen speak, which gives an Ability, publicly to
administer the Sacraments, unto those, whom the Church has esteemed fit. The
Character of Baptism, is a passive power, which makes men fit, to receive
the rest. And from hence, not only is proved in as plain words, as any
schooleman, or other Catholic can speak, the Catholic opinion of a
Character, but also that Orders, and others besides them allowed for
Sacraments, are to be so esteemed as his last words (the rest) insinuate. And
this suffices of this Question.

CHAPTER XXI. PROVING BY THESE PROTEstants, that the Sacraments of the Gospel
give grace, and, as the schools speak, ex opere operato: by the work
wrought.
CONCERNING the validity, and grace of Sacraments, The Council of Trent
defines thus: If any Council. Trid. Sess. 7.
man shall say, that the Sacraments of the new law, do not give grace, by the
work wrought, (opere operato) but that only faith of the promise of God
suffices to obtain grace: let him be Anathema. And to demonstrate, that the
present Protestants of England are, or by their own writings, ought to be of
the same opinion, thus I argue.

Whatsoever Catholic doctrine of the Roman Church, is confirmed both by the
public proceedings and private writings of the Protestants of England, ought
to be allowed, and embraced by them: But the doctrine of the Roman Church,
concerning the efficacy of Sacraments, that they cause grace in the worthy,
and duly disposed Receauers of them, and that ex opere operato, as the
Council before, and our schools speak, is such: Therefore it ought to be
allowed, and embraced by them, for true. The Mayor is evidently true, and
cannot be denied, for no man may or can hold against his own opinion, or that
public Rule, and Authority, to which he has subscribed, and submitted
himself in Religion. The second proposition is thus proved: and first by that
chief Rule their book of Articles, Book of Articl. of Relig. art. 25.
to which they have all subscribed: where it is thus defined in their Religion:
Sacraments ordained of Christ are effectual signs of grace, and Gods good
will toward us, by the which he does work inuisibly in us. And again, in
their newly reformed communion book in these words. By this words Sacrament I
mean an Comm. Book refor. titul. Catechis.
outward, and visible sign, of an inward, and spiritual grace, given unto us,
ordained by Christ himself, as a means, whereby we receive the same.
Therefore being granted by the greatest Rules of Religion, which English
Protestants have, that Sacraments be effectual of grace, and Gods favor,
giving grace, and means whereby we receive grace; And all English Protestants
Ministers have subscribed to these doctrines in those books, They must needs
grant, that Sacraments be causes of grace: for among causes the efficient,
and effectual is not only a cause, but of extrinsecall causes, by many
degrees the chiefest. And being allowed for such Instruments, and means, by
which God works inuisibly in us, and gives grace, and we so receive grace,
as their words be: They must needs be true instrumental causes of grace, and
such work in us. And their same practical Rule of their Religion the
Communion book has the same doctrine concerning Baptism, and consequently of
all others, proved by them to be Sacraments, one and the same reason being of
all: for in the Treatise of Baptism thus it prescribes the Minister to speak
unto God: By the Baptism of Comm. Book Titul. public Baptism.. Almighty
and everlasting. almighty and immortal God, etc. sup.
thy well beloned Son IHESVS CHRIST, did sanctify the flood Jordan, and
other waters, to the mystical washing away of sin. And in the next prayer,
they pray in these words: We call upon thee, for these Infants, that they
coming to thy holy Baptism, may receive remission of their sins, by
spiritual Regeneration. Then seeing the Sacrament and water of Baptism
washes away sins, and remitteth sins, which cannot be done without grace,
it must needs have an Influence, causalitie, and efficacy in this
sanctification; for to wash, and to remitt, are not without operation, and
causing. Neither can those Protestant Bishops, and Doctors, that were assembled
at the conference at Hampton Court, be of other mind, for Conf^rence at
Hampto^ page 16.
granting (as there they do) a necessity of Baptism to salvation. They must
also of necessity teach, that it gives grace, which is so necessary to
salvation, that no man can be saved without it, for so he might be saved
without Christ. And this (as before) they must grant, except they would say
(which none of them to my remembrance does) that it is only conditio sine qua
non, a necessary condition, but no cause, which if any man should affirm it
is directly against his subscribed Rule befote.

Now let us come to their particular writers, of which, the first to be
cited, the Author of the Survey of the communion Book, confirms that which I
have concluded, by their public Rules in this case, telling us plainly, that
by the public Protestant The Protestant Survey of the Book of common prayer
page 104. 118. 89. 141. 103. 104. Field page 10. 179 Middleton pap^stom. page
108. Page 106.
Religion of England, Sacraments or means of grace, and do work, ex opere
operato, by the work done. As the Catholic Council of Trent has before
defined. D. Field acknowledges no less: and affirms plainly, that the
water of Baptism is filled with sanctifying force and power. Therefore it is a
cause of grace, and such sanctification. M. Middleton speaks of communion in
these terms: It does exhibit, and convey the graces, and merits, of Christ's
passion unto us. And he names it, an effectual Instrument of grace. And of
Sacraments thus he writes: They are effectual Instruments, of our
regeneration. Page 100. Sutcliff Ans. to the lay pet. page 22. Sutcliff ag. D.
Kell. page 69.
D. Sutcliffe, besides the matter, and form of a Sacrament, instituted by
Christ, requires unto it, grace and Justification. And writes further in
these words: We confess, that God works sanctification, by the Sacraments
of the new testament. D. Couell commending the opinion of the Catholic
scholemen, in this Question, Couell def. of Hook. page 96. 97 98. 99. 100 101.
102. etc. Against Burges page 101. 102. 103. and def. sup page 96
teaches: Sacraments be Instruments of grace: causes of sanctification: give
grace instrumentally. His words be these: The Sacraments are not only signs,
but causes of our Justification. And reciting the opinion of our Catholic
schools, approves, and expounds it, in this manner: Agent causes we know are
of two sorts: principal, which works by virtue, and power of his form: as
fire makes hoate: and thus nothing can cause grace, but God himself: grace
being a participation of the divine nature. Isntrumental, which works not
as the other, by the virtue of his own proper form, but only by that Motion,
which it has from the principal, and first Agent. Thus do Sacraments work.
And further allowing, and expounding the school phrase, and doctrine, that
Sacraments work by the work done (ex opere operato) he justifies the same,
and shows, how the Church of Rome has been slaundered by Protestants in
this point: his words be these: The Sacraments be Couell sup. page 97.
effectual means and vessels of grace, as glasses containing potions to cure
the sick. Neither does any man say, no not the Church of Rome (allthough they
be so accused by some of us) That the Sacraments work of themselves, by a
virtue resigned unto them without God. God works by them as by Instruments
powerful, and thought in his wisdom fittest. The Sacraments are powerful
means of Regeneration, having by a divine ordination, a force, and virtue, to
begett faith. And therefore justly amongst all the Treasures, that God has
left unto his Church, we honor, and admire most the holy Sacraments. And
again: Sacraments Couell sup. page 98. Page 99.
are the powerful Instruments of God, unto eternal life. And further thus: It
is a strong growing fancy, to be afraid to say, that the Sacraments begett
faith. Sacraments give grace by the work done, ex opere operato. And reciting
what things are required to the due receiving of Sacraments, concludes thus:
Now that, which in all Page 99. sup.
this, actiuely, and instrumentally brings grace, is the external Action,
which is commonly called the Sacrament: this having virtue from his
Institution. And he does not only Join with the Church of Rome (as before)
in this Article, But for it approves the decrees of our Popes, and Counsels,
even of Trent it self in this manner: We say with the Ancient fathers,
Stepbanus, Siricius, Couell sup. page 102.
Innocentius the first, Leo, Anastasius the second, (all Popes of Rome) in his
Epistle to Anastasius the Emperor; with the Counsels, first the general
Council of Nyce, the first Council of Carthage, the last assembly at Trent,
with the testimonies of the Fathers, and Doctors, that the Sacraments for the
Institution of Christ, and his promise, are effectual, etc. And thus much from
these Protestants themselves, against themselves, for those sacred, and
Catholic doctrines, of the Roman Church; for the most Just, and worthy
defense, and profession whereof, they have so long time, so rigorously, and
Injuriously against their own sentence, persecuted their natural friends, and
Catholic Contrymen. Hereafter God of his mercy grant unto them, and all
Enemies of his holy Church, grace to know the truth, and to profess, and
follow it, when they know it.

FINIS.
The faults escaped in printing, are thus to be corrected.
PAge 15 line 2. for are, read as. p. 23. l. 19. heaps, heads. p. 32. l. 15.
poort, part. p. 41. l. 10. same, son, p. 97. l. 2. so, see. p. 127. l. 11.
appeace, appear. p. 140. l. 7. curried, carried. p. 144. l. vlt. and, and his,
p. 152. l. 2. prayer, prayed, p. 190. l. 8. shrouke, shronke. p. 198. l. 23.
daes, deeds. p. 211. l. 5 full, fall p. 221. l. 2. man, many. Ibid. l. 10.
users, usurers, p. 257. l. 7. stafe, state, p. 268. l 19. second, sownd, p.
271. l. 22. deuent, devout, p. 272. l. 10. times his, times greater then his,
p. 280. l. 2. understand, understood, p. 299. l. 2. when the let, when they
fit, p. 314. l. 9. rebeace, repeal, p. 324. l. 15. the, them, p. 326. l. 4.
same, shame, p. 363 l. 14. entroades, oaths, p. 401. l. 20. words, word. p.
403. l. 7. or, ar.

APPROBATIO.
Iste Liber qui Inscribitur English Protestants Recantation a quodam viro docto
and pio mihique familiariter noto co^positus, and a me perlectus, nihil
continet quod fidei Catholicae vel bonis moribus aduersetur, sed doctissime
haereticos huius temporis, Angliae praesertim, per ipsorummet co^fessionem
refutat. In cuius rei testimonium nomen meum subscripsi.

Die 19. Iulij. 1617. MATTHAEVS KELLISONVS.
Huius iudicio subscripsit die 27. Iulij, Georgius Coluenerius S. Theol. Doctor
and Professor, ac Librorum Censor.


