A CONSOLATORY LETTER TO ALL THE AFFLICTED CATHOLICS in England.

Philip. 4. Sic state in domino Charissimi:

So stand in our Lord, my Dearest.

Imprinted at Roan in Normandy.

TO HIS MOST DEAR COVNTREYMEN ALL THE AFFLICTED Catholics in England H.B.
wishes all comfort and strength and perseueraunce in Christ Jesus.
RIght Noble Lords, and worshippfull Gentlemen with other worthy Confessors of
Christ his Church, and religion, and generally all ye that under the name of
wilful and obstinate Recusants, but in very deed because you be true and
constant Catholics, either already have been, or by likelihood may be herafter,
endomaged in your worldly goods and possessions, empeached of liberty, or other
wise persecuted and afflicted. If the light of faith did as clearly shine, and
the fire of godly zeal and charity were now as fervent in men's hearts, as it
was in the golden days of those first Christians among whom the precious
blood of our Savior was yet warm, the memory of the blessed Apostles most
fresh, and the example of invincible Martirs in every sex age and condition so
frequent as that nothing could be more common then daily to see men and women,
old and young, rich and poor Priests and secular for Christ's sake to offer
them selves with willing and glad minds to all kind of exquisite and grievous
torments. If it might please God (I say) but in some part to renew and kindle
again the devotion of those times, in this our dull age and dead season:
neither should this present persecution seem so terrible, as now I fear it
seems, to many: neither should it be needful at all to use so much comfort,
encouragement, and exhortation as now perhapps to a great number shall be very
necessary to be applied. For so far were the most Christians in that
flourishing prime tide and clear. Noone days of the Church from being afraid
of any kind of death (although most cruel and painful) that every one deemed
him self the more happy, by how much more he might endure for the love of our
Savior: and as for temporal goods they were then so little esteemed as that
many prevented the persecutors hands, by selling all that they had, and
distributing their money for the relief of their poor Christian brethren. But
now (alas) that saying of the Prophet Jeremy is to plainly verified of this
our miserable time: Hier: 6
Vae nobis quia declinauirdies quia longiores factae sunt vmbrae vesperi: woe
to us because the day is far spent, because the shadows are grown longer in
the eauening. The light of true knowledge being diminished charity waxing
cold, and iniquity increasing, the shadows of transitory things ar become so
great, that now a mole hill appears more then a mountain did in times past,
the loss of a little money, is now accounted greater, the^ here-tofore of a
whole world of wealth, yea more at this day perhapps ar dismayed at the
pinching of their purse, then would in former age have been appalled at the
tearing of their flesh and breaking in sunder of all their bones. Heb: 6
I mean not in this speech to include many of you most constant and approved
Confessors of whom I confidently trust better things and nearer to salvation:
who have well d^seru^d that honorable testimony, which Saint Paul gives to
the Hebrews h^uing sustained already a great fight of passions: Heb: 10
on the one part by reproaches and tribulations made a spectacle: and on the other
part made companions of them that co^uersed in such sort. You have taken
compassion on them that were in bonds: the spoil of your own goods you have
taken with joy, knowing that you have a better and a more permanent substance
There remains for you no more but that you do not lose your co^fide^ce which
has a great renumeratio^. How long this persecution shall continue, and to
what extremity it may grow hereafter, God knows: And although we may hope
the best yet in respect of our sins, we have cause also to fear the worst.
Therefore patience is necesarie for you: that doing the will of god, you may
receive the promise for yet a little and a very little while, he that is to
come, will come, and will not slack. Live you in the mean while by the
assured faith and hope of Christ his coming, and withdraw not your selves from
the Catholic Church, being ready to resist vsque ad saguinem. Heb: 12
Even to the patient shedding of your blood, if the glory of Christ his name
shall so require. But I speak of the base minded multitude who hardlye be
persuaded in hope of felicity in the life to come to live here with patience
in penury or willingly to endure a paynfull death: who ar either with holde^ by
fear of penal laws against their co^scie^ces, from the harbor of salvation:
or if they be yet in the Church, they stagger and ar ready to fall at the
terror and blast of every new statute that comes forth, behauing them selves
in the mean time so coldly in their profession, that scarcely shall you
perceive them by any outward act to be Catholics. For these espeacially I
have taken in hand this labor of exhortation, although I trust it shal-be
acceptable to you also, who by likelihod have less need to be comforted:
Tertu: ad Martires.
for even those that fight or run best are encouraged not only by their
masters and governors, but also by the vulgar multitude that stands a far
of: and that which to others is a necessary persuasion, to you is a great and
excellent commendation: for so much as you do that of your selves with out
external admonition, where unto others have need to be often and vehementlye
exhorted. And if I profit not otherwise by this endeavor, yet I hope I shall
reap profit by calling to remembrance that which may bring comfort to my
self, whereof I confess I stand in need, in respect of the sorrow which I
suffer for your affliction my dear beloved contrymen, and for the lamentable
state of our native Land, being absent in body, yet always present with you in
mind and spirit, and likewise do I need the prayers of good folk which I
beseech all Catholics that shall read this simple treatise of their charitable
goodness to bestow upon me.

ANd now to come to my intended matter. The weight of this present persecution
seems chiefly to consist in two penal statutes: the one enforcing you to make
show by outward signs of yelding to a contrary religion: the other debarring
you from practice of your own: the one proposing unto you detriment of
temporal goods: the other thretning bodily death: I mea^e the one in flicting
penalty, of.xx. pownd by the month to be exacted of all those that refuse to be
present at the schismatic prayers now called in England by the name of
divine service, the other forbidding you to receive catholic Priests, and
consequently excluding you from the benefit of god his service and Sacraments,
under no less pain the^ for the same to suffer death as in case of felony.
Against the terror of both these, laws, I intend to give such comfort, as it
shall please god by my poor pen to aforde. And first I will assay to give a
cordial against the thirten months mulct, as that which may extend it self
more generally, and is more like to be put in execution, then that other law
which draws blood at the first encounter: the world being more earnestly set
in these days to thirst after money, the^ to desire the shedding of men's
blood. And like as pesecution begins commonly with lesser penalties before
it proceed to greater: so shall it not be a miss to keep the same order in
applying remedy to these afflictions: The love of worldly goods being not so
natural as the care of keeping of a man's life, and therefore ordinarily the
lose more easlly digested. Although many will say that they would rather dye,
speedely, then live a long time in misery: The reason of this their judgment
may be given for that they have already some feeling of want in this life, but
of death they have not yet tasted, neither do they feel it so much, being in
their opinion farther from them: but if death were imine^t, I think there are
very few that would not save their lives if they could although with very hard
conditions for their manner of living: so that commonly that is found true,
although it were uttered by the Father and Author of lies: pellem pro pelle, et
cuncta que habet homo dabit pro anima sua: Job: 2.
Skyne for skyne and all that a man has he will give for his soul, that is to
say for the redemption of his natural life. Yet nevertheless there is good
hope that if we may persuade men to endure patiently the withdrawing of goods
and livings, they will more boldly adventure if it shal-be needful, the loss
of lives: the departing from these temporal possessions, being one especial
pain, that me^ having substance do find at the time of their death being also
a great cause why they fear to dye, and therefore many times a great
impediment to the happy atchiuing of glorious martirdom.

ACording to this order therefore let us first consider this penalty of twenty
pownd by the month, for what cause it is laid upon you, what inco^ueniences it
brings, and what recompense you may expect in time to come for this urgent
detriment. So that waying the goodness of your cause, and joining thereto hope of
future reward, you may rather rejoice in the gain that is to come, then sorrow
for the present loss, or fear the distress or incommoditye that may ensue.
And first touching the cause wherefore your purses be thus punished. You suffer
because you ar Catholics, or as the world terms you recusants: Let us see
therefore what you refuse to do, and upon what ground: and although you have
the same declared more at large in sundry learned treatyses, it shall not be
amiss perhaps to call some few points amongst the rest to remembrance.

YOu refuse to do directly against your conscience, 1 Doing against conscience
in Psalm: 54
to descend quick unto hell, and to be swallowed up a live by your enemies, for
Saint Augustine says, when thou know it to be evil which thou do, and
yet do the same, thou do down quick unto hell. And in a another place,
in Psalm: 123
those are they says he that are swallowed up alive, who know a thing to be
evil, and do give consent with their tongues. And great reason have you to
shun this manifest and wilful perdition of your own souls, knowinge that as
Saint Paul says, To: 14
he that discerns, that is to say, he that judges a thing to be evil
although it were otherwise indifferent, if he do it, is damned: because, not
of faith, but because he does not according to his conscience and knowledge,
for all that is not of faith, all that is done agynst a man his conscience, is
sin albeit the thing were of it self lawful: much rather if it be utterly
unlawful, as the going to church with heretics is holde^ in every discreet
man's conscience and judgment: And Saint James says, ^io: 4
to one knowinge to do good, and not doing it: to him it is sin, much rather
if a man know a thing to be evil and do it, his offense must needs be great.
^ot 14
Blessed are your therefore in refusing to condemn your selves by doing contrary
to that which you best allow.

D^shmo^^g of 2 god.
ALso you refuse to dishonor god by fleeing from his banner and furnishing his
enemies camp with your visible presence: Where as it is written in the
Proverbs: Proverbs: 14
That in the multitude of his people is the kings dignity, and in the small
number of his folk, the ignominy of a Prince. Psalm: 31
And ther-fore of such as shrink away in time of adversity our Savior
complayneth in one of the psalms in behalf of him self and of his spouse the
Catholic Church in lamentable manner saying: Above all mine enemies I have
been made a reproach to my neighbors and a fear to mine acquaintance
excedingly: they that did see me have fled forth from me, upon which place
Saint Augustine says, in Psalm. 31
that the departure of those that had seen and known the Church is more
grievous and altogether intolerable, the^ the obstinate resistinge of those
that have been nouseled and brought up in error from their infancy.

And therefore it follows after a few words in the aforesaid psalm, I have
heard the disprayse of many dwelling round about me. As undoubtedly, if you
should forsake god, for fear of te^porall loss, you should give occasion to
many to blasphem god as if he were not able to deliver you, or as if you had no
trust in his power and goodness saying. Non est salus ipsis in deo eorum: They
have no salvation in their god, Psalm: 3.
they have no hope or assurance in their religion which they have hither to
professed.

You shall also give them occasion to think very evil of the Catholic
religion by seeming to make less account of the defense and profession of the
same, then of a little money, yea then of all your worldly goods and
possessions. They that trouble you shall rejoice if you be moved, Psalm: 12.
but do you hope still in our Lord his mercy.

3 Scandal.
YOu refuse likewise not only to give this cause of rejoicing to your
adversaries, but also to make a show of evil, that by doing that which is
evil of it self to induce many weakelings depending on your example, as your
children, your servant, friends, neighbors, and others, partly having
judgment and knowledge to follow you to church against their consciences, and
partly being ignorant, to allow the schismatic service now used, and finally
to like of heresy whereby (so much as lies in you) you should be homicides and
destroyers of their souls: for as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor: 8
If a man se him that has knowledge, sit at a table in the Idols temple:
shall not his conscience being weak be edified to eat things sacrificed to
Idols? upon which place of Saint Paul, the famous doctor saint Augustine
infers, that we are forbidden to use or to do that wher-by we may be
thought to do any thing in the honor of strange gods, Aug: epst: 154: ad
Publicolam.
receiving it in such sort, that although in heart we despise such things yet
we edify or induce those that know not our hearts in deed to honor the same.
In lke manner to compare the case of goinge to church in these our days unto
meats offered to Idols. If men shall see you in churches in time of
sacriligious service should not their consciences be edified either to think
yt the service of God, or at the lest with out fear to frequent the same: and
so in tract of time to like and allow of heresy, and so sinning against your
brethren and stryking their weak consciences: you shall sin against Christ.
Therefore says the Apostle if meat scandalize my brother: I will never eat
flesh. Of the same mind was that notable Eleazaurus who chose rather to dye, 2
Match: 6.
then to make so much as a show of eating meats forbidden by the law: saying
that he would first be sent unto hell: for says he it is not seemly for our
age to feign: that many young men thinking Eleazaurus now of ninty years age
to have passed to the life of the gentills, may also them selves thorough my
dissimulation, and for a little time of this corruptible life be deceived, and
thereby I may procure a blemish and malediction to mine old age for although I
be delivered at this present time from the torments of men, yet shall I not
escape the hand of the almighty, neither alive nor dead. And should not men
have great cause to think that you were passed to the life and conversation
of heretics seeing you to differ nothing from them in principal signs and
tokens of religion should you not cause many to say: there is no difference,
men conte^ding among them selves have made these controversies, god is to be
honored every where: if the very silence of a man in matter of faith by Saint
Augustins Judgment should cause many to think all religion indifferent? Aug.
De pastoribus cap. 7.
And therefore thryse well advised are your in refusing to do such an act whereby
your catholic brethren might be offended, scandalized, Romans 14
or weakened.

Moreover you refuse, 4 Denial of the faith.
by conforming your selves (as men term it) to the proceedings of a another
religion, to deny that faith, which you undoubtedly know to be most true,
sincere, universal, and ancient as that wherein you have been borne and
baptized, wherein al your worthy auncetors have lived and dyed, which always
and only has floryshed in this Realm of England till within these late
years: yielding in every age most plentiful fruit of devotion toward God,
of obedience toward Princes and other superiors, of mercy toward the poor,
of charity, of truth, fidelity, and plain dealing of all sorts of men
toward their neighbors. And that you should so deny your faith by going to
church with the protestants, yet is it most plain by the nature of the thing
it self being an act properlye belonging to Religion, by the intent of the
law, being made to no other end but to exact of you some sign of yielding
in matters of conscience, by your long refusal and suffering for the same
cause heretofore, by the judgment of the adversaries holding themselves
satisfied if you relent but in this one point of or external behauior, and
finally by the confession of all men of any mean understanding, if they will
utter plainly what they think* and if it were thought heretofore in times of
persecution that the only wearing of a garland in certain feasts of Idols
were to be holden as a sign that a man had denied his faith: In so much that
Tertulian says, Liber. De corona militis.
although a Christian man hold his peace whiles others do sacrifice to false
gods, yet by wearing that garlande upon his head he makes answer in
favor of Idolatrye: whereas this was a thing by nature indifferent being only
made a sign of religion by use and opinion of men: what shall we judge then
of joining with protestants in their public prayers and service which is
peculier to them, as the blessed Sacrifice of the Mass is common to all
Catholics. And therefore as we are known by the one, so they are known and
discerned by the other. Tert. De Idola.
If it were not permitted hereto fore that Christians should in any sort
conform themselves to the Gentiles, not even so-much as to hang a lantern or a
branche of Laurel at their doors, when great feasts were celybrated in
honor of Idols? How can it be lawful to keep feasts with heretics and to
enter into their churches when they are busied in such acts whereby they are
distinguished not only from Catholics, but also one sect and sort of them
from a another? If it were thought a great offense, to be present at the public
spectackles and plays, Tertu. et Cip. De spectaculis
because the beginning and fynall end of them was the honor of Idols: Is it
possible that a catholic man should safly exhibit his presence at such kind of
service as had beginning by deuisio^ from the Church, and was inverted for the
setting forth of heresy? Let us here what Tertulian says of the aforesaid
plays in a peculier treatis of that argument, he requires herein the judgment
of the very Gentiles, whether Christians might be there present or no. For says
he They most of all understand a man to be made a Christian by the refusing of
such spectakles. Therefore he denies manifestlye who takes away the thing
whereby he is known. In like manner may we say at this present: the protestants
especially understand that one is become a Catholic by the refusing of their
churches. Therefore he denies himself to be a Catholic, whosoever fails in
this point pf his profession. Nether let any man think to escape this danger
of denial by subtle euations: For as S. Cyp. Epis. 31.
Ciprian says whosoever seeks deceytfull sleightes to excuse himself has
denied, and he that will seem to have satisfied the Edicts or laws proposed a
against the Gospel has obeyed even in this, that he would seem to have obeyed.
Now who-soeuer shall thus by his outward act deny himself to be a
Catholic, shall thereby denyethe whole Catholic religion: even as he that
denies himself to be a Christian, denies Christ. And consequently a
Christian and Catholic being all one, to go to Church with heretics is
plainly to deny Christ: As contrarie-wise to refuse their conuenticles is a
clear confession of Christ. And this is a most important reason of your
refusal whereupon I have stayed the longer, because it concerns you as
much, as to be acknowleged or denied before God the Father and all his Angels
when Christ shall come in his majesty to judge the world. Mat. 10.


HEreof it follows also that you refuse by damnable schism to sever your
selves from the Church your mother, 5 Schism.
where-by you should cease to have God to your father: CiP. De vnitate
Ecclesiae.
yea you should cease altogether to be Christians: for by the judgment of S.
Cyprian and S. Augustine he is no Christian, who is not in the church of
Christ. Whereby you should depart out of Noah's ark, and commit your selves to
present drowning. Whereby you should be debarred from eating the lamb in God
his house, and so be exterminated from the people of God. Whereby you should be
found out of the house of Raab: Exo. 12. Ios. 6.
to perish most undoubtedly by the sword of Gods judgment. Whereby you should
be divided from the body of Christ, having him no longer to be your head,
receiving no influence of his grace, Aug. De vnitate ecclesica. 16
no lively motion of his spirit, no part of his merits, no fruit of his
blessed passion. Whereby you should be cut of from the true vine and so wither,
and become fuel for hell fire. Io. 15.
Whereby you should lose the fellowship and communion of holy Angels and sancts in
heaven, being also excluded from the suffrages of the millitant church here in
earth. You should be severed from the promises of Christ by forsaking his
spouse, Cip. De vnitate.
and joining your selves to the aduouterous co^grecation. You should be
excluded from the rewards of the heavenly kingdom, by forsaking her, Aug: de
Bap: con: Dona: li: i. ca: 2.
that is appointed there to raygne. You should lose the benefit of your
baptism, and withal the right that you have to receive other Sacraments, which
cannot be fruitfully received, but in the Catholic church. de verb: Domu. 1.
ser. 11.
You should deprive your selves of the means to have remission, so much as of
one venial sin, although you should punish your selves with never so hard
and austere penance. You should lose the fruit of all your good works
heretofore done, EP: 152: de fide ad Petrum: ca 39.
making all your actions from thence-forthe altogether unprofitable, in
respect of everlasting life: although you should live never so lawdablye,
although you should give never so great alms, although you should shed your
blood for the name of christ, yet continuing so out of the church, you could
by no means be saved. To be short you should break that unity for which our
Savior so earnestlye prayed unto his Father. For the establishing whereof, Io.
17. 11.
he suffered his Passion and shedd his most precious blood. In defense of
which unity Dionisius Alexandrinus holds it no less glorious to dye, Eus.
Ecclesi histo. Liber. 7. Cap. 37.
then to suffer for refusing to sacrifice to Idols. For says he, in that
every one suffers martyrdom for one soul, but in this case for the whole
Church. Now that all these inconveniences here mentioned, and what soever else
may be comprehended under the detestable name of scisme, should ensue of your
going to the protestants churches, I think it may be manifest by these
reasons following. Psalm. 121
First of all distinct churches no more the^ for one member to be in two
several bodies you cannot drink the chalice of our Lord says Saint Paul,
1. Cor. 10
and the chalice of devils, you cannot be partakers of the table of our Lord,
and of the table of devils. So likewise you cannot be of Christ his Church and
repair to Satan's Sinnagogue. But some perhaps will answer that by going to
church they do not in deed participate, but only seem to participat with those
of a another religion. To this I say: Secondlye epistle to Saint Ciprian, Cyp.
Ep. 46.
makes mention of some that were reduced from the schism of Nouatus who
protested openly that although they seemed to communicate in some sort with a
schismatic and heretical man, yet nevertheless their sincere minds were
always within the church. And think you the most part of Scismatickes at
this day would not say as much, if this excuse were sufficient. But this is
not enough, neither did it then suffice those men until they were openly
reconciled to the church, and admitted in presence of the whole concistorie of
priests at Rome. And furthermore their reconciliation was notified to the
whole people, to the end that al might see them present in the church whom
before they had seen with sorrow, to err and wander as sheep dispersed from
the Catholic flock. Conf. 8. ca. 2.
Also S. Augustine reportethe of one Victorinus, a man greatly honored in Rome
for his excellent learning and eloquence, that being converted from Idolatry
to the Christian religion, he deferred a long while, or fear to displease his
worldly friends, to make open show of that he believed in secret. And yet
saying often to some of his faithful acqainta^ce, that he was already a
christian, he was always told that they would not so repute him, until they
saw him in the church of Christ, wher-vnto he would replye in scornful manner,
asking whether the walls made men to be Christians? as many at this day will
ask, whether their resort to the material church of heretics, can make them
cease to be of the Catholic church? But in the end, by God his grace, he
turned over the leaf, and going gladlye to the church, he was instructed in
the faith, baptized and made a true Christian. And when the time came, that he
should make profession of his faith before the faithful people, for that was
then the manner for such as were newly converted: It was offered him that he
should do it more secretly, lest so great an assemblye at the first should
abash him. But he made choice to confess his faith before the whole multitude.
And so he did most confidentlye, the whole people cryeing for joy: Victorinus
Victorinus. A notable example, to be followed by many a Victorinus in our age; I
mean many an honorable man, and famous scholar being in heart and conscience
Catholics: and withal it is an evident proof, that it suffices not to be a
Catholic in secret, unless by outward signs a man do also show and
profess his religion, according to the saying of our Savior, Math. 5.
that Men do not light a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick that it may shine to all that are in the house. Therefore says he,
Let your light so shine before men: Let the confession of your faith, and your
good conversation be so manifest, that they may see your good works, and
gloryfie your father which is in Thirdly therefore it is to be considdered that
the Church for maintayning of her visible unity has certain outward signs,
wherein her children do participat one with a another, whereby she is known and
distinguished from other companies. For as S. To 7 Co^tra Faustum. Li. 19. Ep.
11.
Augustine says, Into no name of religion, either true or false, can men be
firmly compacted except they be tied together by some fellowship of visible
signs or sacraments. And these outward signs are esspeciallye the blessed
Scacrifice, the holy sacraments of the same, public prayers and service of
God, which are not in the protestants churches. And therefore whosoever
resorteth thither, does manifestly fail in these tokens of his profession, and
so divides himself from the visible unity. Fourthly even by the Cannons of
the Apostles, and in diverse ages by sundry Councels which we shall have
occasion to cite herafter. And who knows not that the meaning, will and
commandment of all Catholic pastors at this day, is that we should abstain
from the a foresaid churches under no less pain, the^ to be cast out of the
true church. Fifthly acording to that which he shows outwardly, Aug. cont
aduersar. Legis et Proph. ca. 17.
must needs ce^sure him as a scismatike. Which censure is more grievous and
terrible, then if a man were adjudged to be stricken with a sword, to be
consumed with fire, or to be devoured with wild beasts: And more bitterly and
unhappily is a man bound by the keys of the church after such judgment, then
by any other most grievous and hard bonds, albeit they were of iron or Adamant
stone. Neither let any man think to be acquit from the crime of scisme, or
from this heavy ce^sure, because his act of going to the protestants church
is constrained by fear of worldly loss and not altogether voluntary. For
although he would not do this act, if the fear were removed, yet according to
the condition of this present time, he choseth it as most expedient for him.
And therefore al circumstances considdered, and as things go now it is more
voluntary, then against his will, and simpliciter as it is termed and as the
case now stands it is voluntary. For if fear might have excused, the
Church had done great wrong, not only to those who had denied their faith by
doing sacrifice, or casting of incence into the fire before Idols, through
constraint of torment, but even to those who had given up their names among
the^ that sacrificed: al which sorts of offenders were long time withheld
from the Sacraments and caused to do hard penance: yea many of them were not
admitted to the company of the faithful, until that either the persecution
ceased, or that the extreme point of death ouertoke them, or if such faint
hearts might be holden blameless, where should become the glory of martirs,
or the invincible perseverance of constant Confessors. And therefore great cause
have you rather to suffer your selves to be condemned to the payment of twenty
pou^des by the month, then to be subject to this so just and withal so heuye
damnation.

6 Dissimulation.
LIkewise you refuse to dissemble in matters belonging to God and your
conscience, which kind of dissimulatio^ S. Augustine reckeneth for the first
and worst kind of detestable lying: De Ciuita te Dei. Li. 6. Ca. 10.
Therefore in one place speaking or Seneca, who in his heart knew the Idols of
the gentiles to be most false and vain and yet by his outward behavior, seemed
to honor them, the same doctor pronounces this sentence in this sort: that
he did more damnablye worship those false gods, for-somuch as those things
which he did faynedly, he did them in such sort, that the people thought him
to do them truly and in deed from his heart: and in a treatis of purpose
written against the Priscillianists, Liber. De mendacio.
who defended it as a thing lawful, for a man to counterfayt a contrary
religion for advantage, and also against certain Catholics (who forsooth as
they said) to espy and find out heretics, would put on a visard of heresy:
Co^trame^dacium.
He determines that dissimulation in no wise to be used: showing that if they
should convert any of those heretics, by going among the^ in that sort, yet
should they as much confirm their disciples in that error of thinking it
lawful to lie and disse^ble, Cap. 3. et. 4.
as they should edify them in other points of doctrine. So that neither the
catholics should know whether an heretic were in other things converted or no,
so long as he remained in that doctrine of lying: Nether should the new convert
know when or wherein to believe his master whom he had found in many things
here to fore have bin a dissembler and a liar. In the same treatis he recites
the example of Iehu, who fained to commit Idolatrye, thereby to entrape the
priests of Baal, as wicked and sacriligious and by no means to be followed.
For never did the Apostles who were in deed right holy and true martyrs, any
such thing for the saving of their own lives, as this King did upon
indiscreete zeal to take away the lives of others. Romans 14
And wherefore? because that with the heart we believe to Justice: but with the
mouth confession is made to salvation. Which confession is of duty and
necessity when soever a man by his silence, should be thought to have forsaken
his faith, or that the religion should be the worse lyked of, or that others
should be induced to waver, in their faith, thorough dissimulation. All which
conditions may and do concur in this case of yelding to heretics to resort
to their churches and service. And here it is to be noted that the
Priscillianists were not the first, that would warrant men to deny their faith
in time of persecution. It was certain hundred years before the doctrine of
the Helaesaites: and some time before them it was taught by the Gnostikes or
Valentinians against whom Tertulian purposlye did write a book called
Scorpiacum, Eus. Ecc. Hist. Li. 6 cap. 31.
as it were a remedy against the biting of Scorpians. A necessary medicine
for these dissembling days, wherein as it said, the obscure family of Love
have set up a gain this schole of lying. And as for the protestants although
they do not openly hold and maintain this doctrine of dissimulation: yet as
it appears by the behavior of their espials in su^drie places it is much
practiced a mong the^ and therefore not greatly disalowed. But this playing on
both hands is odious a mong men even in humane matters. For as Tully says.
Odio digna est dissimulatio. De officijs
Dissimulation is worthy of hatred. And contrariwise he says, that which is
true simple and sincere, is most agreeable to man's nature. So we see by
experience there is nothing more repugnant to a noble courage, then for fear
or favor to please a another man's humor, contrary to his own lyking. Therefore
Aristotle describing the conditions of one that is Magnanimus, of loftye and
noble mind assigns this for one that he is no dissembler. Also a mong the
moral virtues he reckneth Truth for one, whereby a man shows himself in his
life, to be such as he is in deed inwardly. Furthermore in all commonweals
wisely governed, those that have remained neuters in civil dissension, have
bin suspected as frindes to none and common enemies to all. And surely me
thinks there should be good hope that your mercyefull Prince with her
honorable counsel should in time considder, and like well of your plain
dealing and sinceritye: whereby it appears manifestly that you do not
temporise, nor expecte any day to come: other then the general day wherein
Christ shall give to every one according to his works good or evil. But for
this as it shall please God. Now to our purpose, it is certain that
dissimulation does highlye displease him, especially in matters belonging to
his service: Leu. 11.
In figure whereof some fowls that partly live upon the land, and Partlye in
the water were holden unclean in the old law. It was likewise forbidden in
detestation of doublenes for any man to sow his ground with two kinds of
seed, Deuteronomy. 22
to plowe with an ox and an ass, to wear a garment of lincywolsie. And to
the same purpose belonged so many ceremonies, ordained for the distinguishing
of God his people from strangers to the end that they might in no wise be like
in aparel, in dyate, in all kind of outward behavior. And more plainly wisdom
her self in the proverbs declares that she does hate and detest a double
tongue. Pro. 8.
Likewise the wiseman forbids to come to God with a double heart. woe be to
the man of double heart (says he) to him that goes two ways upon the earth
at once. Ecclesiasti. 2.
The heart that goes two ways shall not have success, and a wicked heart shall
be scandalized by his proceedings. Therefore he admonishes. Non sumere faciem
contrafaciem, not to make a show against a man's inward Neither do thou receive
a lie against thy soul. That is to say do not make false semblance to thine
own damnation. The Prophet Helias cries unto the people in God his behalf of
the ten tribes. 4. Re. 18
How long do you halte on both parts? If our Lord be God follow him, or if
Baal be God follow him. And in the same book of the Kings they are commended by
God his own mouth, 19
who had not bowed their knees before Baal neither had they kissed the Idols
hand. Our Savior himself affirms that no man can serve two masters, Mat. 6.
God and Ma^mon, but either he shall hate the one and love the other: Luc. 11.
or susteyn the one, and co^te^ne the other. He that is not with me (says our
Lord) is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters. Apo. 3.
And in saint John's Revelation he complaynetn of one that is neither cold nor
hott. I would (says he) thou were cold or hott. A true Catholic or a flat
heretic. But because thou art luke warm and neither cold nor hott, I will
begin to cast the out of my mouth. For dread therefore to be cast of by
almighty God, you do justly refuse to please the world by double dealing:
Keeping as you do that faithful and upright course which is most honorable
for the setting forth of your religion, most seemly for your magnanimitye,
most honest before men, and most free from suspicion of treacherye, and
therefore most dutiful toward your Prince, whom you should rather delude then
obey by fained conformitye, whereas now you perform the true obedience of good
subjects by suffering patiently whatsoever the law of your country shall lay
upon you.

BEsides all this you refuse to come to the Protestants congregation, 7
Participation.
for fear to be partakers of the sins there in committed, and so to be joined
with them in punishment. This avoiding of such as are authors or folowerers of
new sects and schisms is commanded by God himself, and therefore by no
means can be dispensed withal. An example of this commandment and of
transgression against the same, and withal of punishment due for such offense,
we have in the first pattern of al schsme I mean the sedition of Core^, Number. 14
Dathan and Abiron. From whose tabernacles the people were commanded to depart,
and not to touch those things whih did belong unto them, least they should be
inwrapped in their sins. And imediatly the earth opening swalowed up the
captayns, and two hundred and fifty of their complyces were slain with fire
from heaven. Yea fortye thousand and seven hundred of the people for murmuring
in their behalf, the next day were destroyed by fire. 3 Reg. 13
The man of god who was sent to Jeroboam the author of division in the people
of Israel, was commanded not to eat nor drink a mong the schismatikes: And
for doing the contrary he was slain by a Lion in the way. The godly King
Iosaphat is greuouslye reprehended for joining with an Infidel even in temporal
matters. Par. 19.
Thou geuest aid unto the ungodly (says one Prophet unto him) and thou art
joined in friendship to those that hate our Lord: And therefore in deed thou
dydest deserve our Lords wrath. Therefore the Prophet David, Psalm. 1.
describing a happy and wise man says, Blessed is the man that has not gone a
way in the counsel of the ungodly, and has not stood in the way of
sinners, and has not sit in the chayer of pestilence. In which verse may be
noted three degres of co^senting to schism: The first are of those that go a
way through frayltye, the second are those that stands therein by
continuance, the third are those that defend and teach it to others as a
thing lawful, who may verily be said to sit in the chayer of pestelence,
teaching the doctrine of Balaam to give sca^dal. Over many such have been in
our days, and I pray God there be not yet some remaining. Apo. 2.
But let them take heed, for Christ will come quicklye and will fight against
them with the sword of his mouth: that is to say with the truth of his
word. Lib. De spectaculis
The a foresaid verse Tertulia^ thinks sufficient, to forbid al resort to al
unlawful assemblies, whether they be gathered with intent of Idolatrye, of
iniquitye, or for vanities sake, as wanton plays and dishonest spectacles,
although they be not expreslye forbidden in scripture. And therefore undoubtedly
it may well be applied unto the co^uenticles of heretics, wherein so many ungodly
folk concurt together in the very act of dishonouring God, by impugning his
true religion: of contempt of the church, by vsurpatio^ of their new devised
service, and of derision of Christ's Sacraments by profane rites of their own
frivolous invention. Psalm. 25.
Yet furthermore the same royal Prophet in an other psalm declaring his own
innocence says, I have not sitten, that is to say I have not stayed any while
with the council of vanitye, and with them that do wickedlye I will not go in
by once seeming to allow that which they do, I have hated the church of the
malignant, and with the ungodly I will not sit. I will wash my hands among
innocents, and I will compass thine altar round a bout by cleaving fast to
Christ and his Catholic Church. And within a few words. I have loved the
co^elynes of thy house, and the dwelling place of thy glory. As a Catholic
might say, the cause wherefore I refrain in this sort from wicked company of
heretics in their churches, is the love and zeal which I bear to the beauty
of Gods Church, the merueylous disposition of her service, the reverend majesty
of her Sacraments, and decent order of her Ceremonies, where of I find no
resemblance in the new deformed congregation. In an other Psalm he says
after, he has spoken of ungodly men. Psalm. 141
I will not co^municat with their elect or chosen men. Which S. Augustine in his
time applied to the chief masters of the Manachies who were called Electi. And
we may apply it well to all those of Caluins crew who most undoubtedly presume,
that they are elected by God and predestinat to everlasting salvation. Psalm. 49.
Contrariwise in an other Psalm, an evil man is reprehended by God, with these
words. Thou did see a thief and did run with him, and with
aduouterers thou did lay thy portion. Heretics are the thieves by stealing
and abusing the Scripture. They are also aduouterers by corrupting the
sincerity of simple men's faith with false doctrine. And whereof did proceed
such boldness, to join and take part with iniquity? Thou have thought
wickedly, that I will be like unto thee, as commonly men will say God is
mercyful as gentle to bear with schism as thou to favor heresye. I will
reprove thee, and say it to thy face, by charging thee with it at the dreadful
day of judgment. But these places may seem a like for the avoiding of al evil
company. Now more particularly for the shunning of such as wilfully divide
the^ selves from Gods church: we read in the Gospel of S. John, that the Jews
did not communicate with the Samarytans, who were schismatikes in respect of
the old law and therefore were most abhorred by the faithful folk of Gods
people: And although they did also abstain from having conversation with other
Infidels. Mat. 18.
Wher-vppon our Savior gives us a rule, to shunn an heretic, or any one
that disobayeth the Church even as the Jews did deteste the Heathen and the
Publicane. And the like commandment has been given continualye by the blessed
Apostles in their writings. First by S. Paul. Romans 16
I desire you brethern (says he) to mark, them that make dissentions and
scandals contrary to doctrine which you have learned and avoid the^. The
reasone he yeldeth within a few words, for that this company is perilous:
Because by sweet speeches and benedictio^s they seduce the hearts of
innocents. By often naming of the Lord, and his word, by frequent cyting of
Scripture, by reading the Gospel, the Psalms, and other parts of the old and
new Testament, they steal to them by title and little the minds of ignorant
people. 2. Cor. 6.
And to the Corinthians he urges the matter more vehemenlye after that he
has given commandment not to bear the yoke with Insidels (that is to say)
not to communicate with them in any sort in their works of infidelitye:
showing by diverse points of disagreement, that there could be no felowshipe or
conueniencie between them. First in respect of the diverse disposition of their
wills, what participation has Justice with iniquitye. Justice requires that a
man exhibet his service to God in the Catholic Church, and it is great
iniquity to withdraw himself and others from the same service as heritikes
do by raising particular factions. Then because of their different doctrine:
What society is there between light and darkness? So you have been brought up
in the lignt of Gods truth, and the protestants wander in darkness of sunderye
foul and absurd errors. Thirdlye because of the diverse Authors and founders
of their congregations: what agreement between Christ and Belial? Now Christ
has builded his Church upon the succession of S. Peeter, and Belial the
spirit of disobedience is the very beginner of all heretical and
schismattical conuentickles. Fourthlye because their whole state differs:
what part has the faithful with the heretics or Infidels, yea and the worse
sort of Infidels, because of their departure from the faith once received: by
reasone whereof their error is less excuseable, their malice commonly greater,
their company more perilous for infection, and less hope of their recouerye,
then of such as never knew Christ's religion. Lastly for the diversity of their
external service: What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for you ar
the Temple of the living God says the Apostle, which he proves by that saying
in the law that God will dwell and walk in them and will be their God and they
shall be his people. So the whole Catholic church is the Temple of God: but the
doctrine of heretics, their communion and al their other external rites of
religion are spiritual Idols of their own invention, and have succeeded in
place of gross and carnal Idolatry and therefore no less to be shunned and
detested. For which cause says the Apostle aledging the Prophet Isay and
Ieremye, Isay. 52.
Go out of the midst of them, by giving no credit to their false teaching, and
seaperat your selves by avoiding of occasions of contagion and touch not the
unclean by seeming in any sort to consent unto their wickedness: and I will
receive you, and I will be a father to you: and you shall be my sons and
daughters, says our Lord omnipotent. Likewise to the Thessalonians he
denounces in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ that they should withdraw
themselves from every brother walking in ordinatly and not according to the
tradition which they had received: 2 Thessalonians. 3.
Also if any were disobediente they should note him by an epistle and not
company with him, that he might be confounded: Wihche is one principal cause
why the Church lays upon heretics this pain to be excluded from the
societye of her children, intending thereby their correction, as having more
power over them then other Infidels. A another cause which is the peril, lest
the sincere part should be corrupted by their company, is expressed in one of
the Epistles to Timothye where it is said: 2. Timo. 2.
That their speech spredeth as a canker, pernitiously creeping from one member
to a another. Also the same Apostle commands Titus by express word to avoid
an heretic, Timo. 3.
knowing that such a one is subverted, that is to say, he is commonly past
hope of amendment, and condemned by his own judgment, by his wilful running
out of the Catholic church. And agreably unto this S. John in one of his
epistles, says. If any man come unto you, and bring not this doctrine
[meaning that which had been taught by the Apostles and other lawful pastors]
receive him not into thy house, nor say, God save you, unto him, for he that
says unto him, God save you, communicates with his wicked words. And in his
Revelation he makes report of Christ his own words denouncing terrible
punishment unto all that shall participate with heresy, Apo. 2.
under figure of those that co^mited aduoutry with a certain famos woman. And
in the same book of Pro. phecye he reherseth the voice of an Aungel who gives
warning unto the servants of God to avoid and fly al ungodly godly company,
Apo. 18.
signified by the name and figure of wicked Babylon: Lest they should be
partakers of her sins and thereby should receive of her plagues, and
punishme^tes. This point was diligently observed by S. John himself who
refused to tarry in the same bathe with Cerinthus the enemy of truth, lest the
bath should fall down and oppress them both: Also by Policarpus S. John his
scholar, who would not take acquaintance of Marcian that famous heretic,
otherwise then by calling him the devils eldest son: And by S. Anthony, of
whom it is written that he could not endure to speak one peaceable word to an
heretic. And although it be permitted in places where heretics are in great
multitude, for necessities sake to co^uerse and have deling with them in
worldly affairs, so long as they be not by name excomunicated and denounced:
yet to have fellowship with them in acts of religion, it never was nor could be
allowed or suffered: But has been always forbid den, as I said before by the
Cannons of the Church reyued from the blessed Apostles. Can. 12. 45.46. 63.
The authority of which Cannons moved Origin to refuse by any means to be
present at prayers with a certain heretic called Paul. Eus. L. 6. Ca. 2.
The same also moved Heraclas to cast out of the Church certain Christians
because they had used the company of heretics, and not to be admitted again
before they had publikly declared whatsoever they had hard of those enemies of
the truth, L. 7. C. 6
notwithstanding that he knew them from their very heart to be turned from
all error and false doctrine. The like is decreed by the blessed Pope and
martyr Fabian, Ep. 1. Ant. ca. 1 Laod. ca. 9.33. Car. 4. ca 71.72.73. De unit.
Ecc. versus finem.
and by the Counsels of Antioche and Laodicea, by the fourth Counsel of
Carthage, and diverse others. The same has been taught by holy Doctors, as by S.
Cyprian, who speaking of heretics and schismatikes, says. we must depart from
such offe^ders, or rather we must fly from them in haste, lest that joining
our selves with such as walk peruersly going with them in the way of their
error and crime, and wandering a straye from the right and course of our
journey, we be holden guilty of like offense. And by S. Augustine who entering
into conference with one of the Manachies sect, Cont. Ep. Fund. cap 3.
makes exception of three things, which in no wise he would consent to do.
First that he would not pray with them: Secondly that he would not keep
solemn conuenticles with them: Thirdlye that he would not take upon him the
name of a Manichie. More-ouer it has been practiced by the whole church of al
ages as may appear by the example of those godly people of Allexa^dria,
Samosata, Edessus, Theodo. Li. 2.17. Li. 4.19. 14.16.
with diverse other Cities where whole multitudes would rather choose to suffer
death then once to enter the churches while the Arian prelates were present:
Whose godly zeal may well confound the cold devotion of this unhappy time
wherein so few are found in comparison of a great number who in heart do believe
the Catholic religion, so few there be I say that will be content to sustain
the loss of a few goods for the open profession of their faith. Yea many
there be that will not take knowledge of this case whereof in times past no man
was ignorant, no not the very heretics, as Arians Donatists and such like,
all having their several churches by them selves, and refusing to communicate
either with Catholics or with any other sect disagreing from their opinion.

AND this may be a another important reason of your most just, 8 The judgment
of Infidels.
and advised refusal: I mean the very judgment and example of al Infidels
touching participation with those of a another religion, the Jews do not enter
into the churches of Christians. The Turks hold it for a sign of Mahomets
religion for one to come into their moskeyes, the Lutherans and Caluinistes
have their several congregations one distinct from the other, and all the
protestants in other countries refuse to be present at the Catholic service.
So did as many of them as had zeal or care of their conscience in the late
days of Queen Mary. In which time a famos preacher of their faction, inroled
for a martire in Fox his book, making answer to a certain woman who demanded
of him whether she might go to mattens and euensong [for to go to mass her
conscience would not suffer her] pronounced and gave his sentence in this or in
much like sort: that to go to any part of the service then used, should be
a thing greatly against the honor of God, and contrary to the charity due
unto her neighbor. It should be against God his honor, because (says he) God
is not to be honored but in such sort as he has commanded and taught by his
word meaning by God his word express Scripture, where-as we include also
such truth, as God has revealed unto his Church. Also he said that by
going unto such service she should deny and disalowe of the whole doctrine of
the Gospel. And concerning breach of charity toward her neighbor, she should
thereby sever her self from the congregation of the faithful. She should great
lie confirm the obstinate Papists in their error, she should cause the weak
Protestants to waver in their religion, and she should greatly offend the more
firm sort of Gospellers. Behold here the cause wherefore Catholics be
afflicted, determined by the judgment of a Protestant preacher and recorded in
the a fore-sayd book of Fox his monsterous monuments. Which thing being well
cosiddered would make one to wou^der, that we should be so urged by the
Protestants at this day to do the same thing which in their own case, they
have thought and must think very damnable seeing that this common consent of
all sects and religions must needs show it to be a thing forbidden not only by
man his ordinance, but by the very law of God and nature and consequently to
be repugnant to the judgment of every one that has in his breast, but any
little spark of vprightnes and sinceritye. 9 Mislike of the service


AND now lastly to make up this matter of defense for your not going to the
church, you refuse to resort to such a service as besides that it has been
devised by the English Protestants a mong them selves, besides that it is
condemned of other sects, besides that yt has no like pattern or platform a
mongste their Evangelical brethren in other countries, besides false
translation of Scripture, the defect of a lawful minister, the want of
sacrifice, sacraments, reverent ceremonies, and other things belonging to the
honor of God which are contained in the Catholic service, besides false
doctrine and blasphemye which must needs be offensive to all religious ears,
is mislyked of most even at home and has been impugned by sundery printed
pamphelets which has given occasion of writing great books of controversy:
Yea by all liklyhoode it had been changed long before this day had not the
grauer sort made stay of the matter, for fear to incurr the note of
inconstancy, yea in the last parliament holden in your Realm anno. 29. where in
this monthly exaction was more aggrauated upon you with peril of a greater
forfayture, a book was exhibited for the reformation of the form of common
prayer now used, neither was the matter determined otherwise then by contrary
commandment of the superiors: although one would think by reasone it should
have been agreed amongste themselves, what service they should think best to
use before you should have been compelled under so grievous a pain to resort
unto their churches. Lo now you see here the causes of your refusal. A most
happy refusal undoubtedly if you continue therein being grounded upon so good
reasons of conscience, of duetye toward God, of charity toward your Catholic
brethren, of respect to religion, of reue^rece toward the Church of common
honesty and plain dealing amongst men, of care to avoid the fellowship of
other men's sins, being also just, as that even those that do most persecute
you, if the case were their own: must needs plead for the^ selves with the
like alegations, and finally being moved with mislyke of the service whereunto
you are now commanded to resort, in which point your adversaries cannot justly
reprove you, themselves being not yet agreed whether it be the service of God
or no, and many of them earnestly mainteyning the contrary.

The Second Part what Recusants shall lose.
NOW Let us considder what loss you shall sustain for this refusal. You shall
lose, so many of you as shall not be able to discharge and answer this heavy
sums, your whole substance of moue-able goods, and such as have lands, shall
lose moreover two parts of their revenues, and those that are of more
abilitye to supporte this grievous burden shall be greatly impouerished and
forced to abridge themselves of that which otherwise should be very convenient
for their estate and calling. A very hard case vndoubtdely, but yet not so
hard but that by Gods grace it may be easilye digested. And first of all
those that have greater lyuinges do less stand in need of comfort and with
more quiet minds may sustayn the loss that shall fall upon the^: Comfort for
them of more abillity.
both for that they may hold themselves the better contented in respect of
tha^kfulnes toward God to lose a little for his sake, having received much: and
farthermore because the inconuenie^ce which they shall suffer is but the abasing
of their out-warde countenance in the world, which I hope there is no Catholic
but will patie^tly and gladly endure if it were for no other cause yet for
christian humilitye and modestye. To such of you therefore as are of greater
calling and have more wher-with to mayntain your selves, I say that I trust
there is none of you that so looks toward preferment but that you will
rather be content likewise to be aflicted with the people of God, then by
offending God to have temporal pleasure for a while, Exo. 2 Heb. 11
esteeming the reproach which you shall suffer for Christ greater riches then
the treasure of the Egiptians that is to say of the whole world. There is
none of you that so atendeth to purchase lands for the increasing of your
patrimonye but that you have greater care by good deeds to buy the kingdom of
heaven. For if you purchase here on earth [you are as it were] not possessing:
Cor. 7.
And if you rejoice in the world you are as if you rejoiced not: And if you
use the world as though you used it not. Because the figure of this world
passes away I trust you account your selves here as strangers and Pilgrims,
1. Pet. 2.
and therefore you seek to have houses to dwell in for a while and not as though
you should remain in them for ever. You shall be hindered by this persecution
from providing for your children so plentifully as otherwise you would, but you
shall leave unto them Gods blessing which is more then al earthly riches. You
shall not marrye your daughters so richlye nor with so great portio^s, but you
shall match them with Cotholikes who in this time of common necessitye shall
more esteem of religion the^ of riches, and shall more regard virtuous
behavior then vain brauerye. You shall perhapes not have so great attendance
of servants, but you shall be attended with Angels whersoeuer you go. And if
you keep not so great familyes yet you may keep such as be devout toward
God and faithful toward your selves: As undoubtedly you shall make them much
the better by this your example of suffering for Gods cause. Also you shall have
the less to answer for many idle persons and in a smaller number you shall
have the fewer evil. You shall keep less hospitality among your neighbors,
but you shall be the less enuyed by your adversaries, and withal you shall have
less occasion to entertayne unthankful heretics anb schismatikes, who preying
upon your monye, can the less expecte to be fedd at your tables. Yea perhaps
you shall be able to bestow more largelye upon the domestical of faith or if
your alms be less for lack of ability your good-wils shall be rather the more.
For as you know the widows two mites is more then any rich man's treasure and
good folk will considder, that you are afflicted Catholics and therefore will
require the less at your hands. I trust you will always follow the rule of good
Tobias, Tob. 4.
to be merciful in such sort as you shall be able, and if you have much, to
give abundantly: If you have little, to bestow yet a little willynglye: yea
this which shal-be the greatest alms that could be given. For as that blessed
martyr Sir Thomas more says, when a man loses any thing for Gods cause,
although the devils escheator sease upon it, yet it is rendered to God. And as
for delicate and sumptuous fare, gaye apparel and other external worldly pomp
I hope you are so far from being in love with any of those things that
rather you will thank God for giving you occasion to cut of such superfluous
expenses. But now for such of you as have little and therefore not being able to
satisfy the penaltye shall lose two parts of that which you have, and for
such whose substance consists wholye or for the most part in moveable
goods, and therefore are like to lose all and so to fall into great poverty:
there is great cause why they should be relieved by such whom god has blessed
more larglye with temporal benefits, and wherefore they should be comforted
against the extremity of this imminent storm of worldly affliction. And yet
peradventure it shall be easier for some of the^ to descend from their mean
state unto the lowest then for some other that have borne a great port to come
down but to a certain mediocrity of living. For where there be lest
possessions, there is many times less love of the world: Although in deed
there be no great difference between leesing much or little for Gods sake, so
that a man bear like love toward God. But to such of you now whose loss may
be more grievous or that may fall in to greater want I direct my speech,
desiring you to consydder a while the condition of these earthlye goods and the
burden of pouertye which may light upon you in the hardest case that may be
foreseen by man's reasone. Comfort for the poor.
So shall you see neither the loss to be so great nor the inconvenience that
may follow thereof so intolerable, as at the first sight it might be esteemed.

AND First touching wordly goods I might tell you according to some
philosophers, Consideration of riches.
yea by the judgment of many Christyan Doctors, that they are not worthy
the name of goods, because they make not their possessors any thing the better.
But rather they make them for the most part far the worse: for so much as
they are the occasion of pride which is the very worm and disease that
follows riches. They kindle covetousness and there fore they be like to cold
water being drounke by a man that is in some hott disease: the more that he
drinks the more it increases his thirst. They are matter of intemperance and
over delicate lining. They give impunity to vices and consequently are occasion
of many sins. I might say that they are common to good and to evil men, but
more commonly they are bestowed upon the evil then upon the good. Behold
sinners have obtained riches, says David in one Psalm: Psalm. 72.
And this is so disposed for sundry good reasons. First because we should
understand these earthlye possessions not to be the true goods nor the reward
which we expect to receive, also because those wicked men are many times
rewarded with earthlye riches for some moral good which they have done being
not worthy at all of better recompense. And for the most part this abundance
of wealth, is an occasion wherefore they become more vicious and so is permitted
unto them as matter of more grievous damnation. I might say unto you that none
of these external things which a man possesses are to be called his own,
because they are not within him self, and therefore it is not in a ma^s power to
keep or not to leese them. This moved certain Philosophers as Bias and Stilpo
of Megara being spoylled of all that which they had, to boaste that they
carried with them all their goods, meaning that they had not lost their inward
virtues. This bragg they made perhaps more confidently then truly, but how
much better may a Christian say that although he be depryued of his earthlye
goods, yet he hops that he shall not lose his faith, his trust, and his love
toward God, and consequent lie he shall not lose God himself the geuer of all
goodness and the only riches that may suffice and cause him to line content
and happy. I might show to you out of profane historyes that many
Philosophers either for love of knowledge or desire of vain glory as
Anacharsis, Crates, Antisthenes, and almost all those of like study and
profession, and many worthy Captayns and honorable men in their common
wealths, as Aristides and Phocion among the Athenians, and among the Romans,
Fabritius and M. Curious, have either chosen to become poor, or have refused to
be made rich, when occasion was offered. I might prove further by good reason,
that this external wealth, is no otherways profitable, but when it is well
bestowed. And how can it be bestowed with more aduau^tage, then being forsaken
for gods love and for the redemption of your own souls. Otherwise what
benefit has the rich man by his great abou^dance? Or what do his large
possessions avail him? Are they profitable in respect of his health? we see
that most wealthy men can hardlye repair their bodies by contynuall applying
of medicyne, where-as the poor man contynueth sound without healpe of physike.
Has he more liberty to go where he will, or more freedom to do what him best
pleases? undoubtedly no. For setting a side the covetous man whose heart is
always tied and chayned unto his money, and take what rich man you will, he is
more restrained from bestowing his time at his pleasure by the manifold
instance of his temporal affairs then the poor cottier, by the necessitye of
getting his daily living by daily labor. But does he enjoy more pleasures?
No surely. For although he have perhapps greater store of delights yet pleasure
consists rather in rarenes then in continual use, and rather in men's desires,
then in the nature of things themselves. The rich man can scarcely find any
dayntyes that may content his appetite, where as the poor has hunger for his
sauce to al kind of meats. As it is written in the Proverbs. Pro. 7.
That the soul which is already fully satisfied will tread the honey comb under
foot: but the hungry will take men bitter for sweet. The rich man tosseth up
and down in his soft bed after a full stomach, where as the poor man,
sleeps soundly upon his simple couche, after mean diet, by reasone of his
long days labor. Sleep is sweet, (says wise Solomon) to him that works
whether he eat little or much: Eccle. 5,
but the fulness of a rich man does not suffer him to sleep. The rich has more
fauning friends peradventure, but he has less assurance of their fidelitye
because they may be friends in respect of his riches, rather then for the
love of his person. He is served of many, but withal he has the charge to
prouid for many. Eccle. 5.
Where there is much wealth, there be also many that eat to consume the sa^e, and
than what does it profit the possessor, but that he sees his riches with his
eyes. He has the name of Lord and master, but in deed he has but the
stewardship and disposition of these earthly goods to the benefit of others,
who live at his cost more quietly or merely then himself: having no more for
his own part the^ will feed one belly and cloth one back, fare he never so
well, or be he clothed never so trimly. But perhapps the rich are less subject
to injuries and oppressions? It is altogether contrary. For the poor man
lives without molestation of any if you consider him as he is poor: and if he
be any ways troubled it is in respect of some little goods that he has or
procures to have. But the rich man is more often a pray to those that are more
mighty and rich, then the poor people are to himself. He is had in gelosie
by his superiors, he is impugned by his equals, he is enuyed and undermined by
his inferiors, he is betrayed many times for his money by his servants, yea by
his own children. Therefore I might say farther, that by common experience the
having of worldly pelf is matter of care, how it may be kept, how it may be
employed, and how it may be increased. It is occasion of fear: for the rich
man fears those that be richer then himself, and such as be poorer: he
fears thieves, he feareh change of weather. He fears strangers in time of
war, he fears his neighbors when there is peace: he fears his own
familye, he scarcely dare trust his own hands. Furthermore it breeds suits
and contentions: it provoke enemyties, it procures a thousand perils, so
that we see mo to have peryshed for their riches, then to have died for famine.
And if we shall give credit to the holy Scriptures, this base and earthly
baggage, is often times a great impediment to men's salvation. Therefore says
out Savior: Mat. 19.
That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven: Yea that it is
more easy for a Camel to pass through the streicte eye of a needle. The
reasons hereof be many, first the multitude of cares, which these worldly
goods commonly bring with them, in respect whereof they are called thorns
that suffocate and choke up the seed of god his word. Mat. 13.
eSecondly the delycate manner of life which the most part of wealthye folk
lead, and therefore says our Savior: Luc. 6.
woe to you that be rich, because you have your consolation. Also because it is
hard to have many possessions, and not to love them beyond measure. Luc. 14.
And you know well that whosoever so much loves these earthly goods that he be
not ready to renounce and forsake the^ all for the love of God when the cause
so requires, cannot be the disciple of Christ, neither can he have part in god
his kingdom. Hereof it came that he which had bought a farm, and he which had
bought five yoke of oxen refused to come to the supper, wher-vnto they were
invited. Moreover it is very hard to have much, and not to covet more* whereby
worldly me^ desiring to be rich do fall as S. Paul says into temptation, 1.
Tim. 6
and into the snare of the devil, and many desires unprofitable and hurteful
which drown men into destruction and perdition: The proof hereof is very
evident by the manyfolde intricate cases wher-with even they that think them
selves to have upright consciences be often entangled and do offend by pretense
of Tytles, by ordinary buying selling and bargayning, and other temporal
dealings and affairs. For these and many other considerations I say to you as
unto Christians, and unto men that have care of their souls health. That
what-soeuer it is possible for you to have in this world, were it never so
properly called by the name of goods, were it never so rightlye termed your
own, were it never so profitable, so pleasant and so apt to good uses yea
although you meant to imploye it to the best use that might be devised, cannot
yet be so much worth as that you should for the retayning of the same displease
God by one mortal sin and much less separate your self from the Church by
heinous and damnable schism and participation with heresye. Mat. 16.
For what should it profit you to gain the whole world and sustain the
damage of your souls. And specially since all that you possess has come unto
you freely by God his gift and then think with your selves what a grievous
point of ingratitude it should be to forsake the geuer for any part of that
which he has given. This considderation moved blessed Job to bear patiently
the loss of al his wealth and not to offend God, so much as with any
impacient or foolish word. Job. 1.
Naked I came out of my motheres womb (says he) and naked I shall return
thither, our Lord has given, our Lord has taken away: as it has pleased
our Lord, so it is done the name of our Lord be blessed. It is greatly to be
noted that although the Sabeans had taken away his oxen and asses, although the
Chaldies had spoled him of his Cammels, although the devil had consumed his
sheep with fire, and had raised a wind to overthrow his house, and to
oppress his children, yet he says our Lord has taken away, knowing well that
none of these things could have happened without God his permyssion and special
prouydence: which may teach you in all losses that may fall out, to considder
God his ordinance, and so to rest contented accepting his holy will and
disposition. Conformably to those words of Job S. Paul says. 1. Tim. 6
we brought nothing into this world: doubtless neither can we take away any
thing. Considder I pray you how bare, how needy and destitute of all help,
you were first borne, and how you differd nothing from the poorest child that
is brought to light, setting a side the care and provision of others that were
nere about you. And the^ shall you well perceive that whatsoever you now enjoy,
or have enjoyed has been bestowed upon you thorough God his infinite bountye
and liberalytye, and what a point of clownishe inciuylitye would you think it
were for a beggars brat, being taken by some great Prince into his court, who
should cause him to be dayntilye nourished and richlye appareled, intending
after-wardes to make him heir of his kingdom, to set at naught the great
favor of that Prince, and wilfully to forsake his court if he would dot in all
things make him so large allowance as he had done before. And even like
vncourtesy, nay infinite times more should it be for any man after so great
number of benefits received at God his hands, besides the expectation of
heaven in time to come, to set naught by his grace, to neglect his favor, to
commit hye treason against him for the saving of a little worldly trashe which
he alone has given, and when it pleases him can take it a way again. This
point I beseech you to way aduisedlye, and with-al to consider the second part
of S. Paul's sentence that most certaynlye you shall carye nothing with you out
of this world. Think what unspeakable grefe it shal-be for one that has
displeased God for the saving of his worldly goods when at the time of his
death he must depart and leave his fair houses, his goodlye ma^nors and
lordships and all that he held most dear in this life: neither that nor all the
substance of the world if he had it to give can procure him one hours respite
for penance, and much less can obtain his salvation. Psalm. 49.
He shall not give the price of redemption of his own soul. Says David of
the rich man trusting in his riches: when he dies he shall not take with him
all that he has, neither shall his glory go down with him. But perhapps he
trusts to leave his possessions to his children, the Psalm seems to
affirm the contrary: They shall leave their riches to strangers, which is to
be understood as S. Augustine says upon that place, that although their
children succeed them in the possession of their patrymonyes yet can they
nothing relieve the miseryes of their friends being damned to hell fire, and
what profit then do they reap to themselves. Their sepulchers are their
houses for ever, they have prepared to themselves costlye monumentes as if
they should dwell in the^ perpetually not providing for the mansions wherein
they should live in deed everlastingly. But what becomes of the poor souls
who reap no benefit of their solemn funerals, and stately tombs, but rather
have their pains agrauated, it follows within a while that the wicked rich
man shall enter even into the generation of his fathers, that is to say of
ungodly men that here to fore has been like to himself and he shall not see
light for ever, because when he was here he delighted in darkness, and rejoiced
in false goods, not loving the true goods he shall therefore go hence to hell:
after the darkness of his dreams wherein he imagined to himself a deceitful
kind of felicity he shall be given over to the darkness of eternal torments.
Look into those houses, I mean those Sepulchers, and considder the length,
Psalm. 75.
breadeth, and height of those mansions, and compare the same, with those
statelye rooms wherein they dwelled here-tofore. Look upon their decayed
nature, their rotten bones and consumed members. See whether you can discern
the master from the servant, the rich man from the beggar, the Prince from
his poorest subject. Co^sidder what is become of their gallant traynes of
seruitors, their gorgeous apparel, their goodly plate, and costly furniture.
See whether they have now any use of these things. All is earth, all is dust,
all is worms all is putrefaction. And what shall be the state of such fools at
the day of Judgment? The Prophet tells us in a another psalm that the lovers
of this world whom he calls the men of riches: Have slepte their sleep,
and waking they have found nothing in their hands. whiles they were here in
this life they thought the^ selves to be happy, they slept in their desires,
they were delighted in vain pompes, but at the day of resurrection, they have
found their hands empty for lack of good works being destitute of all that
wherein they gloried before. Tell me what comfort had the rich man burning in
the flames of hell, who before neglected to give his crommes to poor Lazarus,
by remembrance of his former wealth, his dainty food, and sumptuous clothing.
Or what reaped that other curmogion of all his abundance. To whom thinking to
enlarge his barnes, and to make merry with his store for a long time together:
It was said, Thou fool this night they shall require thy soul of thee. Luc.
12.
And these things which thou have provided, whose shall they be? Note well
those words. Whose shall they be? A man heapeth up treasures says the
Psalm, Psalm. 38.
and knows not for whom he gathers them. Whether for an unthankful, or a
prodigal child. Whether they shall be euicted by his adversaries thorough
color of law, or shall to the Prince by attaynder, or shall come to the
merchants hands by way of usury. O dear Catholics, lift up your eyes, and
look upon this general day of waking from the sleep of death, Sap. 5.
see with what constancy you shall stand in that dreadful day, if you be now
constant, against those which have opressed you and have taken away from you
the fruits of your labors. Behold again how your persecutors shall be troubled
with horrible fear, and shall wou^der at your sudden and unexpected salvation:
how they shall say within themselves with much anguish of spirit and groaning:
what has our pride profited us? or what the boasting of our riches auayled us?
al those things have passed away like a shadow with a great deal more,
which is expressed in the book of wisdom. And as you would not in that day
change with them, if you might enjoy a thousand worlds: So now think your
selves more happy what-soeuer you shall leese for Christ his sake, then if for
a temporal commodity you should be joined to that co^mpany of the damned to
suffer extreme confusion and torments that never shall have end. Consider
besides all this the vncertayntye of riches even in this life to what dangers
and chances they are subject, and how they ebb and flow from one to a another.
Therefore if riches flow abou^dantly, set not your hearts upon the^, in such
wise that you flow with-al and ru^ne from God in this time of persecution.
Psalm. 61.
Trust not so much in the incertayntye of worldly goods so that you lose for
them the hope of your heaven lie heritage. Be not deceitful in your waytes to
deceive your selves with to much account of vanity, but esteem al temporal
things as they are, according unto the conditions which I have laid down
before you.

Consideration of pouertye.
NOW If riches be no more to be esteemed then as it may apeare by these reasons
here recited, let us way likewise the burden and inconvenience of pouertye
whether by any means it may be endured with quiet and indifferent mind. A
light burden undoubtedly supposing sufficiency as we shall prove herafter,
with the presence of gods grace yea in this case when it is sustained for Gods
sake a sweet and delightful burden. And first in those riches which are common
to al men by nature. As the influ^ece of the heavens, the commoditye of the
bright and warm sun the goodlye moon, the clear sterres, the pure and
fresh air: And many other benefits of Gods creatures, there is no doubt but
that pouertye enjoys her part more freely, more often and with more delight,
then does the rich man, who for the most part leads his life in a close
house and when he goes abroad he atte^deth not to take pleasure in such
things having his mind occupied about his manifold temporal business. And for
the use of al necessaryes we have partlye heretofore compared the rich and
poor together, and now we may say again that the poor have their substance
with less cost and care and their rest with less disturbance. They are also
served more surely and dulye By their own endeavor then those wealthy folk
for whom the provision. of Sea and Land will not suffice who cannot co^triue
how they may lay their heads at convenient ease and for who^ all the service
of men in liuerye coats is to little. O happy poverty that is not forced to
make friends in court, to retayn counsailers for the bar, to wait upon
atturneyes, to follow sise and sessions, to make her part strong by banding of
men against her adversaries. She is not vexed with exactions she is either more
safe in common calamityes to abide without danger, or more ready to fly and
escape: she aduentureth not her self by sea for lucres sake and therefore is
not in peril of pirates: she may better go without weapon by land, for as
the common proverb is she may singe before a thief. And to the exercise of
virtue she is no impediment but rather many times a great furtherance. She is
companion with humilitye she is mother of modestye and temperance maintayner of
sobryetye schoole-mistres and teacher of patience nurse of devotion and
conte^plation. Only in giving of corporal alms, she seems to be inferyor and
yet she is not excluded from giving a cupp of cold water which may be
meritorious of life everlasting she may feed a prophet with alitle oil and
flower she may entertayne Christ in a poor fishers house she may wash the
weried feet of gods pilgrims. She may healpe and serve the sick she may
visit and comfort prisoners if she cannot otherwise relieve them. She may
further the cause of religion, if not by money, yet by industry of mind and
bodilye travail. Romans 6.
Aquila and Priscilla were poor folks and lived by the labor of their hands
by making of tents and yet S. Paul calls them his helpers in Christ Jesus
to whom not only he gives thanks but also all the churches of the Gentiles:
and morouer they had a domestical church of their own. But one objection is
here needful to be answered, wherefore Solomon should earnestly desire God not
to give him beggerye lest perhaps he should be compelled to steal, and to
forswear the name of his God. The answer is easelye given that Solomon spoke
according to the state of the old Testament, Pro. 30.
and in the person of the imperfect, who may fall into such inconveniences
when they become poor against their wills by worldly mischa^ce. But such peril
is in no wise to be feared when a man leaves or loses his gooddes and
willinglye be comes poor for the love of God. Mat. 19.
Otherwise if poverty were an impediment to salvation our Savior would not
have proposed it as a point of perfection to a certain rich young man that
asked him counsel what he should do over and besides the keeping of Gods
commandments. Yea which is more he would not have consecrated the same in his
own person as it was fore-tolde of him in one of the Psames. Psalm. 39.
I am a beggar and a poor man, says David in the figure of christ. This is a
singular prerogative of pouertye and a principal motive to al Christians to
sustain gladly any want for his sake who was made poor where as he was rich
that by his pouertye we might be rich. What subject would disdayn to follow the
fashion of his soueraygne? 2. Cor. 8
what soldier would think scorn to be attyred like his Captain? what scholar
would be ashamed to resemble his master in his profession? Now our Lord and
King our Captain our M. Jesus Christ did choose to be borne poor to be
swadled in simple clothes and to be laid in a mau^ger. His blessed mother was
poor and so was holy Iosepth the guardian of his infancy. Mat. 3.
His birth was first reueiled to poor sheepherds. Mat. 5.
His fore runner S. John baptist was poor being clothed with a camels skinn
and fed with locust and wyld honye. Luc. 9.
He began his preaching with commendation of poverty: he led a poor life
having not where to rest his head. Mat. 19.
He chose for his Apostles poor men, or if they had any thing before, they
left al when they followed him. He gave it for a principal token that he was
the true Messiah that he preached the glad tidings of the Gospel to the poor.
Mat. 11.
He dyed poor having no house nor roof to cover him, not lying upon a soft
bed but hanging upon his hard cross having a crown of thorn in stead of a
pillowe for his head: being spoiled of his clothes to the bare skinn whiles the
wicked soldiers that crucified him divided his garments among them and cast
lotts for his coat: being withal so destitute of friends yea in his burning
thirst he could get nothing to drink but sower vinegar. But what speak I of
his pouertye? He shead his precious blood for your redemption: And can you
think much for his love to depart from a little worldly pelf and vile
trumpery? 1. Cor. 2
S. Paul describing generally the calling of Chrystians says, That God has
not chosen many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble:
And like-wise S. James says, Iac. 2.
That god has chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith, and heirs of
the kingdom which God has promised to them that love him. And one would
think that the heavenly wisdo^e preferring the poor in this sort were better
to be trusted then the judgment of worldly folk who commonly esteem of a man
according to his money.

3 Reward for Recusantes.
AND Thus having pondered the several conditions of riches and pouertye, it
remains to be considered what further advantage you may have, if for
conscience sake you shall be driven to exchange the one for the other: to the
end that seeing before your eyes assurance of most undoubted gain, you may
boldlye adventure upon a bargain so beneficial, wherein almighty God himself
becomes your debtor. For he that is faithful and true, has promised with his
own mouth, Mat. 19.
That who soever forgoeth any thing for his love shall receive a hundredth
fold, and shall possess life everlasting. You shall receive an hundred fold as
an earned pennye in this life, and life everlasting shall be your reward in time
to come. This hundred fold as it may diverse ways be understood, so
principally, A hundred fold
I think yt may be taken to consiste in three things, in sufficiencye, of
necessaryes for the present time, Sufficie^cy.
in quietness and contentment of mind, and in many other spiritual guiftes and
graces. First concerning sufficiency of temporal things. It consists in Gods
providence, in his almightye power and fatherlye goodness we have many promises
thereof, and many examples, both in the old and new Testament, as where it is
said, Psalm. 32.
That the eyes of our Lord are upon the^ that fear him and upon those that
trust in his mercy to deliver their souls from death and to nourishe them in
famyne: that there is no poverty or want to those that fear him. That the rich
have lacked, Psalm. 33.
and have been hungery by reason of their covetous and insatiable minds, Psalm.
36.
but they that seek our Lord shall not fail to have all good. That the just
shall not be confounded, in the evil and hard time, and in the days of famine
they shall be satisfied. Like-wise in the Proverbs it is said that God will not
afflicte with famine the soul of the just. And as for examples we might bring
great store for proof of this point whereby it may appear that not only God
does not suffer his servants to be destitute of things belonging to the
sustentation of their temporal life, but furthermore when it pleases him he
rewards them abundantly even in this world. Genesis ca. 12.
Abraham forsook his country and kinse-folke and went at God his
commandment into a strange land where he had no foot of possession, and God
blessed him with worldly substance during his life, and three hundred years
and more after his death, he gave that whole land to be possessed by his
posteritye. Genesis ca. 32.
Jacob passed Iordein with his staff fleeing from his brother Esau into
Mesopotamia, Genesis ca. 41.
but he returned again with two troops having wives and children, and great
abundance of cattle. Joseph was sold into Egypt as a bondslaue and there for
righteousness sake was thrust down into a dungeon, but after a while it pleased
God to deliver him and to make him ruler of the whole country. Exo. ca. 3
Moses forsook the wealth of Egypt and kept sheep in the desert: and it
pleased god there to apeare unto him and to make him governor over his people.
Holy Job was abased even to sit upon the dunghill full of sores, Job. ca. 42.
but in the end God bestowed upon him double wealth to that which he had
before. Reg. Li. 3. ca. 17. 19.
Elias was poor and fled from the persecution of Iesabel but he was
sufficiently fed, once by the ravens that daily brought him meat, and a
another time by bread which God miraculously provided for him. Elizeus was
poor, Re. Li. 4. cap. 4.
but he was sued unto by great Princes: yea he was able to feed others by
bread miraculouslye multiplied. Tob. c. 1.
Blessed Toby was spoiled of al his substance by the wicked King Senu-Acherib
for his charity toward the dead: but after fortye five days he was restored
to his house and to al his possessions again. Daniell. Cap. 14.
Daniel for his religion toward God, was cast into the Lions den, but he was
fedd by a Prophet being wonderfullye brought out of the land of Iurye for that
purpose. Machabi orum. Li. 4. Cap. 2.
And so as Mathias said to his sons, consider through-out every generation,
and you shall see, that al which trust in him are not weakened nor overthrown.
But what do I rehearse the example of godly men, our Savior sends us, Mat.
6.
even unto the fowls of the air to see how they are fed, and to the lillies
of the field to behold how they are clothed to the end that we should not
doubt of God his providence, for meat drink clothing and other things
necessary for the mayntenance of this life. And undoubtedly this is a
consideration of great importance. For if God of his goodness exte^d to feed the
pore worms of the earth: Psalm. 31.
As it is written in the Psalm, That he opens his hand and fills every
lining creture with blessing, Psa. 144.
if he bestow food even vpo^pon the young Ravens, Psalm. 146
being not succored by their dames that brought them forth. If neither the
feather of any foul, nor the leaf of any tree, be destitute of his
providence, if the very Infidels be visited daily with God his benefyttes
which they receive of the Sun, Job. ca. 39.
the Air, and the Earth yielding her fruits in due time, how much rather will
he provide for his servants that suffer affliction for the glory of his name.
How much rather will he provide for you O ye of very small faith says our
Savior. Is not the life more then the meat: Mat. 6.
and the body more then the raiment? Therefore he that has given the greater
benefits, will not fail to provide for the less. Your father knows that you
need al these things, and who will mistrust the prouysion of so mighty, so
wise, so good and so loving a father. Seek therefore first the kingdom of God
and the justice of him: Take care how you may save your own souls, and
please God: And all these things shall be given you besides, so that you shall
not need to fear any inconvenience by loss of temporal goods for god his
cause. For declaration of this providence: Luc. 10.
Our Savior when he sent his Apostles first to preach, he forbad them to
carye Purse, or scrip or shoes, and a little before his Passion he asked them
When I sent you Without purse and scrip and shoes, Luc. 22.
did you lack any thing? But they said nothing. And after Christ his
ascension when they went into farther countries and therefore stood in more
need, and had less provision for necessaries, hear what S. Paul says of
himself and other his fellows. S. Pa. ad Cor. cap. 4. Epi. secu^d
In all things we suffer tribulation, and are not in distress, we want, but
are not destitute: we suffer persecution, but are not forsaken: we are cast
down, Cap. 6.
but we perish not. And within two chapters of the same epistle after a great
number of things recyted that might seem contrary at the first appearance, he
makes up the sentence with these words, As needye, but enriching many, as
having nothing, and possessing all things. Meaning that they had the whole
world and all God his creatures at commandment. And least you should think
this privilege proper to the Apostles and to none other, behold the poor
Hebrews, Act. 4.
the very first flowers of Gods Church, who sold all that they had and gave the
price to be distributed in godly uses: and you shall perceive that they received
their hundredth fold by Gods provision, when the Gentiles of sunderye nations
were careful to contribute to their relief, Romans 16
and S. Paul himself was collector and bearer of the alms bestowed upon
the^. And among holy Martyrs as we read of many that have been fed by the
service of Angels, so we find very few that either in prison or out of prison
have perished for lack of sustenance. And in the number of Hermites that
willinglye became poor for Christ his sake, we read of S. Paul fed by a
Raven, and S. Gyles nourished by the milk of an Hind. And among thousands
that be extremelye poor in diverse religious familes, do we not see that the
most of them live and find no great defect of necessaries? And can any man
doubt of sufficiency, having so many examples of Gods goodness in this
behalf? Or is not this sufficiency as much as all the wealth of the world
can afforde, and therefore an hundredth fold in comparison of that which any
one man possesses. Especialye if a contented mind be joined therewith al. 2.
Tim. 6
According to that saying of S. Paul. Piety with sufficiency is a great gain.
Therefore says he, Having food, and wherewith to be covered, with these we
are content.

2 Contentmente of mind.
THIS Quietness and contentment of mind proceeds especially of Gods grace
which tempereth the appetite of man, being before insatiable and crying still
after, bring, bring, although he have never so much already. And as the
desire of having more, is a great tormente to covetous rich men, enwrapping
them with many cares, and setting them about much unhappy business: so this
limiting of a man's desire, to be content with that which God sends, be it
more or little is a singular benefit, more worth then any gold, yea such a
one as no world lie treasure can procure. For tell me I pray you is it not much
better to cure a man of his fever, which causes him still to desire drink and
never to be satisfied, then to give him drink at his desire and not to quench
but rather to kindle this thirst. Here-of it comes to be true which is said
in one of the Psalms. A little is better to the just man, Psalm: 36.
then the aboundante riches of sinners. And that which S. Hierome says. Epi.
ad. Pauiinu^.
The believing man has a world of riches: to the covetous man nothing is
enough. And the very heathen Philosophers, acknowledged that for a man to be
co^tente with his own was the greatest and the most certain riches: And it
was a common saying among them. The mind of a man is rich, and not his cofer.
Of this contented mind, we have an example of S. Paul, who says speaking of
himself. I know both to be brought low, Phil. 4.
I know also to abound: (every where and in all things I am instructed) both
to be full, and to be hungerye, both to abound and to suffer penurye. And if
any man should say: I am not S. Paul, I am not an Apostle: let him at
least, not be found inferior to Socrates a heythen man, who notwithstanding
that he was pore, passing one time thorough the market place, and seeing great
store of diverse wares, said with himself. How many things be here, that I do
not desire. And can not the grace of God work as much in the heart of a
faithful man falling in to pouertye for his love by means of persecution? I
think there is none of you that have been converted to God from the way of
sin, and love of this wretched world, especially having lost any thing for
Gods cause, that he has not withal felt by experience the proof of this
point, and therefore I shall not need to-stande longer in confirming the same.

3 Spirytuall graces.
AND As for spiritual gifts and graces which God bestows upon those that
willinglye forgo their temporal goods for his love: S. Peter was a poor
fisher and for his boat which he left at Christ's commandment he received
the government of Christ his Church, Luc. 5.
in place of his nett. The word of God was committed unto him and for his
trade of taking fishes to their destruction, Act. 3.
he was made a fisher of men's souls to salvation. Cap: 5.
He had neither gold nor silver but with his word in the name of Christ he
could cure the lame, Cap: 9.
with his only shadow he could heal the sick, and by his prayers he could
raise the dead again to life. Phil. 3.
S. Paul esteemed the things that were gaynes to him before to be detriments
for the exceeding love of Christ: Act, 9.
And he was made a vessel of election to carry Gods name before the Gentiles, to
teach and convert the greatest part of the world. He was rapte into the
third heaven, 2. Co. 14
and saw the joys of Paradise. His name was terrible to wicked spirits, Act.
19.
his very napkins and handkerchifs had efficacy to cure all kind of malladies.
The rest of Christ's Apostles for that little which they frosooke at his
bidding, received authority to preach the Gospel, Psalm. 44.
virtue to cure diseases, and power to cast out devils. Mat. 19.
They were made Princes over the whole earth, and appointed judges of the
world in time to come. S. Anthony. S. Hilarion and others be came willinglye
poor, where-by they might more freelye serve God: and they became as it were
Angels here in earth, they were made even in this life fellows with heavenly
spirits, 2. Pet. 1
conquerors of devils, physicians for infirmities, fathers of many spiritual
children, teachers of many Relygious familyes, and Lords over all Gods
creatures. Who could live more poorelye then S. Francis or S. Dominike chose to
live for Christ's sake and yet their lives were miraculous their memory at this
day continues honorable and the fruits of their doctrine and examples have
been found thorough out al christendom almost innumerable. And though such
excellent prerogatives are not bestowed upon every one yet there be certain
gifts which God bestows upon all that truly serve him and much more upon
those that suffer any thing for the profession of his true catholic faith. I
mean his grace whereby they are made in a sort pertakers of the divine nature,
whereby their souls are bewtified and made amyable in Gods sight, whereby they
are enabled to perform the offices of all virtues, and wher-with they are
armed against al assaults and temptations. The light of understanding whereby
they perceive Gods goodness and withal they know the vanitye and uncertainty of
al things that be in this world. The comfortes of the holy Ghost which never
fail to them that willingly weane the^ selves from worldly solaces. The
quietness of a pure conscience, which as the wiseman says Is like a continual
feast. Pro. 15.
The increase of Gods love which makes al afflictions light and easy. The
hope and confidence of Gods merciful favor and protection which causes them
even to rejoice in their greatest tribulations. The liberty of spyrite whereby
they find them selves free from the base servitude of earthlye desires. The
gift of patience, whereby they endure quietly and gladly whatsoever affliction
is laid upon them for Christ his name. The marvelous comfort, which all
good folk receive at their departing out of this vale of miserye. These and
many other be the rewards wher-with al temporal damage is recompensed not only
a hundredth, but even an hundredth thousand fold if one might use any
comparison as suerlye there is non to be made in this case.

Life everlasting.
NOW If Gods payments be so plentiful in this life what think you is contained
in these words Vita aeterna, life everlasting. Among all the temporal been fits
that god has bestowed upon us, there is none more dearly esteemed, non more
carefully defended then is our life: although it be short and unsure to
continue subject to many chau^ges annoyed with sundry wantes and distresses, in
wrapped on every side with infinite miseryes, and rather to be called a death
then a life. If then we make such account of this life wherein we are daily
dying, the state whereof, is so uncertain, so mutable, so full of necessities,
labors, pains, woes, and al kind of wretchedness: How greatly should we
desire to enjoy a perpetual life, a life void of al peril, free from al
mutation, wherein is no defecte, no travail, no sorrow: A quiet life, a life
abounding with all kind of good, and in every respect a most happy and
blessed life. There is scarslye any man that desires not to live although he
be sure by living longer to suffer many afflictions both of mind and body:
and for the purchasing of a little false felicitye, consisting in transitorye
goods, honors, and soueraygntye, although it shall endure but a very small
while, we see that men spare for no expense, they shunn no travail, and
finallye they refuse not to do or suffer any thing, whereby they may attain
unto their desired end. Now when true felicitye and secure eternitye shall be
so happily joined together, that neither there shall be any feeling of present
want nor any doubt of defect to fall herafter, is not this a life to be
procured and to be purchased with any bodylye pain, or temporal loss
whatsoever may be imagined greatest. Dearly beloved Catholics it is not
possible to conceive with thought, much less to express with words the
dignytye of this reward which is reserved for you, if you persevere faithful
to the end. Mat. 24.
Eye has not seen, nor ear has not heard, neither has it ascended into
the heart of man, 1. Cor. 2.
what things god has prepared for them that love him. Therefore it may rather
be commended with silence then sufficientlye set forth by any speech. Yet
nevertheless somewhat I mean to say touching this most happy inheritance
when I shall have passed over the uttermost point of persecution which is the
sheading of blood. In the mean time to comfort you against the loss of your
worldly goods, I may be bold to say having almightye God for my warrant that
for the loss of worldly offices which you might bear in the common wealth,
and now do forbear them for conscience sake, you shall be all crowned Kings
in that heavenly, Mat. 5.
blessed, and everlasting kingdom. For your lands which may be taken from
you, you shall enjoy every one of you the land of the living without
disturbance, Psalm. 141
envy, or contradiction. For supplye of the wants which yon may fall into by
the spoil of your moveable goods you Isaie. 49.
shall be sure neither to suffer hunger nor thirst nor other necessitye. Apo. 7.
In lieu of your howses of timber and stone, which happylye you shall forgo,
and most sure you are not long to continue in them, besides that they may also
fall to ruin by some mischance: 2 Cor. 5.
you shall have mansyon places in heaven not built with hand which cannot
decay, and you shall dwell in them for ever. For the disgrace wherein you live
being in a manner debarred from the court and from the sight of your Prince
Isa. 33.
you shall see the King of Kings in his majesty being present before his throne
and serving him day and night in his Temple. You shall see God, Apo. 7.
you shall love God, you shall praise God forever. You shall have Palaces for
prisons, you shall have gratulations of Angels, Joan. 12.
for the reproach which you suffer among men. In stead of earthly honor and
service, Luc. 12.
you shall have honor from God the father, yea you shall have christ himself
to serve and minyster unto you the greatest prefermente that by any heart
could be desired.

Conclusion of this first part.
AND Thus seeing your refusal and abstayning from the protestants churches to
be most just and: reasonable: The loss which you shall sustain for so good a
cause to indifferent minds tolerable: The recompense which you shall receive
without all proportion [both here and in the life to come] incomparable: Iac.
5.
I exhort you all (dear countrymen and beloved brethren in Christ) to
follow the example of husband men who committ their seed to the ground nothing
mistrusting to receive in time the precious fruit of the earth albeit their
seed be for a time buried and trodden under foot, and sowsed with showers and
bittten with many a cruel winter storm: It is now winter with you, the seed
which you must cast into the ground are these worldly goods which you shall
either leese or give for Gods-sake. Fear not the pinching cold of this hard
season nor the sharp storms of persecution. For shortly the spring time of
the resurrection shall come, and then your plentiful fruits shall appear, and
you shall have a glad summer of heavenly joy, and a perpetual harvest of
perfect blessedness. Immytate here-in those merchau^tes who are content to have
their money transported by way of exchange into such places where they may
receive it more commodiously. Your country is heaven, be contented that your
goods be transported thither, although by the hands of such as think to
spoil you. God himself will be your assurance for receipt of the whole. And
wher-as men are glad to give somewhat for the exchau^ge, you shall have
manyfolde gain both in respect of quantitye and quallitye. You shall have
much for a little, gold for silver, things spiritual and everlasting for
bodylye and corruptible things. At the leastwise provide for your safetye as
passengers do on the sea in outrageous tempest, they cast away their goods
and ar contented so that themselves may come safe to land. The violence of
this present storm may perhaps be such by Gods sufferance as that you shall
hardly keep your wealth and save your souls withal, be content to be deprived
of the one, whereby you may preserve the other, arriving safe at the heavenly
port, where al your friends and kinse-folke expecte you: I mean the nine
orders of Angels with all, Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, Confessors, Psalm. 141
and other glorious Saints, among whom you shall have no lack, and with whom
you shall live and rejoice euerlastinglye. Set before your eyes the notable
constancy and firm resolution of those three worthy young Hebrews, who being
captives in a strange land, Dan. 3.
destitute of frindes, and deprived of al humane aid and comfort, would
choose rather to be cast a live into a burning furnace, then to worshipp the
statue of Nabuchodonosor, or to do any honor to his Gods. Dear Catholics
your case is somewhat like, albeit the extremity be not every way so great,
they being in peril of death, and you only at this present in danger to leese
your goods and liuelyhoods. The furnace of pouertye is threatened to al those
that shall refute to honor Caluins bread, and Cranmers communion book by the
assistance of their bodylye presence. But fear not the terryble flames of
extreme necessitye. Give no ear to the vain sound and pernicious Music of
worldly and carnal men's persuasions who give you counsel to reserve your selves
for a better day and in the mean time to dallye and dissemble with the world
and not to let your enemies take the spoil of your goods where-by they may
tryumphe over you. But assure your selves, howsoever the conditions of times
shall change this is your time of trial wherein you must either save your souls
and wynn glorious crowns for your faithful confession or else you shall damn
your selves by cowardlye yealding to do aginst your conscience. And to say
the very truth, the devil is your only enemy: these men that afflicte you
temporallye are more your friends, then they are aware of: They are but fyles
to polyshe and make you bright, they are but hammers to bring you to good
fashion, they are but rods of correction to keep you in due awe and
obedience to your heavenly Father. The only triumph and victory which the
fiende your mortal aduersarye seeks is, to make you cast away your souls
by grievous sin and damnable deuisyon from God his Church: and contrary-wise,
your constant perseverance shall be to his confusion and to your great honor and
renown. Be not moved with the multitude of those which fale thorough faynte
heart and lack of patience, but look to the commendable example of these
three young men whom I now speak of, and make answer as they did that your
God whom you worship can deliver you from this burning furnace, and from the
hands of al those that persecute and oppress you. And if he will not, yet make
it known unto al men that you will neither by word deed nor any kind of
outward semblance, allow or acknowledge any other religion then that which,
by the consent of al Christendom has been and is accounted Catholic. Dread
not the flames of penurye in this life, knowing that if you be cast into this
furnace, Christ himself will come and join in company with you, causing this
fervent flame of worldly want, to become like a fresh air or comfortable
dew, by spiritual comfort thorough his grace. The fire shall not hurt or grieve
you, it shall only burn your bonds and set you at lybertye from sundry
noisome cares of this world. Your persecutors are those who even now are
scorched with this flame being al-wayes needye, and desirous to have more,
possess they never so much. And the day will once come (I would for their
parts it might be otherwise) when you shall eat, and they shall be hungerye:
you shall drink and they shal-be thirstye, you shal-be glad, and they shall be
confounded: you shall praise God thorough exultation of heart: and they shall cry
for inward sorrow, Esaie. 65
and shall howl thorough contrition of spirit, I mean all this in the next
life: in hope whereof I desire you to continue steadfaste and firm in the way
of our Lord, and that you may the better persevere, I exhort you to commend
your selves to God by your own prayers and by the devotion of others which you
may purchase by your alms, now whiles you are able, releeuing those that be
al-readye in necessitye. And especially you may appease God his wrath by
having the blessed Sacryfice daily offered in your houses, for your own
states and for our whole country, also your chiefest armor against all
assaults shal-be the holy Sacraments for the admynistring where-of, and for
your spiritual comfort otherwise, yt shal-be necessary for you to retain and
to make much of those godly Priests with you, who be amongst you in daily
perril of their lives for your souls health. Which is the second thing
whereunto I mean to exhort you: In the mean time I desire you to take this
in good worth until God shall make me able to perform the rest.

And with-all I humblye and earnestly beseech the God of all grace, who has
called us unto his eternal glory in Christ Jesus, to perfyt you, having
suffered a little, to confyrme, and stablishe you. To him be all honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Your Honors and Worshipps humble servant in Christ. H. B.

FINIS.

