A DEFENSE of the Ecclesiastical Regiment in England, defaced by T. C. in his
Reply against D. VVhitgifte.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queens Majesty's
Injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Humfrey Toy. Anno. 1574.



A brief Table of the Contents of this Book.
THat sacrificing priests may be ministers of the Gospel. Page 11. Of
Apparel of Ministers. 25. Of Bishops titles, lands, etc. 51. Of an
Archbishop. 84. Of Bishops livings. 95. That Bishops may intermeddle in civil
causes. 110. Of Dispensations. 118. Of the Presbytery. 122. Of kneeling at the
Communion. 132. Of Holidays. 149. Of Mourning for the dead. 156. That
Ministers ought to bury the dead. 163. Of women's veyles. 166. Of
Interrogatories ministered to Infantes. 167. Of the sign of the Cross. 171. Of
Fasting. 173. Of Singing. 175.
The Defense of the Ecclesiastical Regiment.
IT was my hap not long sithence to light upon a slender Pamphlet entitled A
reply to an answer made by D. VVhitgifte. etc. which at the first blushe for
diverse causes brought me into expectation of some great and weighty causes,
whereof it behooved the whole body of the Realm to be informed. For who would
think that a man of M. Cartwrightes study and continuance, would encounter
with so strong an adversary: that a loyal subject as he ought to be, would
undermine a state so well established: or last of all, a man so well qualified
in all his doings as he would seem to be, use such bitter, vehement, and
intemperate speeches, as he has done, unless the truth were manifestly and
apparently on his side? But this hope of mine, was soon made frustrate, and
deceived: for both the first ingredience, discovered the secret poison, and
the misliking of al men in general (a few unadvised persons and of small
account excepted) condemned peremptoryli^ the intemperate, fond and
slanderous discouries of this unquiet and disguised Apostle. Yet still being
doubtful between so great resembla^ce, and so little truth, so fair a color
and so little beauty, which way to resolve my judgment, I held the steadiest
course to be both mistrust of mine own skill, and ielousi^ of common brutes
(which in these days rather incline to private factions than plain and simple
dealing) till by diligent examination and pondering of the arguments, I might
discern the difference. At length me thought I saw an evident and perfect
pattern of those counterfeyte and lying Prophets, which as Jeremy says,
falsely prophesied in the name of God without commandment, Ierem. 14
uttering nothing else but seductionem Ierem. 23.
cordis sui: the disceitfulnesse of their heart, which run before they be
sent, or have their errande delivered them. And last of all, Loquu^tur pacem
cu^ amico, and occulte ponu^t illi insidias: they speak peace with Ierem. 9.
their friend, and privily lay snares for him, which strive to make waste and
desolate the kingdom of our savior Christ by Math. 12. Math. 13.
deuidyng of the same, corrupt the grain by scatteryng fares: Whose unity is
division, and charity most bitter slander, and as the Prophet says,
Sapientes sunt Ierem. 4.
ad mala, bona autem facere nescierunt: they are wise to do evil, but they
know not how to do good. And ^rast these things may rather seem to be uttered
upon the spleen and ch^ler, than any st^dfaste and assured grounve, I appeal
to the platteforme of Master Cartwryghts Reply: from whence I durst undertake
to pick out Tullie his i^uectiues against Cateline and Uerres, if by any
casualtie or misaduenture they should happen to miscarrie.

First, the ministers themselves are called players, idcotes, and I know not
what beside: the Bishops jurisdiction must be quite displaced, and the Quaenes
Majesty deprived of her just supremacy, and that by the same arguments which
Sau^ders uses in his late infamous libell against her government: wise men
gather by this good beginning, what will be the end of their ungracious
enterprise, were they setteled once or fully established in free possession of
their liberty: where every man will be his own caruer without respect, and
leuel his doings by the president of no superior: where malice is the ground of
all devises, and religion brought in, only for pretense and color: where
generally new points of doctrine are devised, but no good example of life and
conversation practiced: where nothing is sought but liberty, in meat, drink,
obedience, and apparel: nothing tendered, but disorder, nothing furthered but
contempt and faction. What can we look for in the end, but ex terra vnius
lab^i and eorundem sermonum: of a land of one Gene. 11.
language and one speech, a co^fused Babell of judgment and understanding:
Supreme authority is the only brake which restrains such brainesicke co^tes
from their untamed affection: and therefore I blame them the less, though they
would shake off the bitte of due obedience, and wander without controlment.
The surest way to give the camisad^ lustily, is to entrappe the sentinel: and
greedy wolves, must first dispatch the shepeheardes dogs, before they can
possess their booty, and even as in skirmishe upon the seas, the top
gallant is stricken down before the ship be sunk: even so in the perilous
waves of this unstable world, they which only bend themselves to make
shipwreck of the Church of Christ, (to make sure work) strike down the
maste of all authority, from whence the Bishops, who in respect of their
vocation are most fitly termed watchmen in the Scripture, may discover a far
off the fleet of Satan our professed enemy, and either stryke sail for
fear of danger, or prepare themselves for a fierce encounter. It greeueth
the^ to see any skillful person at the helm, by whose good government the nose
of our English ship of policy is so kept against the storm, as both the
waves and byllowes of their rebellious atte^pts are broken, and no suddayne
pirrie can drive her upon the rocks of disobedience. How cunningly soever our
superintendentes frame the platte of their fresh attempt, (as every man
seeks the caste^ way to that which he most desires) yet if either the
Captain be retchlesse of his watch, or the Shepherd careless of his fold,
or the Pilote to secure in looking to his charge, he cannot be excused of great
oversight and folly, no more may they which suffer this cockle to spryng up
so rank with the purest corn to the destruction of the harvest.

Our Savior Christ termed Herod vulpem, a fox: but this is to mild a term
for these Apostles: for albeit a fox be counted a ravening beast, yet is the
malice of his nature somewhat corrected with this good property, that he
loves not to pray near home: where as these new reformers think their
poison best bestowed, when it is disparkled into every quarter and corner of
the Realm, that being conveyed by slander us livelles, as it were by veins
and arteries to the very heart, it might break out at last with more strong
and perilous infection: I rather may compare them with the viper, which
cannot come to light without gnawing and devouring the bowelles of her mother.
That policy of the Serpent which our Savior Christ so greatly prayseth and
Mat. 10.
commends in the Gospel, was so to cast and fold him self, as all the
body might be a shield and sauegarde for the head, whereas our people spredde
themselves at large to give more scope to any that has intent to hurt the
most principal parts. Better it were with the Bishops (whom most vniusily
they term sleapie watchmen) sometime to be idle, than ever evil occupied: and
rather can I allow of his looking on in the market, which for want of hyring
could not labor, than of homo inimi^us, the envious Mat. 10.
man, that was styring and very busy in the night to scatter tares amongst
Mat. 1^.
the corn. It is always the property of rauenyng beasts, (but neither of
Doves nor Lambs) to sever and disioyne the league of mutual society. But
seeing in collecting places of the Scripture they have no better skyll than
those children of the Prophettes had, which in stead of wholesome herbs
made pottage of Colliquintida, Reg. 4.
they must give men leave having tasted of the bitterness, to bestow this
Admonition upon the simple and unlearned, mors in olla: death is in the pot.
And if any notwithstanding for greediness will taste this dangerous repast,
before the bitterness be taken quite away, I cannot deem them other than
guilty of their own destruction. And whereas they do vaunt and boaste
themselves of trouble and persecution, as Praxeas the Heretic sometime did in
Tertullians time, de carceris Tertul. contra Prax. 1. Pet. 2.
taedio: of weariness of prison. We answer with S. Peter, that where the
punishment falls upon just offense, the merit is but slender. Neither is
there any comparison or lykelyhoode between the dealyng of the cruel steward
in the Math. 18.
Gospel, and our Magistrates in policy, sith the minister of the one was
rash and unadvised, the other is discrete and sober, the one exceeded the
bounds and limits of his commission, the other is warranted both by the law
of God and civil policy. The steward by his dealing brake charity, and our
governors by correction maynteine and preserve an unity: and to conclude,
whereas these fellow servants incurred no penal laws, these master ministers
will follow no common order. If any man be enforced to fly in the mild and
temperate government of our gracious Sovereign, it is by the terror of his
private conscience, not of any public laws. For as Solomon says very truly,
Impius fugit nemine persequente: The wicked Pro. ^8.
flies when none does persecute him. It is not enough to complain that they
are stricken a principe Sacerdotum, of the high Act. (...).
Priest, no more than thieves did of the civil magistrate, unless they prove
that they are stricken contra legem, contrary to the law. What the Jews said
falsely unto Christ, we answer truly unto the^: Non de bon^ opere lapidantur,
sed de blasphemia: John. 10.
They are not stoned for their good work, but for their blasphemy. This is no
more but corripere inquietos, to correct 1. Th^s. (...).
those that be unquiet, Equis fraenain^cere, to put the bit in the horses
mouth, Errantem ouem corripere, to chaste^ the sheep that goes James. 3.
Ezech. 34. Prou. 9.
astray: Dare sapienti occasionem vt sit sapientior. To give to the wise an
occasion that he may be more wise: Ad conuiuium co^pellere, to compel the^ to
come to the marriage. Wherefore ^uc. 14.
let such as carpe at civil constitutions, for reforming these disorders,
first remember, that verbis non emendabitur seruus durus: Prou. 29.
a stubborn servant will not be mended with words: And then ponder with
themselves, whether S. Paul account them sons, or bastards, which were
without correction. Hebr. 12.
Let them remember that Christ in the reclayming of S. Paul, first stroke, and
then taught, seeing as S. Augustine says, it is as well the part of a faithful
shepherd, Erra^tem ouem flagello reuocare, To fetch again August. ad
^inc^ntiu^.
with his whip the sheep that wandreth: as the policy of a thief,
auertendis pecoribus pabulu^ spargere, By spreading of meat to allure the
sheep from the shepefolde. Better are the strokes of a friend, than the kisses
of Pro. 27.
an enemy: and he that keeps him waking still, which being subject to the
Lethargy, is most desirous of sleep: or fettereth a frantike person, the
which would be working mischief, though to either he seem troublesome, yet
to both he may be counted profitable. Better it is with due severity to keep
vniiatem spiritus in vinculo pacis, Ephe. 4.
The unity of the spirit in the bond of peace: vnitatem mentis and
sententiae, the unity 1. Cor. (...). Act. 4. Iudic. ^0.
of mind and of opinion: Cor vnum and animam vnam, one heart and one mind:
Eandem mentem, idemque consilium, the same mind and counsel: and Exscindere
conturbantes, Gal. (...).
to cut of those that be troublesome: than with foolish lenity to suffer
pricking bra^bles to ouergrowe the vineyarde.

Sacrificing Priests may be Ministers of the Gospel.
Now will I enter into a brief discourse of some particulars, which chiefly
seem to bear the weighte and stresse of this division. And first of al least
the greatest part of our ministry in England may be deemed lame and
altogigither imperfect, for the space of more tha^ twenty year, it shall not
be unmeet to lay open the feeble principles of this senseless Paradoxe, that
none distayned or defiled with unlawful sacrifice, may be admitted to the
ministry. I would gladly understand by what authority these fellows
cleuing so precisely to the letter, can be content, and think it not unlawful
to admit an Idolatrous Priest upon hearty and unfeigned repentance, into that
kingly priesthood, whereof mention is made in S. Peter, and in S. John's
Keuelation, (...). Pet. 2. Apoc. 1. 5. 20.
excluding him from the outward function, which only depends upon the other
as chief and far more excellent. May a man become the child of God, and yet
what store of gifts soever be imparted to him, of necessity must be secluded
from his ministry? shall it not seem presumption in us mortal creatures, to
challenge a coinheritance with our Redeemer in his everlasting kingdom, and yet
be reckened so great impiety to serve him in this frail and temporal
vocation? Has Christ by renting of the veil in sunder given free scope and
made a passage even for the vilest Idolater that ever was, after regeneration
and repentance, into sancta sanctorum, into the holiest, and most covert and
secret places of the temple, debarring them notwithstanding from disposing of
his word and sacraments? But the Levites (say they) were so dealt withal in
the Law: whereunto I answer, that negandum est argumentum in Euangelio: this
argument holds not in the Gospel, both for many reasons fitly and truly
alleged in the Answer to the Admonition, and chiefly because amongst us the
merits of Christ's death and passion is a more sufficient purgation, and of
greater force and strength, than any Leuiticall washing or clensing from
uncleanness. I see not what can be intended by this new devised discipline,
but only restitution of the veil, and clogging men's consciences with such
Iewishe observation, from the which we are enfranchised already by the Gospel.
Surely these tra^sformations, or rather deformations, are so strange, as if
Ouide him self were now alive, he would for spite and rage deface and quite
blot out his ancient Metamorphosis. Though the ministry were refused while
the heart and mind was yet infected with corrupt religion, what makes this
for disproofe of those which are mortified with sincere devotion?

We are taught by the word of God to measure the outward action by the inward
affection, for as the scripture says, Bonus bomo de thesauro cordis sui
profert bona, Matthew. 13.
malus mala. etc A good man out of the treasure of his heart brings forth good
things: An evil man evil things. And ye heart ought always to be the rule and
squire of our perfection. Now seeing in evident and express terms, since the
offering of that sacrifice which has wrought more deep effects than ever
the law could do, it can not be auo^ched ye any Idolatrous priest was admitted,
or rejected from the ministry of the Gospel: because none stood ever yet so
well affected in the holy story of the new Testament to require it, charity
would require that whom it has pleased GOD to receive as members of his
mystical body, those we should not reiecte from dispensing of his mysteries.
For by how much the calling is greater and more honorable of haeres, than
seruus haereditari^s, of filius than minister, even so much is that benefit
to be reckened and accounted of greater value, whereby we are made coinheritors
with Christ, than ministers and dispensers of his word and sacraments.
Wherefore, if the greater be not prohibited, the less may be permitted: For
seeing all the faithful are branches, and Christ the root: we the members,
and he the head: we^ the officers, and he the governor: and las^e of all, we
the servant, and he the Ma^^er: they can allege no reason why admitting any
as members of the Church, we should reject them from that ^unction, wherein
with greatest benefit to the universal body, they may be employed.

If to avoid such as had bin Idolatrous, had bin a matter of so great
importance as you make it, I marvel that S. Paul in all Eit. 1.
his commission unto Titus for ye purpose has no special prouiso for such
men by name, considering the store of Idolatrous Priests which abounded in
Crete above al other places, being (as some write) the native soil of that
notorious Idol Jupiter. It is there thought sufficient, that whatsoever in
time paste the Ministers have been, they do now amplecti eum, Tit. (...).
qui secundum doctrinam est, fidelem sermonem, Hold fast the faithful word,
according to doctrine, without limitatio^ of their priesthood.

Again in the lively description of a Bishop unto Timothy, though the Apostle
1. Tim. 3.
take exception against many faults, which are sufficient to disable
Ministers: yet makes he no kind of mention of unlawful worshippers: which
makes me judge, that rather malice to the present state, than desire of
reformation has lately set abroche the lies of this new fangled doctrine. It
had been no slender oversight in ye Apostle to maime his division, by leaving
out one of the chiefest parts, or to give out that for a perfect pattern,
which must be perfited by later workmanship. S. Paul rather seems to
enquire what presently they are, than to listen what sometimes they were, and
more ready likewise to encourage them in their happy chance, than vpbrayde
them with their ancient folly: God has promised though our sins were as
red as scarlet, to make them as white as snow, whereas these follows put us
still in fear of some outward and apparent blemishe: and whereas Christ like a
true Samaritane, cured the wound of the afflicted trauayler, whom he sound
so greatly endamaged by our common enemy, these unskillful surgeons leave such
a scarre behind them by reason of their helpless salve, as almost we are as
good continue without their medicine. And thus to uphold these ruinous
articles, for a shifte they are forced to abate and qualify Gods mercy, and
pretending deadly fode with the Papists, endeavor by all means to fortify
their strongest bulwark, I mean deliverance a culpa, sed non a poena, from
the offense, but not from the punishment. If this with other like stuff, had
been well tried and examined before the publishing of their late infamous
libell, there would have appeared ^uster cause to suppress their own forgery,
than to charge the Answer with strengthening the adversaries hands, whereas
indirectly in mine opinion, they labor nothing more, than to prove what they
seem most willing and desirous to oppugn (as both in this, and in the
article of Supremacy may at large appear) like running bargemen which ever
look one way, and bend their force another.

If the Gospel were indifferently and without respect delivered to Jew and
Gentile, circumcision and uncircumcision, Isaac and Ismaell, if God be
indifferent unto both, and both are justified by one mean, I can not see why
as well the ^nfi^ell upon repentance, may not be admitted unto the ministry,
having i^^erm^dled with unlawful sacrifice (seeing Leuiticall scruples and
ceremonies (...) quite abolished) as the Jew which after abrogation of the law
has ^ealt with his ancient and legal ceremonies: for if any be in worse case
than other, Jews must needs come foremost, both for their ungrateful casting
off their promised Messiah: and because we read that what child soever
knows his fathers Luke 12.
will, and performs it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. S. Paul
equally Gal. 3.
compares and matcheth in all respects the converted Gentiles with the
converted Jews: and gives these none other privilege than the other.

Wherefore, seeing we are fully assured by many reasons, that God in Christ
has absolutely cle^sed and purged those by the m^rytes of his death, whom
he has called to the acknowledging of his name and con^^ssion of his truth:
seeing God is ^o accepter Act. 10.
of persons, but in a^ Nations embraces those which fear him, and work
righteousness: seeing it was revealed unto S. Peter, neminem communem aut
immundum dicere, To call no man common or unclean. And again, Omnia munda
mundis Tit. 1.
esse, all things be clean to those that are clean. Either must our new
instructors restrain this clensing and purgatio^ to the inward affection only,
without respect of the outward calling, or else they will run bankrupte
amongst the wyser sort, for want of credit. Rather might men be thankful to
God, when he makes of stones bread: of persecutors, Pastors: and publishes
his Gospel by the ministry of those which at the first were the greatest
ha^^rs and oppugners of the same, than either envy upon malice, or hinder by
ungodly practice, the going forward of present reformation. Stones can not
gather moss with continual rolling: neither may wisdom build her neste in a
mind vns^tled and always wavering. If these textes before alleged may be
thought rather to lean upon conjectures and probability, than grounded upon
certayntie. I would gladly be resolved by some Cartwrightian, whether Moses
were so greatly to be blamed in permitting Iethrothe Idolatrous Priest of
Madian, to offer victimas and holocausta Exodus 18.
Domino: sacrifices and offerings to the Lord or how it comes to pass that
Aaron not withstanding his Idolatry committed, was yet permitted to retain
his office, ad extremum vitae spiritum: even till Exodus 3^.
he dyed. I could allege the continuing of Peter in his office, after the
threefolde denial of his Master, cum fleuisset am^re, Mat. 26.
when he had wept bitterly, and by outward tears had declared the secret
remorse of conscience. The like may be said of Marcellinus, and sundry
other, Plati^.
who by terror of the time, and frayltie of nature, were enforced to renounce
the testimony of their conscience, and yet for all that restored upon
repentance to their former state and dignity. These places being, as in
deed they are more evident than that they may be shyfted off with
Sophistical interpretations, I find no ground sufficient to exclude such
persons from the ministry, as either have been seduced upon ignorance, or
faynted by infirmity. And thus much briefly concerning this article.

As for the peoples interest in choosing Ministers, because it has so plainly,
learnedly, and truly been opened in the Answer, as neither any thing may
conveniently be added, nor reasonable perseus can remain unsatisfied, I will
let it pass, speaking a word or two of this question, Whether it be lavvfull
for (...) man may o^fer himself to the ministry.
any man upon the inward motion of his conscience, and learned zeal, to
proffer himself into the ministry, which seems to be so greatly reprehended
by our Reformers.

And first of all (to grant as much as may be justly challenged) I will not
deny but whosoever laboring to be minister, rather gives ear, and listeneth
to that wicked Cormorant, crying: Soul thou Luke. 12.
have much good laid up in store for many years, eat, drink, and be merry,
than Christ our Savior sounding these sweet and comfortable words: Si quis
Mar. 8.
vult me sequi, deneget seipsum, tollat crucem suam. etc. If any man will
follow me, let him deny him self, take up his cross, and follow me, is
lyker to accompany Dives Epulo, the rich glu^ton, in eternal pain, than to
live with Lazarus in everlasting joy. No man with good conscience, can defend
that idle and slothefull steward, which rather for his ease, and Luke 16.
because he would not beg, than upon any good intent or purpose uprightly to
discharge the same, desired to keep his office, no more than we may justly
discommende their forwardness, which studing any gift of teaching or edifying
in them selves, are willing to employ it in the ministry, considering how
great the harvest is in comparison of the laborers. And first of all, we are
commanded Matthew. 7.
to knock, and it shall be opened unto us, not to stand gaping at the door
fill some other call us in: And they of whom it has pleased God to make his
choice, even at the eleventh hour, made proffer of their service, as may be
gathered by the Text, for being demanded the cause of their idleness, they
gave none other answer, than Nemo Mat. 10.
con^uxit nos, no man has hired us. Whereby their intent is evidently
discovered. If to present our salues before we be outwardly summoned and
elected, be a matter of such weight: why did not Christ rebuke the Scribe for
his rashs and unadvised profer, crying, Magister sequar te Matthew. 8.
quocunque ieris, Master I will follow thee whither thou go? And this kind
of calling S. Paul him self seems nothing to mislike in these words: Qui
Episcopatum 1. Tim. 3.
desiderat, bonum cpus desiderat: He that desires the office of a Bishop,
desires a good work. Which words employ a manifest promptness and readiness
with some petition in the party, rather commending the dignity of the office,
than disalowing the forwardness and zeal of the requirer. Many other textes
of Scripture to like effect might be alleged, if decision of this question
rather stood upon heaps of places, than force of arguments, or were sooner
ended by multitude of allegations, than certentie of matter. And thus much to
this article.

Of apparel of Ministers.
NOw omitting questions of pluralities, presentations, adu^sons, and such like,
which rather seem to make a noise upon the stage, than to serve to
edificatio^: Omitting also what may be said in defense of reading scripture in
the Church, as an article to plain to be called in question. I will now
bring somewhat for mainteyning and approving prescripte apparel among the
ministers: which can not better be a^ouched, than by disprouing all such
childishe cauillations, as are objected to the contrary, which already has
been sufficienth p^r^ourmed in the Answer, and this ^s Aesopicus: (Esopes
crow) so shaken (...) of his coulered and painted plumes, as he may have little
joy hereafter to vaunto himself in any open audience. And whereas some
allege that in respect of their abuse these garments should be abandoned: to
let pass Gedeons example, and the president Iudic. 8.
of Hierico, which cannot be better maynteyned Joshua, 6.
than by the weakness of the adversaries answer, in the one, inferring
greater necessity of flesh for furnishing the legal sacrifice than we have
of li^en in our service: in the other, making much a do about purgation by
fire, which serves no whit at all to the purpose, seeing hereby we may gather
that things abused by unlawful ministers may be retained in a lawful
ministry: yet here unto may be further added, Manasses in the very self same
temple from whence he had removed, Deos alienos, strange Gods, Instaurauit
altar Domini, prepared the altar of the 2. Par. 33.
Lord And Ezechias that wise and virtuous Prince, setting down a true and
perfect platform of godly reformation, rased not the walls, but cleansed ye
sanctuary, which 2. Par. 30. 31.
our savior seems directly to follow in the Gospel, when he rased or
defaced not the building, but drove out the Marcha^ts and ungodly people,
albeit he found it quite altered, a domo orationis in speluncam latronu^: John.
2. Math. 21.
from the house of prayer into a den of thieves. Receive we not daily profit
by such things as either at the first were devised by ye Panimes, or sithence
have been abused by pernicious heretiqu^s? I will not speak of Physic, which
as ancient writers testify being first invented by Aesculapius, was
afterward practiced by Esai. 38.
Esaie in the time of Ezechias his sickness, and now is honored by the
commandment Eccles. 38.
of the scripture: nor of ships first builded and framed by that idol
Pallas, and yet occupied and used by Jonas, Christ, and Paul the Apostle,
because perhaps our adversaries will grant that in such necessary things as
cannot be forborne without great inconvenience, and which rather appertain to
suffenance than discipline, we may use a greater liberty than in rites and
ceremonies belonging to religion: but then must they likewise answer, how it
comes to pass that Christ our Savior in the celebration of his supper made
special choice of bread and wine to represent his death and passion, sayng the
same elements were the wonted oblations which were exhibited to Ceres and the
dronken Bacchus of the Panimes. The Priests of Cybele (falsely surnamed Deorum
matter, the mother of the Gods) went in mantels during the time of their
ministration, so did Samuel, Elias and Eliseus. Ceres had a company of
widows addicted specially unto her service, the like in the beginning of the
Church was prescribed by the Apostles. Apollos service was celebrated in verse
and meter, the 1. T^^t. 5.
like did David sing at the funeral of Abner. 1. Sam. 3.
And M. Cartwrighte can be content to sing our Psalms in meter without offense
or grudge of conscience, without either warrant or commandment of scripture.
By these and such other like examples and presidents of antiquity we may
plainly gather that the Gentiles usage in things decent and comely, neither
was impediment to the ancient Fathers why they might not deal with the same
things in an other sort, after they had been profaned: or retain them, being
first invented by unfaithful authors. Of which mind it was not unlike that
Gregory was when he had sent Augustine into England to convert them from
their gentilitie, did write to Melitus, saying: Quod Ex Regstro ad Melitum
epist. 71.
diu me^um de causa Anglorum cogitans tractaui: videlicet quia phana Idolorum
destrui in eadem gente minime debeant, sed ipsa quae in eis sunt Idola
destruantur. etc. Quia siphana eadem been constructa sunt, necesse est vt a
cultu Demonum in obsequium very Dei debeant commodari, vt dum gens ipsa eodem
pbana sua non videt destrui, de cord er^orem deponet, and Deum veruns
cognoscens ac adorans, ad loca quae consueuit familiarius concurrat. etc. That
is. That upon deliberation I have determined that the Churches of the Idols in
that Nation ought not to be destroyed, but let the Idols in them be destroyed
and pulled down, for if those Churches be well builded, then they must be
changed from the service of Deuilles to the service of the true God, that the
people seeing their Churches not destroyed, may in their hearts leave their
error, and worshipping the true God may make their recourse to those places as
they were wont. etc. Otherwise because wine was ye cause why Tarquine defloured
Lu^rece: Alexander made away his derest friend: and Lot Genes. 1^.
committed that incestuouse folly with his daughters: S Paul might not license
Timothy to take a cup of wine for the 1. Tim. 5.
warming of his stomach. We may not use Physic, because Aha trusted so much
in the Phisicians that he never called for 3. Reg. 1.
the help of God, the true phisici^n both of body and soul. We must abandon
all civil laws and politic ^tutions because so many woes and curses are
denounced in the Gospel against the doctors and teachers of the law. And
last of all we may not lay the Scriptures open, because the i^ disposed reader,
as S. Peter (...). (...). 3.
says, oftentimes peruerteth them to his own destruction. And (as M.
Cartwright teaches) it is a surer way to remove a stone of offense and plain
the way, than to hyre (...) watchman to give warning to the passengers.

But they say forsooth they were the garments of Balamites etc. what then^ I am
sure they will not make the Papists worse than the Idolatrous Egiptians, and
yet were the children of Israel charged to spoil the^ of their ornaments, and
put them upon their wives and children. Exodus 12.
S. Paul was not so scrupulous as it seems, nor so precise, when be came
into the Idolatrous temple at Athens and Act. 17.
picked out of the very stones sufficient matter to confound the peoples
ignorance. He alleges heathenish Poctes in three Act. 17. 1. Cor. 5. Tit. 1.
lundry places in de^ense of Gods truth, which is, I am sure, as evil as
clothing a Christian minister in a popish vesture: for if a man may adorn the
spirit of God with such base and homely matter in comparison, much more may
we set forth ye person which is reputed of a great deal less account. And
last of all, the Apostle in his voyage toward Rome, was content to travail in
a ship consecrated (...). 28.
to the defes^able idol of Cas^or and Pollur. To this I could allege (if
allegories may go for payment) that these white garments Math. 17. Act. 1.
Math. 28. Apoc. 3.
have ofte^^r bin taken up by Angels, than worn by Balamites and popish
priests: or if their stomach be to dainty to di^gest these places, let them
peruse and (...) with themselves in what garment David was clothed with the
rest of his 1. Par, 15.
company that bare the Arc, and yet was this accoumpted no Heathenish
superstition,

But it is a sport to see, how with one petition of the principle these
fellows undermine the whole estate of civil policy, and Ecclesiastical
government: for (say they) forsooth they serve not to edification. Surely I
maruayle the less that cappes and surplices are burdened with this fault,
which so often is objected by M. Cartwright to the whole Clergy of the)
Realine. The case is hard, when every saucie jack, discoursing of divinity
upon his bench at home, dare presume upon his own bare word, to control both
Prince and state. A man may see by this that how greatly soever they seem to
repine and grudge at our Bishops pomp and seat in Parliament, yet surely were
they tolerated and borne withal a little longer, their consistory would
creep from corners to carpets, and their Segniorie ascend from several
parishes, to Westminster pallas, so great is their desire and longing for
perfect reformation. Wherefore this conclusion being nakedly and without proof
affirmed, may with like authority be rejected.

As for the show of evil, they have it no more than one bell which they allow
to ring to sermons, and yet that one, with one more was wo^t to knol to
mattens. They have it no more than wine in respect of dronkenesse: Churches
because they were the nestes and Celles of Imagerie: Civil laws and
constitutions in that they are derived from idolatrous and heathen Princes: and
yet did not Paul evil, either in aduising Timothy, to help the weakness
1. Tim. 5.
of his stomach with a cup of wine, or in chalenging the privilege of a
Citizen of Act. 22.
Rome, to avoid ye cruel whipping of his enemies. Wherefore to conclude, as
their reasons are to childish to require any answer, so their malice is so
peeuishe as it deserves correction.

As for their working discord, the case would quickly be determined, if
contentious and rebellious natures would submit themselves to quiet discipline.
Thus we may say revenues and possessions work discord and dissension, because
sometime unruly persons pretend a wrongful title against the lawful owner: and
yet would M. Cartwright unwillingly resign the interest of his own
enheritaunce, to purchase this unprofitable unity. If this reason be allowed
of them, call in the Bibels for sear of strife and quareling, suppress laws
and co^stitutions to avoid contention, and away with meat and drink for
fear of surfeting. This reason had been good to persuade poor Naboth to give
up his vineyarde, least quareling might arise between the king and him, and yet
I doubt not but this simple man would then have framed the self same answer,
which in the like case we presently allege, Propitius 1. Reg. 21.
sit nobis Dominus, ne demus baereditatem Patrum nostrorum vobis. God forbid
that we should now reject and quite abandon whatsoever has continued in our
house by many discents without just and lawful evidence. It cannot justly be
accounted discord, which proceeds rather of malice of the person, than the
unlawfulness of the thing. For as it is the property of a froward disposition
to spurn at the best and wisest kind of government, so may not godly Princes
seem ever a whit ye more discouraged from discharging of their duty: such
discord, is co^corde, and better nourished, than removed. If Justices would
resign their office because they are sometime hardly and leudly reported of by
vagabondes, neither should equity bear any sway in the common wealth, nor
laws be put in execution, in respect of causeless fear, nor any man within a
while be able to keep his private house for fear of open spoil and robbery.
If Cons^antine had suppressed as many co^stitutions as wrought discord among
the wicked, the Church of Christ had not yet come to his perfect age, but
groned in his state and cradle of infancy. There is small heed to be given
unto their words: for as in this place priestly garments are misliked
because they have the show of evil, so in an other place the cross of
Baptism is condemned, although it signify the co^bate which we must fight
with our ancient enemies the world, the flesh and the Devil, under ye
imperial ensign of our Savior Jesus Christ. Wherefore those that ca^ digest
no sober discipline, must needs be bridled: But above all others those gapers
after change and alterations with the loytering Athenians, which as Luke
reports, Ad Act. 17.
nibil aliud vacabant, nisi aut dicere aut audire aliquid noui, Gave themselves
to nothing else, but either to tell, or hear some news, in time must be
restrained. And until then, he were very simple in my conceit, that would
suspend his verdite upon their flitting and unstable faith, which waxes and
waneth with the moon, ye authors whereof seeming always desirous of
perfection, make wrecke of al good order, and as S. Austine says, labor for
nothing more, than non inuenire quod querant, not to find that they seek for.
Well, seeing it is manifest by this, that such apparel as has been mentioned
before, works discord in none, but those that will be ruled by no order: I
come now to the preaching of the gospel, which they say is hindered: but
howsoever this be affirmed in have, it will be proved at leisure. For were it
is so as they would ^ow pretend, we have the more to yield them thanks, that
having long abused the simplicity and credulity of the people to their own
confusion, frame an argument thereupon against the sober government and
direction of the state. Apparel cannot hinder the preaching of the gospel, but
their own contentious and rebellious wrestling with civil policy, would to
God themselves were but as well inclined to keeps vnitatem spiritus in vinculo
pacis, The unity Ephesians. 4.
of the spirit in the bond of peace, as they with whom they quarrel for
suppressing their schismatic and devilish faction. It was the presumption of
the Pharisees vaunting themselves of verbum domini and Hierem. 8.
lex domini nobiscum est, that bred dissension among the people, and not the
wholesome doctrine of our savior Christ who humbled himself to the most vile
and accursed death of all, for our redemption. For little hope is to be had of
the medicines working, where the pacient will observe no order: Even so must
our superintendentes eyes be settled by profitable and fruitful reading, and
their minds quite purged of canker and malicious speaking, before either they
can discern the outward beauty, or reap the hidden benefit of public laws
and discipline. Wherefore let them forbear a while to put toys in the peoples
heads, and no doubt but they will gently and quietly enough be guided and
persuaded by their pastors.

Keepyng the memory of Egypt still amongst us, makes no more for the taking
away of surplices, than taking down of Churches: nay in very deed not so
much,) since the one was but the ornament of the Priest, the other is the case
and shryne of the Idol. Wherefore, seeing the whole course of the Scripture
whereby this principle is alleged, Omnia munda mundis, Tit. 1.
overthrows quite the sandy foundation of this ruynous and untoward
buylding, I will let it pass, and briefly answer unto that which is
alleged for brynging the Ministers in contempt. I would to God it were now
holden in as great reputation, and reverenced as much, as when these things
were better thought of. The cause whereof though I ascribe not to the garment,
yet is it no impertinent reason to maintain, that both may stand together.
And touching the reason it self, (which in Logike, is termed Argumentum
common, because it may as well be brought against them, and a great deal^
better, than alleged by them) little is to be said more, than that it seems
to be pitied that so strong a cause as they would this should seem, ca^ find
no better patrones than such as by inte^perate zeal bewray the weakness of
their quarrel.

Men are brought by these strange opinions into such a maze of doubts and
Labyrinth of confusion, as scant any one amongst a thousand knows where to
settle his foot for fear of falling. The greater part I fear is poisoned and
infected with the rustie sect of Academites, suspe^ding all upon opinion and
probability, but almost holding and embracing nothing upon assured grounds
or approved certainty. And yet is this the very fruit and harvest of
ambitiouse strife for colored perfection. It is now reputed a great and
hayn^use crime to offend a silly artificer in his ignorance, and yet a
matter of no weight to offend both law and civil governor, appointed by
Gods ordinance. Their sight is sharper than either Lynx or Argus in other men's
dealings, but they themselves more blind than Betels in their own behavior.
A mote cannot escape their censure in their neighbors eye, and yet great
beams and rafters lie covered under their own. I maruayle what is become
lately of charity, Quae operit multitudinem peccatoru^: which Prou. 10.
covers the multitude of sins. Well, I can say no more, but God of his
mercy abridge their power, and contine we the shortness of their horns, or
else grant them greater measure of his grace: for even as day may be discryed
at a little creuise, so this we find by good experience, that whensoever the
time shall so much favor them, or the Prince smile upon the^, that being
principes Synagogae, the rulers of the Synagoge, they may lawfully cry out,
nos legem habemus, we have a law, the very John. 19.
n^^t^ittie and song may be, crucifige eum, crucify him. For my part, I make
but small account of the mildness of that beast, which neither biteth nor
scracheth when he lacks both teeth and nails, but rather say with blessed
Augustine to the Donatistes, Saeuire se nolle dicunt, ego non August. Epist. 49.
posse arbitror, they say they will not be cruel, but I think it is because
they can not.

Next comes in encouraging of the obstinate: a weapon surely not unlike to
be aforded by such rude and rustie cutlers. But pity it is that by grinding
out the nickes which it has already received at sundry frayes and skirmishes,
the edge is ground so thin, as hardly it can ward a fresh encounter without
cracking quite asunder. Now must M. Cartewright furnishe and prepare him
self to enter the field, not against D. Whitgifte, but Bishop Ridley, neither
shall he now be matched with a learned Minister, but a worthy Martyr, which
thought the continuing of these rites and ornaments in the Church, a most
perfect and ready way to agreement and conformity in religion Of the same
judgment was Cranmer, and the best learned of that company, which sealed with
their blood the testimony of their conscience. And though M. Hooper made the
matter somewhat dayntie at the first, yet in the end he disdayned not to
prefer other men's knowledge before his own opinion. If any man obiecte M.
Rogers, who by no means would be brought to this conformity, we must crave
pardon, dissenting from him in a point more precise than perfect, which I
trust the rather will be granted by M. Cartwright, for that himself can not
allow his judgment in a matter of great importance, I mean in placing ever
every ten parishes a superintendent, sith every Minister must now become
both Metropolitan, Pope, and parish Priest, within his own jurisdiction.
But to let examples pass, for covering of this notorious untruth, I could
first allege our own experience, as the surest ground to prove that men are
sooner led to like of such a thing as carries still some outward show and
appearance of their old opinion, than where there is no resemblance nor
continuance at all. Then might I press them with examples of former times,
and presidentes of the best called and governed states, who thought it very
dangerous to make any change or innovation in causes politic, much less in
matters of religion, which have a deeper root and ground in conscience,
without some show or shaddowe of the ancient gouernmente, although the very
substance thereof were quite and clean abolished. So played the Romans in
prescribing twelve Sergeantes, at corners to give attendaunce upon the Consuls,
after that the Kings were quite displaced, because so many were wont to wait
upon them while they lived in chiefest authority. Again, because the
sacrifice could not be solemnized without the presence and assystaunce of
the Prince, whose gouernmente was quyte suppressed: there was order taken, that
for the time one should be appointed to supplye the rowme, and bear the name
of King, ordained for the sacrifice, least any thing might quayle the peoples
devotion, or offend their conscience. Neither was this policy devised
without great consideration, seeing the common sort being rather guyded by
their outward sense, than governed by understanding, imagine the later state to
be equal with the first, when the eye can discern no difference: and thereby
are the better content to live in awe and due subjection. Such simple souls
are as well fed with seeing, as hearing, so much the better, as nature has
more sufficiently enhabled them by outward sense to discern the one, than
knowledge, skill, or experience to judge of the other. But seeing nothing will
content them, but the very Canon of the Scripture, mark whether the same
course were not observed by the kings of Israel and Judah, which may be
gathered by the Romans history. And first we read that David ware the crown
of the king of Rabbath, after his famous 2. Sam. 12 2. Chro. 17
victory. Iehosaphat received gifts of the Philistians, as his ancestors had
done before him. And even as the Gentiles sanctified them selves after any
pollution, so did the children of Israel after their 2. Chro. 29
transgression. Christ never reproves the Pharisees apparel in the Gospel,
but their hypocrisy, leven, and corruption: and surely by the way I marvel
with what conscience they can strain so much at the Papists tippet, and wear
a long gown, which was the garment both of a Papist and a Pharisie, expressed
in the Math. 2 3.
Gospel. Did not S. Paul retain a certain shadow and resemblance of the
ancient discipline, when he derived his vayling of women from the Jews (as
Tertullian proves against Marcion) circumcided Timothy, purified him self in
Act. 16. Act. 21. Act. 18.
the temple after the Iewishe manner, shaued him self, with protestation that
being free, yet had made himself, Omnium seruum vt plures lucrifaceret. etc.
Servant unto all, that he might win more: unto the Jews 2. Cor. (...).
he became as a Jew. etc. Belike they would be very loathe, to come thus far
on, marching foot by foot with Paul, that so precisely stand on trifles of
very small account.

Now to prove a prescript kind of apparel used among the ministers, different
from the common sort, I will allege the self same place which by them has
most corruptly been abused, to the contrary. 1. Sam. 28. for after the
wicked sorceresse had descried to Saul the coniured spirit under the
likeness and resemblance of Samuel, he presently demanded the form and
manner of his going, and being answered that he seemed an old man clothed in a
mantell, presently the King affirmed that of certaynetie it was Samuel,
grounding him self as it seems, upon the wearing of his mantell, wherein
Samuel differed from the common sort, while he was yet alive: for otherwise
neither his hoare hears, nor Mantell, if it had been common with ten
thousand other, could have moved the King so resolutely to persuade him
self, that doubtless it was Samuel. For other questions of his favor,
lineamentes, or stature, were not in that place demanded. For confirmation of
this probable conjecture, may be alleged, that not only Elias ware a mantell
himself in execution of his office, but cast the same upon Elizeus, when he
admitted him to the function and dignity of a Prophet, saying: Quod meum erat
1. Reg. 19.
feci tibi, I have done unto thee that which apperteyned unto me: as a man
would say: I have bestowed upon you the outward sign of your election and
approbation before God. With which mantell 2. Reg. 2.
the waters were afterward divided. Whereby it appears plainly, that a
Mantell was the special and peculiar vesture of a Prophet. Our Savior Christ
being a president for all true and well disposed ministers, ware vestem
inconsutilem, a garmente without Ioh. 19.
seame: and yet can I read of never an Artificer gooing in the same liuerie.
We read that John was apparelled with Mar. 1.
Cammels hear, and that a gyrdle of leather was about his loins. And least
they should escape with his extraordinary calling (which is Master
Cartwrightes chiefest ^^eyghte, and last refuge in his late Replye) I cann^
prove a more common use of this garmente, in some which boasted not of any
extraordinary vocation: and such were those godly men which walked up and
down in mantles and goats skins, whom S. Paul condemns not of ignorance
and superstition, but affirms Hebr. 11.
the world to be utterly unworthy of their virtue. Thus may truth be shadowed
for a while, but never quite extinguished with colorable dealing: wherefore in
mine opinion I think a prescript kind of garment is no more repugnant to the
word of God, being used by the Ministers, than the Robes of Parliament,
Collar, and Garter, with such like among the Nobility, tha^ Lawyers hoodes,
or Doctors habites, which being as well signa praedicantis, the tokens of a
Preacher, as the surples, M. Cartwright himself has been content to wear in
no closer place than S. Mary's Church in Cambridge, and in no lesser company
than the whole University. But nothing strives against Gods word that serves
our adversaries turn, though all the Papists in Europe wear it, and though it
be as well, or rather a sign of their doctrine, than the surples of their
ministry. But for a conclusion, to make short work, I would gladly
understand, whether of them selves such things be indifferent, or not: if
they grant them indifferent, both the Prince may lawfully command them, and
by this commandment proceeding from Gods Lieuetenant general, ministers are
enforced to wear them, the Princes Iniunction quite removing the
indifferency, and restrayning the liberty of the thing, and byndyng the
conscience of him which of pretensed malice breaks it, for this is, to give
unto Caesar Math. 22. Romans 13.
the things that are Cesars and to be subject not only for fear, but for
conscience. For whatsoever the Magistrate be, representing Gods authority, to
resist him is to resist Gods ordinance, and hasten Gods heavy judgment: and
therefore did our savior Christ submit himself to Pilates wicked and
unconscionable dealing, because Ioh. 19.
his power and commission came not from man, but God. But if they be not
indifferent, I grant S. Peter's affirmation, that magis Act. 4.
parendum est deo quam hominibus, it is better to obey God than man, appealing
to these Precisians answer, before the high Commisioners at Lambeth. 1571.
for disprofe of this assertion, where they were content to grant indiffere^cy
in these things, and yet restrained the Prince from commanding them. I could
likewise set all the Germans in a rank against such frivolous and wrangling
Pastors, declaring both in their public works, and their private letters, a
contrary judgment. For both Peter Martyr having at large declared the nature
of indifferent things, concludes in these words: Parendu^ Mart. in. 1. Reg.
18.
est igitur Magistratu^ in adiaphoris qua^uis dura interdum and grauia
videntur, we must obey the Magistrate in indifferent matters, although they
seem sometime to be hard and burdenous. And Luther, Bucer, and all the rest,
maintain the same opinion. Wherefore leaving out the opinions of our ancient
fathers in this article of prescripte apparel, because they are reputed as
suspected witnesses, and withal omitting Caluines judgment touching the
antiquity Insti. lib. 4. cap. 5.
of the same, I will here conclude, desiring God to grant our precise
Apostles greater store and plenty of his grace, and pour into the^ either
less ability to ^urt, or better will to benefit ye church of Christ.

Here is good occasion offered to deal in the defense of her Majesty's
supremacy, but seeing the Bishop of Sarisburie his arguments against D.
Harding may serve as fitly for impugning of these asser tions, I think no
more can be well said, tha^ is already printed. And therefore leave to your
learned consideratio^s yt which can not be repeted without some tediousness.

Of Bishops titles, lands. etc.
NOw follows the controversy of Bishops titles, lands and temporalties, in
ripping up whereof, I will as briefly as I can devise, declare my simple
judgment. And first of all concerning equality among ministers, no man will
deny but the same authority is committed to them all in binding, ^o sing,
preaching, or ministering of the sacraments, and yet does this equality in
ministration nothing hinder a diversity in government. For to use our savior
Christ's example, which them selves have cited for their purpose. Nolite vocari
Rabbi, vnus enim est magister vester, vos Mat. 23.
autem omnes fratres estis, Be not called Rabbi, for one is your master, and
you are all brethren: who knows not that even among brethren, though all of
them spring of one root, and a certain equality be observed in nature, yet
one is called to a higher place than all the rest, for mayntenance of the house
and family. Esau and Jacob being both descended of the self^ame parents, were
equal in nobility, and yet when they met together, Jacob forgot not so great
reverence to his eldest brother, but that he Genesis 33.
worshipped him groueling seven times, in private conference was not ashamed to
call him Dominu^, Lord. And so fares it in the church of Christ, wherein
though al ^e brethren in respect of one heavenly father, yet all can not be
equal for preserving of Christian unity. As for Principes gentiu^ dominantur,
no^ erit sic inter vos, The kings of the Mat. 20. Luke 22. Mar. 10.
Gentiles reign over them, but it shall not be so among you. He that notes
that (sic, so) will find a difference rather to be put between both
jurisdictions, than one of the^ to be quite displaced. He is blind that sees
not ambition rather to be suppressed, than equality inferred, as some of the
soundest writers do interpret. The practice of this precepte they may find
most lively set forth, whereas our savior Christ conveyed John. 6.
him self quite out of the way, when the blockishe people would needs have
promoted and advanced him to temporal government. But when either any question
is referred to his decision, or occasion offered to exercise his spiritural
jurisdiction, mark whether at any time he abase himself to the most inferior
ministers: Rather may we prove a kind of primacie among the Ministers by the
words following, Qui mayor est in vobis, fiat Luke 22.
sicut junior: and qui princeps est, sicut qui ministrat, Let the greatest
among you be as the least: and the chiefest as he that serves, than disprove
it by the sentence going before. And this precept of humility seems but a
limitation to their due authority. The vehemency of the words expressing the
commandment, is no lawful bar to the jurisdiction of a Minister, as may
appear by conference of textes together. For although our savior utterly
beat down the titles of ambition, and unlawful rule in his Apostles by these
words, Nolite vocari Rabbi, Be not ye called Rabbi: yet meant he not to exclude
any reasonable Math. 23.
pre-eminence, as may appear by these words: Vocatis me magistrum and
dominum, and been dicitis, sum enim, you call m^ John. 13.
Lord and master, and you say well, for so I am. In which place he may seem
according to the letter to challenge what he had forbidden in his Apostles. But
if you understand in very deed the pomp and pride of earthly Princes in the
one, and reverent usage and interteinement of a Minister in the other, he has
challenged no further prerogative unto him self, tha^ he has left unto his
ministers. For in like (...) says, The son of man came not to b^ ministered
unto, but to minister and vet if (...). (...).
i^ this place we understand the ministry ^porall things for preservation and
su^ of this (...), the contrary appea^: S^ quis ministrat mihi, me sequatur, if
any man minister unto me, let him follow me, etc. Even so this one word
dominari, to bear rule, makes the sense more plain and evident, and sets
forth unto us, that our savior meant not to remove al kind of dignity and
pre-eminence from his Apostles, but rather charged the^, non sic vt principes
gentium dominari, not to bear rule so as the Lords of the Gentiles do, that
is, with pomp, disdain, and loftynesse. And if these words should simply and
without any limitation be interpreted, there were no difference to be made in
dignity between the Apostles and the seventy disciples, unless they ca^
allege some good authority, whereby it may appear that in using these words,
vos aute^ fratres estis, for you are brethren, Christ only co^prehe^ded the 12.
omitting the great number: which by scripture will be very hard to do in mine
opinion. But put the case equality were approved and allowed among the
Apostles, seeing that all they were chosen after one manner, by one person, and
to one vocation extraordinary, seeing they were all so plentifully and
abundantly inspired with the holy Ghost, as it was not possible for them
being so well guyded to break into immoderate heates and passions pernicious
to the Gospel, and therefore division being less feared, equality might be
better abidden. What makes this, I say, for equality amongst our Clergy,
where faction has excluded concord, and ambition rather strives for credit
by followers, than charity seeks truth by humbleness? All tyniber can not
be squared by one rule, nor all estates directed by one kind of policy. Our
Ministers, I grant, succeed them in place, but not in office: and therefore
even as in the Apostles time the degrees of Deacons and Ministers were
distinct in honor without offense of any godly conscience, or contradiction
to the Scripture: so in our time the Church of Christ having grown to riper
state and greater number, requires other order and direction. What greater
folly can appear, than to prescribe ye same rules to a General in co^ducting
of an Army which every captain is bound to observe in trayning of his hand,
or to grant as large scope in government to the Constable of Newington, as to
the Mayor of London? I think S. Luke understood the Scriptures as well as we,
and yet in reporting that Barsabas and Sylas were viri primi inter fratres,
Act. 15.
chief men among the brethren: he notes no presumption in them for
challenging unjust authority, inequality of honor, or transgressing the
words of Christ our Savior, Qui voluerit inter vos primusesse. etc. who so
will be chief amongst you. If they say this primacie mentioned in the Acts,
was understood of virtue and forwardness in religion, I answer with the
Lawyers phrase, hoc est diuinare, this is but gessing, since it is not like that
in zeal they could so far exceed the rest of the Apostles which both lived
and continued with them. And thus much briefly by the way to the contrary
opposition, for the maintenance of the contrary thus will I reason. The degree
of Priests was not equal in the law, Ergo, it ought not to be equal in the
Gospel: the antecedent may be proved by sundry textes of Scripture, first where
Aaron the high priest was consecrated. Exodus 29.
Again where charge was given by the king to Helchias the high priest, 2.
Reg. 23.
and sacerdotibus secundi ordinis, and to the priests of the second order.
Here unto we may add, where one priest as chief and principal sits in
judgment and decision Deuteronomy. 17.
of causes: where the captain of the soldiers took Seraiam sacerdotem
summum, Sheriah Hierem. 52
the high priest, and Sophoniam sacerdotem secundum, and Sophoniam the second
priest in degree. The like appears Hier. 51. and in sundry other places. For
whereas mention is made of Abiathar, Achimilech and Sadoch. 2. Sam. 8. Peter
Martyrs judgment is that only Abiathar was the high 2. Sam. 8.
priest as in deed he was, and the other two were but Chaplaynes, as we term
the^. The argument is proved by a Topicke place of their own. For if it be
lawful for them to teach us ab authoritate negative, there were no
Metropolitanes among the Jews being Gods chosen people, Ergo there ought to be
none among the Christians, it shall be much more lawful for us affirmatively
to reason thus: There was a difference among the legal priests in honor,
Ergo, there ought to be the like among the Christians. But here me thinks I
hear a muttering, that for as much as the high Priest in the law bare a
figure of our savior Christ, which vanished at his coming, the like
pre-eminence cannot be continued in our Christian Clergy. No man doubts I
suppose, but the legal priesthood being a shadow of the truth, vanished at
the passion and eternal sacrifice of our Melchisedech, which was offered once
for all. But that the high Priest was more a figure than the meaner Priests
discharging the same duty, though for honors sake he be after named, or that
the Priest were counted as a figure partly in respect of dignity, and not
only for his office, is more than ever the adversary shall be able to
maintain. I know S. Paul to the Hebrews compares the sacrifice upon Hebr.
7. 9. 10.
the Cross made for our redemption, with the high Priests oblation among
the Jews, and rather matcheth Christ with the high priest than the other, for
the more honorable comparison, and by reason of mutual prehemine^ce, than
because the other using the same sacrifice which he did, bare not as well the
figure of Christ as he: wherefore as they will have no high minister because
the high priest represented Christ in figure, so may we in like sort reject
the meaner ministers, because the inferior Priests were likewise figures of
our Savior Christ and of his office. And as strong is the argument of the one
side, as of the other. But if we should grant them that the high Priest only
were a figure of Christ to come, and therefore the office being now decayed the
degree must like wise perish: yet seeing the ministers of Christ represent him
now paste (unless our savior being glorified have lost some of his glory) I
know not why his ministers may not shine in as perfect glory, and so much
greater as truth exceeds shadows. Wherefore either must they now deny that
ministers are the deputies of our savior Christ (which were to great
absurdity) or else allege some reason why the nearer ye truth they draw, the
further they should be from dignity. For even as observing of the paschall
lamb was a figure of our Savior Christ and quite abolished by the oblation
of the Cross, notwithstanding the same matter be yet kept in memory by an
other figure, which is the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood: Even so,
albeit the legal priesthood be now abolished and quite displaced, yet why the
same pre-eminence may not yet remain in remembrance of the high priest
glorified which was kept in figure of the high priest not yet incarnate, no
reason has been yet alleged. Sure I am that the same proportion that is
between the one figure and the other, is between one minister and another.
Wherefore by good reason ought he which represents that which Christ has
done, be of as great account, as he which figured that which Christ should
do: and so much more as our benefit is greater. And to prove that of
necessity the honor is not linked or annexed to the office, I can prove that
S. Paul acknowledged a reverence to the person after Christ's death had
spoiled him of his office, repenting as it were his hastiness to the Priest,
and alleging out of Exodus. Principi populi tui non maledices, Exodus 22.
(...). 23.
Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people, in defense of his
authority. We read in Luke that every one which Luke. 19.
could employ his talent to the greatest profit, was called to chief
preferment, wherefore he that with one tallent had gained ten, was preferred
to as many Cities: and he that yielded five was rewarded by the same
proportion. Whereby we find equality of government not to be so necessary in
the Church, but upon good consideration and worthiness of the ministers it may
be enlarged. Again seeing the Church militant (as far as weakness and
infirmity of nature will give her leave) ought to imitate and resemble the
policy of the Church triumphant, where diversity of degrees may well be
proved as Angeli, Archangeli, Throni, dominationes, 1. These. 4. Col. 1.
principatus, potestates, Angels, Archangels, Thrones, dominions,
principalities, powers: We may conclude that in the Church militant the like
may be observed. If Saint Paul thought it no presumption to call the Church
the body of Christ. I dare be bold to say Ephesians. 4.
that in every natural body one member does exceed an other in dignity and
honor, and in direction of the whole, according to the strength and ability
are fitly and conveniently preferred. To prove that every man should be put in
trust according to his skill and ability, no playner text can be alleged
than Math. 25. where the provident and discrete householder Math. 2^.
gave to one five talentes, to an other two, secundum propriam virtutem,
according to every man's abylitie: but that one man in gifts does excel an
other, appears first, by the words of Paul, where be plainly affirms,
Maiorem esse 1. Cor. 14.
eum qui prophetat quam qui loquitur linguis: That he is greater that
prophesies than he that speaks with tongues. Ergo pre-eminence amongst the
Ministers of the Church is not only lawful, but expedient and profitable. No
Realm can well be governed where one has not authority above the rest.
Neither can any private house be well directed, where the meaner sort stand not
in awe of some special officer. Wherefore since the Church is oftentimes
compared by Parables to these earthly kingdoms, and S. Paul is not ashamed to
resemble it after a sort 1. Tim. 3.
with the government of a private house, enhabling a bishop to the one by his
providence and forecaste in the other, I see not why that which is profitable
in the one concerning discipline, may not likewise be well thought of in the
other for edification. That this pre-eminence is not lately devised or new
begone as some would bear the world in hand, may soon appear by these
words of the Apostle, Spiritus Prophetarum prophetis subiecti sunt, non enim
confusionis est deus sed pacis. The 1. Cor. 14.
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, for God is not the God
of confusion but of peace. Whereupon I gather that if the spirit of the
Prophets being lightened by the virtue of the holy ghost, were not free from
check of other Prophets, upon whom it had pleased almighty God to bestow his
gifts of judgment, knowledge, and learning: much more ought we to allow the
grauest and learned sort a dignity and pre-eminence in worldly things,
which ought to be reputed of less account and estimation, and by the way the
reason following is not to be neglected, for after he has set an order in
directing the congregation, attributing the determination of the matter and
approuement of the Prophets spirit to the ^^anders by, he straight adioyneth,
Non enim Deus est confusionis, God is not the God of confusion, as who should
say, if so ne were not appointed to decide such doubts as might arise either
upon ignorance or malice, all would go to wrecke in haste, and Christian
edification be converted into mortal hatred. Then would the froste of private
quarrel either sterue the buddes of the gospel, or the rage of spiritual
ambition disturb the policy of every congregation. But some man will say
perhaps, that Christ our savior made all his disciples equal in authority, I
grant he did so, but yet for order sake it may be answered, that one above the
rest had some pre-eminence, which Peter Martyr, very fitly terms Primatum
ordinis, non potestatis: Primacie of order, not of power. For to let pass
those favorable words so often bestowed more upon one than all the rest, and
the manner of his government quite thorough the Acts (which proves as much as
I affirm) we know that albeit Christ said to all his disciples in general,
Vobis datum est nosse mysteria regni Math. 13.
Coelorum, unto you it is given to know the Secrets of the kingdom of
heaven, yet when he was transfigured in the Mount he had only with him, Peter,
James, Math. 17.
and John, when he cured the daughter of Iairus-one of the Princes of the
Synagogue, he took no man with him, save Mark. 5.
Peter, James and John. And being in the greatest agony of all, when he went
to pray before the sufferyng of his Passion, he made his special choice of
Peter, Math. 26.
James and John, to assi^^e him to the very last. By this it is very clear,
that words sometimes generally spoken must yet be limited according to the
circumstaunce and proceeding of the matter. For Saint Paul mentionyng by name
long after, those Apostles, Qui Gal. 22
videbantur esse columnae, which seemed the pillars, expresses none save
Peter, James and John: Lay these places close together and weygh them in the
ballaunce of indifferent judgment, and I doubt not but the equality among
the Apostles will not appear so great as some are now persuaded. Here unto
add Saint Paul's words, Mihi qui videbantur esse Gal. 2.
aliquid, nihil co^tulerunt, etc. They that are the chief, did communicate
nothing with me, etc. And again: Nihil minus feci ab his 2. Cor. 11.
qui supra modum sunt Apostoli, I suppose I was not inferior to the chief
Apostles. And in the same Chapter: Ministri Christi sunt, plus ego: they are
the Mynisters of Christ: I am more. And again, Nihil minus feci a magnis
Apostolis, I was not inferior to the very chief Apostles. If, Qui Gal. 2.
videbantur esse aliquid, they which seemed to be great, Columnae, pillars,
Magni Apostoli, Apostoli 2. Cor. 11.
supra modum, chief of the Apostles: be no significations of superiority, for
mine own part I grant mine ignorance and infancy in the Scripture. He
thought it neither an article of Papistrie, nor a breach of Gods
commandment, to challenge some pre-eminence above the rest, when he blusheth
not to say, Si amplius 2. Cor. 10.
aliquid gloriabor de potestate quam dedit mihi dominus in edificationem, non
destructionem vestram, non erubescam: If I shall somewhat more boast of the
power that the Lord has given unto me, to edify, not to destroy you, I need
not to be ashamed. We read that Barsabas and Sylas are reckened by Luke by no
worse style than viri primi Act. 15.
inter fratres, chief men among the brethren, without any spark of emulation
among the Brethren. They were neither called Linsey wolsey Bishops, nor Popes
of Lambeth, as some have been of late, challengyng no more unto themselves,
than primatum inter fratres, the chief authority among the brethren, which
may be justified by sound authority. Last of all I will conclude with. 1.
Timoth. 5. where 2. Tim. 5.
Saint Paul allows double honor to those that govern well, which word
Double presupposing Single (as no comparatiue can stand without a positive) I
see not how the difference in degree can be avoided by any slight or
policy. This made Calvin so often and with so constant affirmations to resolve
that without this pre-eminence among the Clergy, it was not possible by any
mean for the Church of Christ to stand. And first of all writing upon these
words, Sicut Patri filius, Timotheus mihi Calvin in 2. Philip.
seruiuit in Euangelio, Timothy did service unto me in the Gospel, as a son
unto his Father. We learn by this place (says he) that no such equality
was among the Ministers, but one did govern and rule the rest by his
authority and counsel. The same writer upon the first of the Acts,
grants that one of necessity must be preferred before the rest in every
congregation. The like he has upon. 1. Tit. and Philip. 1. and upon the. 2. Corinthians. 10. we find this ^latte conclusion: Quamuis Calvin in 2. Cor. 10.
commune sit omnibus Ministris idemque officium, sunt tamen honoris gradus:
Although one and the same office be common to all mynisters, yet be there
degrees of honor. Thus one of their chiefest and surest friends begins
now to faynte at the very pinche, and was content not only to publishe with
his pen, but practice by example even till his death, the same authority in
effect, which these fellows now impugn in England, because it greatly
sounds to the abasing of their credit. Wherefore if Master Cartwright
allow as well of M. Caluines judgment, as to the world he would pretend,
he must of necessity be enforced to allow us one Bishop in every City,
shifte afterward as well as we may for laying out a Dioces. And yet if any man
will read his Institutions Lib. 4. Calu. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Cap. 4. he need not to travail far to find a reason, sith Calvin is
content to grant that from the Apostles time, Vnicuique ciuitati regio certa
fuit attributa, Of Bishops Diocesses.
quae Presbyteros inde-sumeret, and quasi corpori illius ciuitatis
accenseretur. To every City there was a certain compass appointed which
should take ministers from thence, and be as it were incorporated to that
City. And this in mine opinion is as large a Dioces as any Bishop does at
this day challenge.

Yet by the way needs must I wounder at this peeuishe or rather childishe
spite, dryuyng us to prove that Dioceses were governed by Bishops in the
Apostles time, when not only whole shyres but scante one City was generally
saythfull. For what though the Gospel were spredde in many provinces, yet was
it not universally received any where, nor set forth by law or published
with full authority, by their dealyng in this one Article, their cunnyng is
most clearly discovered, and all men made witness by the manner of their
proceedyng, that truth is rather fled, than sought: and their only purpose
seems nothing else but for want of proof by difference of time and state, to
pin the Bishops in such narrow streyghtes as in the end they should be
driven to silence. For where as we have left in Scripture none other
president whereunto we should conform our policy and discipline, than the
Apostles doings, if at any time we urge them with their authority, either in
gouerayng many provinces (as Paul did Macedonta, Phentcia, Crete, and diverse
other) or many controversy, then straight they fly to the old exception of
extraordinary callings: and so by consequent cutting off the Apostles Acts,
or at least so mayming them with cauillations, as they can stand no reader in
stead, they leave no scope for any man in mayntenaunce of true Religion. They
deal more haroly with us than ever Festus did with Paul: for after he had
appealed to Caesar, he was referred to Kome Act. 25.
for tr^all of his cause, whereas our unfriendly Brethren enforce us to the
letter, and yet refuse the letter by Sophistical interpretation, faryng none
otherwise than if they should ^id^e us strike, and yet hold our hands for
frare of afterclappes. And whereas they can brook in no respect the direction
of a Dioces, because no mention is made of any such by Christ our savior, I
can likewise say, that seeing Christ our savior before his departure hence,
took special order for no calling, but only of the Apostles, nor in any of
the four Evangelists mention is made of any minister tied to a certain
congregation, but left at large to choose a place wherein to sound the
gladsome tidings, as appears by the last commission. Math. 28. Therefore every
congregation Math. 28 Mar. 16.
may not have their minister. But some man will allege that touching this
point order was after taken by the Apostles. I grant there was, and so
likewise there would have been for government of Dioceses, if the Apostles
traueil had been blessed with so great increase in their own time, as that
Provinces as fast as Parishes would have embraced sincere religion. For seeing
that to Peter was committed the Church of all the Jews, as Paul had special
care and oversight of all the Gentiles. I can not Gal. 2.
think that these Apostles would have indged the government and direction of
a shire or two, to be a matter of so great importance, but that by Gods
assistance the viligence of a diligent and watchefull pastor might easily
overcome it. In deed if any man will undertake to be the only preacher in a
shire, or vniuersus Episcopus, universal Bishop in a Province, as John the
Ambitious prelate of Constantinople would have been in Gregory's time, there
were good reason to abate so dangerous a tyranny: but seeing every parish is
now furnished of an able and sufficient pastor, and Bishops only keep the
place of Moses, to whom the inferior Magistrates referred the causes of
greatest weighte, as the Scripture says, Leuiora tantu^modo iudicantes,
judging only Exodus 18.
small matters. I neither see any reason of abridging their authority, nor
spoiling the Church of so necessary and profitable instruments. To challenge
this preregatiue is not (as same devise) to strive for Monarchies, but to
maynteyne that regimente and policy which ever has been reckened of
greatest value, and most long continuance. We know that every famous City had
a territory annexed unto it, as a branch and member of the common wealth,
which as well in spiritual causes must be ruled by the Bishop of that Sea, as
in civil affairs, guided by the civil Magistrate. For let our discoursing
Preachers quarrel as long as they list, and with as good right as sometime the
Phariseys did boast and vaunt them selves of verbum Domini, the word of the
Lord, yet never shall it be thought expediente for any state to exempte the
smaller Uillages from the jurisdiction of the greatest Cities. For mine own
part (as one desirous to be taught) feign would I hear some reason
alleged, why Timothy being Bishop at Ephesus (as no doubt he was) had not
as well the ouersighte of the Province belonging to the city, as the city it
self, or if any man will be so malicious as to quarrel with so plain a
president, and allow himself for his part no more, because no more is
mentioned, I would gladly hear what could be said to Titus, that had
committed to his charge not one City as Ephesus, but one whole Island, as
England is, and that in as large and ample manner as can be devised. If S.
Paul had mentioned any special Town, for the government of which he left
Titus there, it might be thought that the bounds and limits of his
jurisdiction never could have reached further than the first appointment. But
seeing he names no particular, but cleaves to the general, seeing he says
not, ideo reliqui te Egubii, I have therefore left thee at Egubium, but ideo
reliqui te Cretae, I have therefore left thee in Creta, I am persuaded in
conscience that not any one city only, but the whole country was allotted to
his government. Of this opinion are diverse excellent and learned Fathers, the
very sound of whose authority without further stresse, were sufficient to
shake M. Cartwright out of his painted and disguised plumes, with derision of
all the auditorie. Neither does the Bishops jurisdictions any more detract
from the regiment of Christ our savior in his Church (whatsoever be given out
to make the cause more odious) than Moses, Joshua, or Gedeon did among the
Jews, the latter of which number, though he were the guide and leader of the
people, yet plainly and openly affirmed, that neither he would rule them, Iud.
8.
nor his son, but God him self should govern them. And in this respect the
Ministers of God, considering whose lieuetenants they are, and whose charge
they occupy, have oftentimes accepted those courtesies at Princes hands, which
otherwise they could not justly, nor of duty challenge. So did Elizeus suffer
king Ioas 2. Reg. 13.
to visit him in the time of his sickness, and Samuel refused not the honor
1. Sam. 13
done him by king Saul, in coming forth to meet him.

But some man will say perhaps, a diocese is to large a Province for one man
to govern: so could I answer, a kingdom is to great a burden for one Prince
to discharge. But as the one may be directed by a wise and virtuous governor,
so keeping those two grounds that every particular congregation have an able
pastor, and only the greatest matters be referred to the Bishop (as with us
they are) the other may as well be ruled by a godly and zealous Bishop. It is
strange that one high Priest was able to resolve all doubts, decide
controversies, attend causes, and exercise all other jurisdiction perteining to
the Church and Gods religion, without omitting one day the daily and continual
sacrifice at Jerusalem: whereas twenty and three Bishops are now thought
vnsufficiente to ouersee an Island, scante in quantity comprehending a third
part of that ancient jurisdiction. Surely I can not better compare the manner
of these fellows skirmishing, than to the serpent Hydra, wherewith Hercules
sometime encountered: for even as for every head that he stroke off two or three
starte up upon the sudden in the self same place, even so our adversaries
striving to behead the Pope, bring in ten thousand heads or Popes into his
place, and exempting every private minister from any superior within his own
precinct, shape out a monster more ugly to behold a thousand times than ever
it was before. I would be loathe to press their consciences to examine the^ too
deeply upon this point, How they can digest a Princes government over many
states, that will not allow a Bishops jurisdictions over a few shires. I am
sure it is more hard to discharge one than the other. And where soever in the
Scripture they can prove the regiment of a godly Prince ever many countries, I
will prove the superiority of a Bishop or high Priest over those shyres. God
grant that this platform being squared out by the president of the
Heluetians discipline, carry not a smacke or savor of their policy, which
has bereft and spoiled as well first the Clergy men, then after the Nobility
and gentlemen of their honor and authority, as the Bishops of their dignity,
and by equal authority justify both attempts. No man I think is ignorant
but as great care and wariness is requisite in a king, as in a Bishop, or if
any odds appear between them, the Prince susteyneth the greater burden, in
as much as he deals both with causes spiritual and civil, directing both
Priest and people. It were pity these Crocodiles eggs should be hatched to
soon: if wisdom preuente the worst, no doubt the best will provide and care
for it self. And as it is an ill argument to prove that the Princes charge
should be diminished, because it is very great, and rather infers this
consequent, that because it is great, therefore more pains must be taken in
discharge of so weighty an office: so may we answer for the Clergy. If
this point were thoroughly examined and boulted out, it would appear that
never a Bishop in England exercises more large or ample jurisdiction in his
diocese, than Calvin Caluines jurisdiction at Geneua, as large as any bishops
in Engl^d.
did within his territory of Geneua, being almost in all causes joined in
commission with the Sy^dici, Counselers of the Town, sometimes meddling without
his own precinct with the Churches of Berne. But to let this pass, when they
shall prove y^ it is more unlawful for one man to rule a province in that order
which the Bishops do, than a great and populous City, as Calvin did, or
that a man may take charge of a great City, and not be bound to answer for
the territory annexed thereunto, as parcel of the body, or that any minister
may look to the head, and neglect the hands, or other parts, as needful for
preserving of the whole, seeing ye body of Christ, which is y^ church, is not
monstrous, but orderly and formally co^pacted, in such perfect order, as si
qui^ vnu^ 1. Cor. 1^.
me^bru^ patitur, omnia me^bra co^patiuntur, if one member suffer any thing,
all the other members suffer with it. When these things, I say, are justified
by good authority, more shall be said than is requisite for this present
occasion: wherefore as the shepherd is not only appointed to have care and
charge of those sheep, which are first put into his hand, and committed to
his charge, but even withal of those lambs which afterward shall come and
grow in vnum ouile, into one shepefolde, though special mention be not
presently made of them: even so I cannot think but the holy ghost, settling and
establishing Bishops at the first in ye most notable and famous cities, had a
further meaning, that what increase soever should after proceed of their
fruitful and laborious travel, should likewise fall to their direction: which
partly may appear by our saviors words to Peter, pasce ou^s, pasce John. 21.
agnos, feed my sheep, feed my lambs. And also if it had bin a matter of so
great importance, neither S. Paul would have concealed it, who revealed omne
consilium Act. 20.
dei, the whole council of God, nor the holy Ghost have left the Church so
des^itute and void of counsel in this ^ase, but that order in some place of
the text or other should have been taken for limiting of the Bishops
authority, seeing that was the scholemaster which by promise should lead us
in omnem veritatem, into John. 16.
all truth. Again, whereas every City kept their territory in the same
religion which them selves professed, it is not to be thought but God bestowed
ministers in the worthiest seats at first, as Antioch, Jerusalem, Rome, and
Constantinople, that both the fruit might spread to the benefit of a great
number, and the same toil and pain which had been taken to plant religion in
the head, might by the same instruments be fruitfully continued in the
members, and they not denied unworthy to direct the worst, which had led the
best, or to rule the^ all, that had reclaymed them all. But put the case that
in the first beginning of the Church, when all things were so raw and out of
order as no assurance could be had of anything, the government of a province
were esteemed to great a toil and burden for a single man, as in deed it might
with greater probability, before the Churches were provided of sufficient
pastors, what makes this against the state of our English Church and policy,
where al men profess one Christ, and hope to be saved by one mean? Whereby the
labor is not only greatly qualified, but brought to a marvelous felicity in
comparison of the former difficulty. Even the Church of Scotland, whereunto
they do so often appeal, over every ten Parishes allow one superintendent, as
may appear by their book of service lately printed, which is more than our
Precisia^s will be brought to like of And thus much concerning Dioceses, because
they do so greatly grieve your consciences.

Of an Archbishop.
NOw follows the name and title of an Archbishop, with the jurisdiction
thereunto annexed, which finds as little grace or favor in their sight as
the other did. And first of all they deny that Archiepiscopus, Archbishop, or
Metropolitanus, Metropolitan, is mentioned in the scripture. The reason whereof
I imagine to be this, that so long as the Apostles lived, who had the same
authority with a great deal more than our Archbishops now do challenge, it
was not so expedient to plant in every province an Archbishop as at this day.
For seeing they do both constitute and depose Bishops, as the virtue or
impiety of the persons did require, what needs any other to supply y^ room?
But now the Apostleship is quite extinct, and yet the same necessity of a
superior, for preserving of unity and good order, does yet remain. Neither
may this degree be thought unadvisedly appointed by our ancestors, nor spared
without inconvenience amongst al godly Christians: and though the word
Archiepiscopus, Archbishop, be not in the law, yet words of the same effect, as
summus sacerdos, princeps sacerdotu^, princeps prophetiae, the high priest,
the chief priest, the chief of prophecy, and such like, are not wanting. But
seeing nothing but the very word it self will please them, what if a man
should reason thus? The same that (...) was in the law, though after another
manner (...) is in the Gospel: but (...) is in the law, Ergo, (...). I
marvel what could be answered: where find they in the law the name of
Deacon, as it is now used? and yet I am sure they will not vanishe it for
lack of sufficient authority: wherefore the Church being guyded by offices,
and not by titles, as it was lawful for the Apostles at the first beginning of
the Church, to devise a new name for a new office: so likewise, seeing this
quiet and security in religion craves another kind of regiment, than those
storms and persecutions did, I would be answered, why the office being
tolerable, and as the world goes now very necessary and expediense, a name
may not be coined, according to the quality of the calling, without any former
president? That one example of creating Deacons, upon great consideration
salling Act. 6.
out more than was foreseen or provided for at ye beginning, is a good
instruction for us, that in all respects we are not to be directed by the
president of the Apostles age, the times being different so far, no more
than all diseases are to be cured with one kind of medicine. For surely to
believe that in matters of form we ought to be tied or fettered to the cradle
of Christ's Church, and never learn to walk alone, or still to feed on
milk, and never taste any stronger food, is as ch^sh ignorance, as to
persuade the simple that God has quite debarred his Church, either from
inuenting, disposing, altering, or reforming of such things as were not at the
first more profitable, than now they seem pernicious. Them selves have dubbed
some petie doctors by the name of Superintendents, and yet no such name read
or mentioned in the scripture. For the proof of Primates or Archbishops
functions out of the word of God, has very learnedly been alleged the
president of Titus, whom both Erasmus and other learned writers think to have
been an Archbishop. But this can not agree with M. Cartwrights stomach, least
the cause should begin now to faint or hang down head, whereon he has already
laid so many lusty wagers. For stall me once a Metropolitan in his chair and
seat of government, and then adieu both equality among ministers, and the new
sprung Presbytery, which are the very groundsels and foundations of this
doctrine. Now, what I should rightly term him but an Archbishop, who^ S. Paul
left not in a Parish Church, but in a flourishing Island, not to minister the
sacraments only, but constituere per ciuit^tes presbyteros, Tit. 1.
to appoint ministers in every city: not to wink at his fellows faults, but
increpare illos dure, sharply to rebuke them, and last of all, not barely to
continue what had been agreed upon by other, but quae deerant corrige^e, to
redress the things that remain. For mine own part I am utterly ignorant.
Again, it is not to be doubted, but after Paul had planted the Gospel of our
Savior Christ in the I Will of Crete, some ministers he created, which by
preaching and godly conversation might allure the greater number to their own
salvation, and yet not withstanding him only he sets forth as a pattern
for all the Tit. 2.
rest to follow. And in the same chapter, which is as much as ever any
Archbishop did challenge, he gives him flat commission, arguere cum omni
imperio, to reprove with all authority: wishing him in any case to shun
contempt, which commonly is wont to follow want of credit and authority.
Last of all, to Titus only, without mentioning or once naming any of his
fellow Bishops, he refers absolutely the censure and decision of true and
false religion, with power to ercommunicate obstinate and froward Heretics. I
could here allege also good probabilities, why the whole epistle consisting
only of precepts touching government and behavior, in that it is only endorsed
and directed unto Titus, empli^th in him a sovereignty above the rest to put
the same in practice. These are no small presumptions to support their
judgment, which suppose the same authority which Archbishops now enjoy, to
have first begone and taken root in Titus, for any thing that I have
hitherto heard alleged to the contrary. The Church is very fitly compared by
S. Hillary to a ship tossing upon the sea, in respect of her endless trouble
and veratio^: but as it is not lawful for every Mariner to play the pylote, or
guide the helm, when storms and pirries come, no more is it fit for every
Minister to reach at an Archbishops dignity, and even as degrees mainteyne the
safety in the one, so do they purchase quiet to the other. The same Church is
called by Solomon in his Sonets, acies ordinata, Cant. 6.
a rank or army set in order: but what order I beseech you can there be,
where there is no difference between the Captain, Peticaptayne, and the
General? who can be ready or forward to give the onset on his enemy, where
every common Soldier, nay every p^sant dare contend in credit with the
Princes deputy, no man acknowledgyng any superior, but wrestleth for the
garlande: and look what tumult commonly does follow confoundyng of the
states in policy, the same without all doubt must needs ensue upon
equality among the ministers. They were accursed by Moses law that sought to
take away the marks of any man's inheritance and just possession: and what
shall now become of those which would so gladly filche and steal away the
limits of every state and condition. It is strange that Gods wisdom should
not be as great in planting of his own elect and chosen people, as ours in
altering y^ state and platform of our auncesters. For whatsoever was then
reckened most profitable and expedient for the Jews, is now accounted most
dangerous and burtful to the Christians, their strength is our weakness, and
men are not ashamed with their own devises and inventions, quite to subvert
and overthrow Gods heavenly and eternal policy. That the high Priest, figured
our Savior Christ in his office, any man will easily grant, but that he
figured him in dignity and pre-eminence, more than Moses, Joshua, David, or any
of the rest, cannot be proved. Wherefore it must appear that with the office
of the Priest ended his superiority and pre-eminence, which already is
disproued, or else the dignity may be continued among the Christians, albeit
the Sacrifice be quite abolished and extinct. Wherefore, seeing God amongst the
Jews did first ordeyne and institute this superiority, and the Christian
Bishops from time, as may appear by good record, being as well read and
studied in the scripture as we, and better able to judge of the meaning of the
Testament by living so near the testators time: sith antiquity makes for
it, and only emulation has oppugned it: since many benefits arise by good
experience thereupon, and are derived unto us as it were by conduites from the
fountain without any kind of inconvenience: since God has promised as well to
be with Joshua as he was with Moses: and last of Ios. 3.
all, seeing the contempt of ministers is reckened aniniurie to himself. I would
wish (...). Sam. 8.
our busy innouatours to be ware in time and take example by the saucy and
naughty boys of Bethel, which were torn and rent in sunder with wild Bears
for scornyng and deriding of the prophet Elizeus. 2. Reg. 2.
If the name of Archbishop be not verbally found in Scripture, no more is
Superintendent: and if they cannot find Metropolitan within the Canon, much
less are they able to pick out hypocryte, Linsey woolsey Bishop, Pope of
La^beth and such usual titles, as commonly they give to the grave and learned
Bishops. Sure I am, there is great difference between S. Paul's advise,
Seniorem ne increpes, 1. Tim. 5.
sed obsecra vt Patrem: Rebuke not an Elder but exhort him as a Father, and
their phrase of speaking. We ca^ hardly justify libels diffamatorie, and
slanderous speeches by the president of any Apostle. Now, whereas so much a
do is made about titles of Archbishop and Metropolitan, and the Scripture
still alleged as adversary in the quarrel, I would gladly know whither the
style of vir nobilis being given of 1. Sam. 9. 1. Reg. 1.
viri potentes, men of might and power, attributed to Sadoc the priest and
Nathan the prophet, be not as great as either Archbishop or Metropolitan:
what differs the name of Summus sacerdos, being so often mentioned in the
law, and repeated both Mark. 14. and Luke. 24. from the name of Archbishop? if
this will not serve the turn, nor be received for payment, I see not why S.
Paul being called Act. 14.
Dux verbi, the chief speaker. 1. Tin. (...).
Doctor gentium, a teacher of the Gentiles. 2. Cor. 5.
Legatus Christi, Christ's ambassador. 1. Cor. (...).
Sapiens architectus, a wise builder. Gal. 4.
Angel^s Dei, an Angel of God. 1. Cor. (...).
Dei cooperarius, Gods labourer: can escape the rigor of your censure, taking
upon him names and titles far above the calling of an Archbishop. In like
manner S. Luke terms Gamaliel, Doctorem legis honorabilem, a Doctor of law
honorable: Act. 5.
and often in the Scripture, the Priests are called Principes, chief. But, as
well may they bring down our Dukes, (...). Chron. 17.
Marqueses, Earls and Barons, as abase our Ministers, seeing the same rule of
Scripture is indifferently prescribed to us all, and as little mention is there
made of one degree as of another. Thus may they make our savior Christ,
inferior to his father, concerning his divinity, because the title of (...)
is no where literally expressed, although the same in effect by sundry places
may be well and justly gathered. And thus much in defense of names and titles,
although I deny not but otherwise the time might better and more fruitefully
have been employed: seeing as S. Austine says, vbi de re constat, puerile est
de verbo litigare, where the thing is manifest, it is but childish to contend
for the name: and there is no doubt but ye same spirit which is promised, vsque
ad consummationem seculi, to John. 14. (...) 16.
the end of the world, is as well able to direct the Church by inspiration in
these riper years, as by outward gifts to direct her in her green and tender
state of infancy, neither is it lawful for us to suspect, Manum Domini esse
abbreuiatam, that the lord hand is shortened.

Of Bishops livings.
BUt here comes in new co^playnt, that Bishops livings are to great, and
revenues to abundant, and therefore must be brought to a great deal less
proportion. In deed I nothing doubt but such greedy l^rchers, if once their
quarrel come to snatching, will soon beguile their elders. And yet eue^ as the
wicked stru^p^t which contended for another woman's child before Solomon was
content to have it rather parted and divided quite asunder, that neither of
both might joy in the partition, than the natural mother should possess her
own: so these lusty gallantes, either because they live in utter despair of
reputation and preferment, or in respect of privy malice, disdeyne and
emulation, had rather be excluded from all hope of coming to the like degree,
than either tari^ the time which God has limited, or endure the present
credit and reputation of their brethren. But to come somewhat nearer to the
point, in despite of Satan and all his Ministers, a reasonable proportion
must be allotted to the Bishops, having things in government, and travailing
in their office, by these reasons of the Apostle. If we have ministered 1. Cor.
9.
unto you spiritual things, is it any great matter if we reap your carnal
things? and why this rule may not rather in this place be stinted with the
most, than restrained to the least, seeing Bishops either know or should know
best of all other how to use it, I find no mention in the Epistle. To what
good uses Bishops have in ancient time employed the profits of their land,
the hospitals and other such works of charity standing in the open view and
sight of all the world give sufficient: witness: so as to one that uprightly
and without any spark of malice will survey their doings, rather may they seem
to have been stewards than possessours of their goods: and to have laid up
treasure for themselves in heaven, where neither mothes corrupt, nor thieves
break in: nay, I will say more, if M. Cartwright were not very ungrateful to
that worthy University where he had his first beginning, he must needs
confess, were he never so impudent and shameless, that considering how many
famous Colleges have been erected and endued with lands by Bishops of this
Realm, even the Clergy themselves are chiefly bound to reverence their
memory, and follow their example, by whose liberality they were first
enhabled unto the office which they undertake by entering into the ministry.
If Bishops had borne as low a sail as Paul did, they had builte as few
Colleges as S. Paul did, which I think themselves will grant no slender
hinderaunce both to the learning of our pastors, and proceeding of the Gospel.
Then should neither Peterhouse in Cambridge founded by Hugo de Balsha^ B. of
Ely, nor Trinity hall erected by Batema^ B. of Norwich, nor Gonw^l hal set up
by a simple parson, nor y^ Queens college first begone and set in hand by
Andrew Duchet rectour of S. Botulphes, nor Jesus college brought to full
perfection by Alcock B. of Ely, had flourished in lerning at this day to the
great comfort of the realm, and hope of our posterity: if Heruie Sta^ton
founder of Michael house, whereof M. Cartwright, as it is now incorporate,
lately was a member, were now alive, he would think himself very discourteously
entreated, to be spoiled of all reuenew in recompense of so great chari ie. I
could allege the foundation of Magdalene College in Oxford by Wa^f^et, of the
New college by Wickha^, of Corpus Christi college by Force, all three Bishops
of the sea of Winchester, of Alsoules college by Chichley Archbishop of
Canterbury, of Lincoln and Exc^ter college by those two bishops, with diverse
others, which seem to be left by Gods eternal providence, as an argument to
confute the shameless impude^cy of such starting prelates, as dare presume to
charge these learned fathers, with po^pe, ambition and glory. I marvel that
any man casting but his eye upon these stately monuments dare once conceive an
evil thought against ye authors of so worthy an enterprise, or mislike ye
continuance of that ability which has brought forth so many benefi^es unto
our country, and such as all the princes in Europe, stand in admiration of at
this day to ye unspeakable honor and reputation of this happy Island. If by
warrant of the scripture I ca^ prove, that of evil gotten goods the third
de^cent shall have no fruition, the long standing and most happy flourishing of
these colleges, in despite of all the Cormorants and deuourers of common
profit may sufficiently a^ouch that y^ first original from whence this fruict
does spring, I mean ye te^poralities of our clergy, is neither popish,
glorious nor abominable. And thus much by the way to prove y^ bishops have not
always bin mispenders or unthrifty stewards of their lands. Now will I descend
to y^ example of S. Paul, the imitation of whom is so greatly wished by these
Precisianes, and yet so little followed in their conversation. And first of all
I will not stick to grant that S. Paul's allowance was but very slender,
proceeding of none other cause, than that the Apostle in many things refused
his liberty, and renounced that, which in deed was due by scripture, only to
avoid offense among the common sort, the greater part of which may be sooner
carried, and more earnestly inflamed to religion with the sparing of a groate,
than hearing of a sermon. Wherefore, least to great charge in finding of the
ministers, might alienate the peoples minds, before they had conceived any
feeling or taste of pure religion, he was content at sundry times to labor with
his own hands. But how? Non quasi non habuerimus potestatem, not but 1. Cor. 9.
2 Thessalonians. 3.
that we had authority, as himself alleges. In this respect he disdained
not sometime to make tents, and employ his time in Act. 18.
other bodily labor, rather than to grieve or burden the congregation: giving
out this general rule to as many as professed Christ, If any man will not
work let him (...). These. 3.
not eat: And surely this was in deed the very true and literal imitation of
our savior Christ, who willed his Disciples, not to be careful what they eat,
or what they put upon the^. This is truly not to possess Math. 6. Math. 10.
Luke. 12. Math. 6. Act. 3.
gold or silver. To heap up treasure in heave: and this precept was precisely
kept by Peter, when he told the creple craving of his alms, that he had
neither gold nor silver. But seeing themselves will not be stinted to so hard a
diet, but think it may be enlarged by difference of time, I see no reason to
restrain it rather to a hundred than a thousand pound: and when they shall find
any certain quantity limited for preachers in the scripture, exceeding not a
reasonable mean, for my part, I will not unwillingly subscribe to their
opinion; which hitherto I deem more apt to breed dissension, tha^ bent to
nourish charity. Either would I have the ministers continue and persist in
their first simplicity, or else with such increase repair their state as might
enable them to keep hospitality, and relieve the necessity 1. Tim. 3. Romans 12.
of the Saints. How happy would S. Paul have thought himself, if living in
this age he might have seen ye Church so stored by the benefit of civil
laws, and liberality of Christian Princes, as the Gospel might be preached
without hinderance, and the pastors mainteyned with out grudging, seeing that
himself confesses to have been driven and necessarily enforced to the spoil
of certain Churches for the maintenance and relief of others. 2. Cor. 11.
Number. 21.
Whereupon ensued the collection whereof we read, 2. Corin. 9. Eleazar the
priest who challenging no more than God had specially prescribed for his
diuident, had for one share. 675. sheep. 72. oxe^. 6^. asses, 3^. prisoners,
which I am sure amou^teth above the reuenew of some bishops within the realm.
From thence may they pass by the prophet Elizeus, who notwithstanding he
refused the brybes of N^aman, 2. Reg. 5.
yet would he not forsake the presents of the king of Aram, although he were
an 2. Reg. 8.
infidele: Other examples likewise might be alleged for this purpose, but for
as much as other poinctes must be debated, I will as briefly as I can, run
over the proportion and allowance, which from time to time has been allowed
to the Clergy in the purest and perfectest religion. And first of all the
Levites being excluded from inheritance among the common people, had both
houses within the City, and farms without the city which might in Leuit. 25.
no case be alienated or made away. And therefore Josephus terms Nob which
Saul destroyed Sacerdotum oppidum, the Antiq. Iud. lib. 6. ca. 14.
Priests city. It was enjoined also to the Levites among other things as a
special part of their vocation, praeesse thesauris domus 1. Cron. 26
Dei, to be over the treasures of the house of god: which were a simple charge
were the Church in such beggary and penury as you would have us feign believe.
Again, beside ye priests allowance rated in y^ law for finding of himself, he
might without offense take that which was due Deuteronomy. 18.
unto him by inheritance, wherewith agrees well y^ president of Abiathar, who
being deprived of his priesthood was confined to his own land in Arathoth:
and that it was his own inheritance may both appear by the very words of
the Scripture, agros suos, his lands. And because 1. Reg. 2.
we are otherwise assured, that no more might the priestly portion be chopped
or changed by the incumbent, than Bishops lands may now be alienated from the
sea. How great the Churches reuenew was in those days, may partly appear by
the quantity of treasure, which Asa brought 2. Chron. 16.
out of the house of God, and by the sum of money which Ezechias made only of
the plate, being driven to a hard shift, as Richard the first did here in
England for his ransom: and likewise by division of the land of promise in the
Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 45.
where of four several parts, the Priests and Levites enjoyed fully two: and
to this purpose also serves. 2. Paralep. 34. Wherefore to enter now into the
new Testament: First, we read that Paul will have a Bishop Hospitalem, a
keeper (...). Tim. 3.
of hospitality, but how, and in what sort this charge may be performed in so
great scantnesse of allowance I cannot find: unless a man will say that
hospitality may as well be kept in five shillings as in five hundred
pounds, which seems to hard and stricte an interpretation for so large and
copious a matter. Besides, the practice of this precepte, as we find it laid
open in the Scripture, seems to require a more full and effectual
understanding: for at such time as Paul with all his company remained Acts.
21.
certain days with Philip the Evangelist, it seems not an easy living that
could mainteyne that charge. In deed if Bishops with their purse would either
make marchaundise of the gifts of the Ghost, as Simon Magus did, and likewise
Acts. 8. 2. Reg. 5.
Gehesi Elizeus servant, or wastfully mispende their substance in wanton and
unthrifty company with the prodigal Luke 15.
child, lauishe out their masters treasure like unfaithful stewardes, or pine
the bare and needy for want of comfort, with the purpled Cormorant, there
were Luke 16.
good reason to abridge and diminishe their revenue. But whereas rather by our
saviors own commandment they do Luke 16.
purchase friends by Mammon, seeing they say unto the poor, Vos me^um semper
Luke 15.
estis, and omniamea vestra sunt, you are always with me, and all that I have
is yours, seeing they give to the Saints in their necessity Romans 12.
distribute alms, vt omnia sint munda Luke 11.
illis, that all things may be clean to them, show their faith by good
deeds, and stand Iac. 2.
in readiness to yield an absolute and perfect account, as frayltie will
permit in that dreadful day: no doubt they shall be crowned with reward of
faithful Stewardes and dispensers, whom the Lord has appointed over all:
and the portion of the idle Ministers shall be committed to their dispensation.
As I read that Timothy had a special charge to beware of co^etousnesse and
immoderate desire of honor: so find I no kind of prehibition, why ministers
may not enjoy a Christian Princes liberality: since Musculus Musculus wills
misters not to refuse princes liberalities.
in his treatise of Ministers authority, wills them in no case to refuse it.
Not the lawful use, but ye abuse of wealth and honor makes them justly to be
reproved: and for mine own part I think that both Diogenes conceived greater
pride in his contempt of glory, and loytering in a tun, than Alexander after
all his conquestes sitting in a chair of majesty: even so were the soldiers
more proud (as I suppose) of Christ's simple John. 20.
coat, than Joseph was of his garment wroughte in diverse colors. Simplicity
Genesis 37.
of countenance is oftentimes a cunning veil for proud and disdaynefull
stomachs, and so doubt I not a whit, but under the round cappe of one
Precisian, lurketh more deadly poison than under the Rochettes of four and
twenty Bishops. It was not told Simon Magus that he had no portion in sermon
Acts. 8.
isto, in this word, because of his wealth and riches: but for as much as with
brosse he durst presume to purchase the gifts of the holy Ghost. And where
our Savior Christ says, it is hard, he does Math. (...).
not say, it is not possible for rich men to enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Now whereas Master Cartwright pleases him self with his own mirth,
and in his opinion very ingeniously, in my judgment most spitefully
reports, that were the Bishops such as y^ Apostles were, they would make
less noise in the streets, I would gladly know what noise our savior Christ
made when so many people followed him in flocks and companies? and if he say
this train was gathered rather in respect of hearing than attending, what
shall we say of all those godly people which were at hand to minister and do
him service? What noise made S. Paul in the streates, (...). 2^.
when all the people brought him to his ship, or writing to the Corinthians,
that perhaps he would tarry winter, that they might bring him on his way. If
all 1. Cor. 16.
this were for preaching, then I say, that for any thing you understand, this
godly motion may likewise stir up diverse honest men, the rather to attend on
Bishops, because they seek instruction in religion: in which case it is the
Bishops part by all means to relieve them, as Christ could not for pity
suffer them to M^^^. ^4.
famish: that followed for devotion. In doubt full cases it may please you still
to judge the best, for that lesson are you taught in Scripture. And though
Christ kept them not all in household, yet seeing he has so often termed him
self patrem, familias; a householder, I can not otherwise account the greater
part than his meniall servants. I would hear some man declare how
hospitality could be maynteyned, without such instruments as are fittest for
that office. The Apostles were not resident in any certain place, and therefore
neither kept house, nor stood in need of any servant, whereas our Bishops
being settled in a convenient family, and tied to a certain congregation,
must guide their house in another order. I think it will be very hard for
any Cartwright in England to prove that Christ had ever a seruingman attending
on him with a sword and a buckler, saving Peter, which was a helper of his
ministry: and yet the purest of them al thinks him self half maimed unless
he be so accompanied. Well, to conclude this point, since neither Bishops
revenues are chargeable to the congregation, but rather beneficial to the needy
being well employed: and that being stewardes of the Churches goods, either
they do or should do nothing else than dispose the money brought Acts. (...).
unto their feet by the believers: and the more they have, in bestowing it
well, the greater is their commendation: I will somewhat enter into Ministers
and Bishops, dealings in politic and civil causes.

That Bishops may intermeddle in civil causes.
ANd whereas it is first denied that Bishops should be counselors to Kings and
Princes, I would be resolved whether to refuse the Princes calling in that
order, may stand with the duty of a subject? As for nemo militans Deo, etc.
no man that warreth (unto God) has been so learnedly (...). Tim. 2.
answered already, as it may now go for no payment. For seeing nothing Number.
9. and. (...). Deuteronomy. 4. and. 11.
may be done without the warrant of Gods sacred word, and the interpretation
of the law must be required of the Priest, whether it be meet to have such
Mala^. (...). Agg^. 2.
an instrument at hand as always may inform the Prince of God his holy will,
both in matters civil and spiritual, I leave to the grave consideration of
my learned Reader. Nay I will say more, that being Christ his Legates, as they
are, they can not conveniently be excluded. For subjects are not bound
whatsoever Princes charge them, but, quod docuerint Deuteronomy. 17.
secundum legem Dei, that which they teach according to the law of God. And
in the self same chapter the Priest is linked and joined with the Judge in
deciding of all kind of causes, that nothing should escape them without good
ground and warrant of the scripture. So Iehosaphat joined in commission the
Priests and Levites, and Noble men of Israel, that Justice might be duly
executed. So was 2. Cor. 17. 19.
Eleazar appointed to demand Gods pleasure touching Joshua, and he straightly
charged, ad verbum e^us ingredi and egredi, Number. 27.
to go in and out at his commandment. This made the worthy king of Israel
not only to demand, but even in all respects to follow the advice of the
Priests and Levites. For when Saul in all post haste would needs have followed
and pursued the Philistia^s, ye priest would not permit him till he were
further assured of Gods pleasure. 1. Sam. 14
Here was the king of him self very pressed and forward, and the counsel was
not unwilling, and yet the Priest only did hinder and keep back that
enterprise: neither is it a sufficient shifte to say that more was attributed
then to Priests in respect of revelation, seeing that kind of discovery
having ceased, no less honor notwithstanding is due to interpretation, and
look what the minister of the one might challenge, the other succeeding in
place, though not in miracle, and occupying his office, though he want his
singular prerogatives, may arrogate without presumption. In like manner Samuel
enforced Saul's to kill 1. Sam. 15 1. Sam. 22
king Agag: David commanded Abiathar to abide and tarry with him in his tents:
Abiathar the Priest persuaded David to 1. Sam. 23 2. Sam. 15
pursue his enemies: Sadoc and Abiathar being put in special trust, detected
all the treason and most wicked practice of ungracious Absalom, like true and
faithful subjects, and after were not only of king David's counsel, in
recompense of their loyal service: but also made acquaynted with the sending
of Chusai, a matter of no small importance: and he commanded to make report
of the preceding of all his dealing to Sadoc and Abiathar the Priest. And if
it be answered, that ^eeing made ac^^aynted with one particular matter, proves
not the generality of a Counselour, I must needs allege the general
commission given by the king him self to Chusai, that he should declare what
soever he heard in the kings house to Sadoc and Abiathar the Priests. For
proof of this conclusion may be further alleged the counsel which Nathan
and Abiathar gave 1. Reg. (...).
to David. And Nathan afterward in a matter of no less account than
inheritance and succession of the crown, advised Bersabe the Queen how to
govern and behave Eius. ver. 11
her self. Iehosaphat would not make war against his enemies, before he had
1. Reg. 22.
the Prophets counsel. And in all that cruel war which Achab took in
hand against Benhadad the king of Syria, he was directed by the Prophets
wisdom, 1. Reg. 20.
or else it had gone often harder with him than it did. King Ioas, as the text
reports, ruled passing well, so long as he 2. Reg. 12.
was guyded by I^horda the Bishop. So Herod the king audito Iohanne multa
faciebat, Mar. 6.
and libenter illum audiebat. Diversity and hatred for religion may be
alleged as a reason, why neither S. Peter, nor S. Paul, were admitted into
Princes counsels: and no doubt there is, but if they might have stayed, or
been resident in any certain place, which was contrary to their profession:
and had been proffered any such preferment, they would most gladly have
embraced so fit an opportunity of profiting the Church of Christ, so
vehement and earnest are their writings in exhorting to obedience, whereof
better trial cannot be had, than by doing service, and employing all our force
both of wit and knowledge to the preservation of our Prince and country: As
for dealing in civil causes, so far as they are annexed and coherent to a
spiritual function, maynteyning peace and keeping quiet in the country, I
think it very profitable and requisite for every state, and no slender
furtherance to that making of atonement, where unto Christ has promised
Matthew. 5.
so great reward. And although the reasons before alleged are very fit
and incident to this purpose, yet have we now further to consider of
Achimeleth the Priest, which delivered unto David 1. Sam. 22
Goliathes sword, reserved so long time as a monument of his victory, and
armed him to the battle. So Iehoida the priest caused Athaliah that wicked
usurper, to be slain, restored the crown to Ioas, and made both the
atonement between the King and God, and likewise between the king and the
people: he armed the soldiers, and set the^ in battle array, which in our
Precisians judgment, may seem actions very unseemly and unfitting for a
Priest and Bishop. 2. Reg. 11.
And last of all, the Apostle being offended greatly, that any of the
faithful 1. Cor. 6.
should co^mence their suites, or go to law before an heathen Judge, enioyneth
the^ to end their quarrels among themselves. By which place two special points
may be observed, the one, that S. Paul gave order for y^ ending of all strife
which might arise for lands or goods, which is not only to intermeddle with
a civil cause, or play the Justice, but which is more, quite to inuert the
ordinary course and process of the law, and alter the state of civil
polli^ic: the second is the Apostles reason, a minori ad maius, from the less
to the more, after this sort: Angelos iudicalimus, 1. Cor. 6.
ergo multo magis secularia, we shall judge the Angels, much more things that
perteyne to this world. Whereby we see that both the jurisdictions may without
offense be joined and unit together. For if any man will say, that this place
reaches as well to all christians in general, as to the Apostle, yet shall he
be enforced by the word iudicabimus, we shall judge, to grant him equal
share amongst the rest, which is as much as I require. Although if curiously a
man were bent to search the text, by co^ferring this place with Luke. 22. from
whence it s^^meth to be taken (for our Savior Christ has promised that his
Disciples (...) i^dge the twelve tribes, and here the Apostle says, Angelos
iudicabimus, we shall judge the Angels) the text can not better be understood,
than of the Apostles sitting in judgment. Wherefore out of both the texts
conjoined I will thus collecte mine argument: They that shall judge the Luke.
22. 1. Cor. 6.
twelve tribes of Israel, and Angels, may likewise deal in civil causes. But
the Apostles shall do so, Ergo, they may do the other. Uiew the places
mentioned, and little pain shall serve for proof of any part, that malice
can withstand without pretense of reason. And thus I doubt not, but by this it
does sufficiently appear, that both in the old law priests did sometimes
intermeddle in cases merely politic, and likewise in the Gospel the same
authority has been put in practice. If this be not to deal in civil
causes, let them call to mind, that God appoynting those by name which should
divide the land of promise, before all other named Eleazar Number. 34.
the Priest, and yet the same office did Christ refuse in Luke, being not
thereunto Luke 12. Number. 27.
lawfully called or elected. ^o Eleazar was reserved division of the spoil,
and the same Eleazar was specially appointed to Number. ^2.
put the tribe of G^d in possession of ye land of Galaad. That one may exercise
both functions, appears by the example of ^elchisedech both king of Salem,
and likewise Genesis 14.
Priest of the most high God: by Moses, Samuel, and diverse other, which
(bearing figures of our savior Christ, and of that royal priesthood whereunto
al faithful Christians are admitted) may serve us 1. Pet. 2.
for a president in framing of our policy.

Of Dispensations.
AS for dispensations, since it is impossible for any law to stand without some
limitation, and of necessity some must be appointed to consider of the cases,
there is good reason why the Bishop should be put in trust, before any other of
less judgment, wit, and learning. And therefore seeing that Moses reserved
cases of greatest weight and importance to his own decision, after, meaner
Judges were appointed to attend on lighter matters. And we read that Moses
likewise granted libellum repudii, a bill of diuorcement, Exodus 18. Mat. 19.
although it were ob duriciem cordis, for the hardness of their heart, so as
they neither derogate from the word, nor be contrary to civil policy, such
dispensations may be tolerated. But where they dealt so hardly with offenders,
as no man can escape unpunished, or without doing open penance, this seems
hardly to agree with the Canon of the Scripture, Math. 18.
whereby the Church may not have knowledge until the party have been warned
privately, and again before witnesses. Our case were very hard if god should
always deal by rigor without respect of mercy, and a strange matter it is,
that we will more straightly look to others, than our selves would be
entreated: since this extremity is sufficiently reproved by ye parable of the
servant which being forgiven his private debt, would not remit one halfepeny
to his fellow servants being in great decay and misery. The sun shines as
co^fortably Math. 5.
upon the evil as the good, and God would not permit his Angels to ^eede the
tares Math. 13.
until the day of harnest. When Joseph was in conscience persuaded (though
unjustly) that the blessed Virgin had forgotten her promise of fidelity in
marriage, went he straight unto the Priest, and desired to have the fault
detected and published to the people? No: the scripture says, cum esset vir
iustus, and nollet ea^ Matthew. 1.
traducere, that he being a just man, would not make her a public example.
And so imputes his unwillingness in charging her before the multitude, to a
kind of righteousness. There may sometime f^ll out either so great respect
and consideration in the cause, as law can have no full and perfect course,
without a greater inconvenience, and so, David spared ^oaks life after his
disobedience, for fear of disquieting and disturbing 2. Sam. 3.
all the army: or so great repentance in the party, as better it were fully
to reclayme him, tha^ utterly to discourage him, and so was the unthrifty
child restored to his fathers good opinion: or so Luke 15.
great gifts in the offender, as may be turned upon amendment to the
benefi^e of ^he universal Church, as Paul of a (...) persecuteur became a
zealous (...). 9.
preacher, and yet was not enforced to do open penance for his former
ignorance. This is the way to couple, and as it were to match together mercy
and justice, and with the charitable Samaritane to mingle oil with vinegar,
for the better receuery with patience. For if too sharp and biting playsters
had been applied to the wounded man, of whom we read, he never Luke. 10.
possibly could have endured the second dressing: and again, if they had been
to mild, the sore must needs have rankled with festered matter and
corruption. Si praeoccupatus fuerit aliquis says S. Paul, Gal. 6.
in delicto aliquo, vos qui spirituales estis instaurate buiusmodi in spiritu
lenitatis, considerantes vosmetipsos, ne and vos tentemini. If a man be fallen
by occasion into any fault, ye that are spiritual restore such an one with
the spirit of meekness, considering your self, least you also be tempted.
And that his practice may agree with the manner of his preaching, we have a
whole Epistle written to Philemon, in the behalf of (...) a great offender,
and yet no calling on for public and open p^^an^e.

Of the Presbytery.
BUt now because the Presbytery, as I perceive is like to be the greatest
office when these fellows set up house, somewhat shall be said to those
frivolous cauillations, which are made about this (...), only to exclude the
Bishops from their lawful jurisdiction. And first of all a man may justly take
exception against the very groundworke and foundation of this popular buylding.
For whereas M. Cartwright out of (...). Paul's division of (...). Tim. 5.
Seniors, whereof some preached and gouernedboth, others governed only, would
gladly frame his S^ignorie, I would rather think that S. Paul in that chapter
rather makes mention of two kind of ministers, whereof the one was chiefly
occupied in ministering the sacraments, the other wholly conversant in planting
of the Gospel. For even as ye Apostle says, Non 1. Cor. 12.
omnes interpretantur, all do not interpret. And again, diuisiones
ministrationum sunt, 1. (...). 1^.
idem autem dominus, there be diverse kynds of ministeries, and yet but one
Lord. So, may it not unfitly be affirmed that some were called in the first
beginning of the Church, not so deeply and profoundly studied, as zelously
and well affected. But this interpretation may not be allowed, because the
preaching of the Gospel, and ministering of the sacraments, must needs
concur, and may be severed by no authority. Wherefore unto such as rather
will play small game, than be quite left out, and quarrel upon their own
devises, than be at unity among their brethren, thus I answer, that seeing
the Apostles baptized before they preached, which is justifiable by the very
letter of the scripture, where we find that the Apostles never Math. 28.
had commission to preach till the last farewell of our savior Christ: and yet
baptized long before, as may appear by these words, although he him self did
not baptize, Ioh. 4.
but his Disciples, seeing S. Paul making a flat division between both the
fun^ions, says, that Christ sent him not to 1. Cor. 1.
baptize, but to preach the Gospel. And last of al, seeing the Apostle
preached every where, and yet professes plainly, that he never christened
more than Chrispus, Gaius, and the household of Stephana, I see no reason, why I
may not fitly understand this place of such as only ministered, without that
painful and continual preaching, which the Apostles used in their toylesome
pilgrimage. And Calvin himself seuereth and deuideth teaching from the
ministration, giving doctors only leave to interpret, and so reserving the
^it. lib. 4 cap. 3.
other part for pastors. To this I rather bend, in respect of the common use
of this word Presbyter in the Scripture: which in every place, as far as I
remember, may well enough and with good sense imply the calling of minister,
without seeking for any help of Seniours as they do understand them. As for
the. 4. Act. whereby he will needs maintain that every congregation had their
Seniours, because Paul and Barnabas did constituere per singulas ecclesias
Presbyteros: ordeyne Elders in every Church: First I find this word
Pr^sbyteros, elders, so limited by Ecclesias, churches, as it may well be
verified, though any Church had but one only minister: although I will not
deal so strictly, but the greater companies might have more large allowance,
as the Apostle writes, Episcopis and Diaconis qui sunt Philippis, To P^. 10
the Bishops and Deacons which are at Philippos. And to this opinion I am
induced the rather, because there was not at the first beginning so great a
number of discrete and sober persens in any congregation, that they could make
a Seigniorie. Again I marvel M. Cartwright blusheth not in citing this place
for Seniours. Act. 14. which both all the ancient Fathers and Calvin himself
understands of ordeyning Ministers.

Now to S Ambrose, I will not deny but in the tender grass and spring of
Christ's religion, for want of godly and religious Magistrates, because all
questions and litigious articles, were for the most part ended and determined
before unfaithful judges, I will not deny, I say, but upon the Apostles
charitable admonition, a Co^sistorie for the time might be created, until God
might send some better nources for his people. Now, what can make more
evidently for justifying of the Answer to the Admonition, where it proves by
sound authority, that Seniors were more needful at the first tha^ now? What
can be more strong, I say, for proving that conclusion, than that ratio
finalis, the final cause, whereupon this ordinance was grounded videlicet, ne
iudicare^tur apud impios 1. Cor. 6.
and non apud sanctos, to wit, that they be not judged by the wicked but by the
saints, has now ceased by the piety of our christian Princes. Wherefore I
may well conclude with the Answer to the Admonition, that seeing a christian
Princes is now invested of the state, the seniors both may and ought to be
quite excluded from their jurisdiction.

Now, if this be true that every congregation had their seniors, it is not like
that Antioch, where Christians first took their name, was unprovided of so
necessary an office. But whereas mention is made of Prophets and Doctors.
Act. 13. there is not a word of Seniors: therefore it is not like that any such
were there, and besides (...) questions of religion which fell out at
Antioche, being decided at Jerusalem, argues no such domestical and
neighborly jurisdiction. S. Paul repeating all the offices and functions of the
Church. Ephe. 4. speaks not a word of seniors, which makes me doubt of
their authority: for, otherwise I am sure the Apostle would have allowed them a
bench, though one of the meanest and basest in the company. Wherefore, as they
reason against Archbishops out of the same chapter, Paul repeating all the
offices, names none Archbishoppes, Ergo, etc. the like argument may be used
against these green and newfounde Seniors, finding neither place in doctrine
nor in discipline. M. Cartwright him self as I take it, will not suffer any
mingling or intermedling of jurisdictions, whereby the eldership of one
Church, should be tied or bound to the constitutions and decrees of another
Church, without their own election: and yet must this be otherwise, if
Presbyterium employ a Seigniorie: for whereas the Apostle gave the Churches of
Syria and Cilicia in charge, to keep exactly praecepta Seniorum and
Apostolorum, Acts. 15.
The precepts of the Elders and the Apostles, it follows in the next
chapter, dog^ mata decreta ab Apostolis and senioribus qui fue^ rant
Hierosolymis: (to keep I say) the decrees Act. 16.
ordained of the Apostles and Elders which were at Jerusalem, because we should
not think these Seniours were peculiar to those Churches. And to say again
that even these Presbyteri qui fuerunt Hierosolymis, Elders which were at
Jerusalem, were the Eldership of that Church, were to charge the Apostles with
great iniquity, in suffering rather the Elders of Jerusalem than of Antioch,
to debate those questions, which sprung at Antioch, and therefore above all
other, required the presence and the assistance of the Antiochean seigniorie.
No man will deny as I suppose, but aged persons should be used with
reverence, and as their gifts and qualities are of value, so are they to be
employed by their Prince in places of greatest weight and government. Neither
is it to be misliked though caete is paribus as the Lawiers say, that is: being
comparable with the other they have the first preferment. So we read that
Abraham committed the direction of his son to ^is eldest Genesis 24.
servant. Moses called the Elders together, Exodus 17.
as witnesses of Gods mighty works. Their advise is demanded in Judge. 8.
respect of long experience: they are assembled 1. Reg. 12. 1. Esdr. 6.
in counsel by Rehoboam: they contribute to the Temple: and to be short,
clean through the Scripture, for their wisdom, wits, and great experience
are for the most part used in matters of greatest importance: but of any
special office in manner of a Presbytery, I find no syllable in the
Scripture. First therefore would I know, whether these Seniors were ministers,
or not. If they say, they were: a great resemblance of that government
remains yet in Cathedral Churches, which they persecute with deadly poison:
although some of their company will not resign their fourth Prebende, but
rec^en themselves among the rest, which they call loytering and idle Lubbers:
if they deny them to be ministers, first let them well consider, that whom S.
Paul calls first maiores natu, Acts. 20.
Elders, he afterward names Episcopos ad regendum Dei ecclesiam, a spiritu
sancto constitutos, Bishops appointed by the holy ghost to govern the Churches
of God. verse. 28. And further, to put them out of hope of any refuge, almost
all the writers understand these to be Bishops. Wherefore maiores natu,
Elders, being the same with Episcopi, and Episcopi being not Seniors, but
Bishops, as we understand them: it follows that the Seniors which S. Paul
means, were entered into orders, which they can not abide in any case:
neither can we greatly blame them, for then farewell their Presbytery. And
because no man should muse why the ministers are rather termed Presbyteri,
Elders, than Sacerdotes, Priests, it must be considered in respect of the
Iewishe priesthood, which was now abolished, the name was likewise shunned
among the Apostles, although quite through the scripture I can no where find
(...) rather taken for an officer, tha^ for a minister. And that it may appear
how true it is, that Presbyteri were the same which we call Pastores or
ministri, Pastors or Ministers, first let us conjecture by the manner of their
creation. For even the same imposition of hands, which S. Paul mentions in
1. Tim. 4.
creating ministers, the same Paul and Barnabas used in ordeyning those which
we call presbyteros, Seniors. Before Acts. 14.
these Seniors was an account given of all the proceedings in religion, and the
success thereof Acts. 21.
they were called to all assemblies, Acts. 20.
they sat in counsel, Acts. 15.
Pascunt gregem Domini, they feed the flock of the Lord, 1. Pet. 5.
and S. Peter calls them (...) fellow elders. Ibidem.
But for him to abide in any place or certain congregation is neither agreeing
with ye order of his life, nor form of his commission received. Praedicate
Eua^geliu^ omni creaturae, preach the gospel Math. 28.
to every creature. Wherefore S. Peter being (...) and yet no such Elder as we
entreat of: it follows that both those elders were ministers as S. Peter was,
and S. Peter was no such kind of Elder as ours are. And thus much touching
elders, whose office nether being described nor authority limited in ye
scripture, may be smothered in silence, especially in these days, wherein
such cases as are referred to their arbitrament, may sooner be dispatched
without them, than ended or dec^ed by them. For my part, I mean not an^e
longer to contend with shadows, seeing M. Cartwright himself after seven
years study for defense of this and such like articles, can not well deuyse to
bring them without debarring Justices of their lawful jurisdiction and
authority.

Of kneeling at the Communion.
TOuching reuerente kneeling at the Communion, M. Cartwright alleges, that by
this occasion many can not be p^rsuaded otherwise to think but that their
breaden God is still adored on the altar. Whereunto I answer, that if they be
not deaf, their ears may lead them to another judgment: if they hear, and
yet continue in that custom, it is neither sitting nor standing in others,
that can amend it, sith the ground and true occasion of their error,
springes not so much by other men's example, as by their own persuasion,
reteyning yet a smacke of that realitie, which sometime they believed, and can
not lightly be removed. So that in mine opinion, the very way to bring them
from this error, is not to sit, as usually we do at common meat, nor to
come and gadde up and down the Church, as men do at the market, snatching
bread here, and wine there: but with good authority to persuade them to a
better judgment. For no reason it is that we to bring other from their
ignorance, should detract due reverence from Gods holy Sacraments. The answer
to the Admonition very learnedly alleges, that because this Sacrament is a
thanksgiving for all the benefits of our redemption, therefore kneelyng is
the fittest site and position of the body. Master Cartwrighte replyeth, that
then our kneeling should come after the receiving, because in the very action
our minds ought wholly to be occupied in meditations of the benefit, which
opinion I could very well allow, if there were a meditation void of
thankfulness. But our mouths being full, says he, we are unfit to speak.
Well reasoned surely, and like a Bacheler of Divinity. Is no man thankful
unless he do express his meaning verbally? or, does God respect our speech
more than the zeal and sincerity of our heart? The end of M. Cartwrightes
meditation is, that afterward we may be the more inflamed. And I think rather
that presently we may be kindled: seeing in the breaking of bread the passion
of Christ being represented, ought in one moment to stir up all our powers
and senses to be thankful for our deliverance out of Egypt. Wherefore, as I
like of meditations in receiving, so can I not allow any of that kind, which
is not joined with thankfulness. And whereas grace at meat is compared with
thanksgiving at the Communion (though ye grosnesse of the comparison make me
blushe in his behalf, yet seeing he must be followed) I answer, the benefit
not to be equal, and therefore the form and manner of tha^ksgiuing ought to be
more solemn: for in the one we give God thanks for the sustenance of our body,
in the other, for the nourishing and redeeming of our souls. Wherefore as
Abraham's man offended not in bowing himself, and adoring God after all things
had fallen out according Genesis 24.
to his looking: nor the woman which adorauit prona super terram, worshipped
2. Reg. 4.
groueling upon the earth, before the Prophet, after her son was restored to
life, committed any Idolatry: nor the Math. 15.
Cananite, with diverse others: no more do godly people in bending them selves
wholly to the sacred action with the greatest zeal, devotion, and reverence
that possibly they can devise, seeing that albeit God require contrition of the
mind, yet does he not refuse humility and reverence of the body, being
exhibited with a duetifull and zealous intention. Was it lawful for Bersabe
making suite to an earthly Prince, for a frail and transitory benefice,
in^uruarese, to bow 1. Reg. 3.
her self, and shall we be thought Idolaters, that having already obtained
this benefit at the hands of our eternal God, for declaring our thankfulness
by all humility? Might the Israelites cadere (...). Par. 20.
proni coram Domino, fall down prostrate before the Lord? Joshua fall down
prostrate before the Arc, only in respect that it was Ios. 7.
Arca foederis the Arc of covenant, and that Iud. 20.
God him self promised to speak from Exodus 25.
thence? and should we Christians she we no kind of reverence, partaking of
those mysteries, whereof the Jewish observations were but shadows, and which
are in very deed the pledges and seals of our redemption, having a promise
annexed to the worthy receiving of them, not of speaking, but performing the
work of our salvation? we read that after the majesty of God had filled the
place, prostrati sacerdotes adorauerant, the Priests falling prostrate
worshipped, (...). Para. 7.
and yet the holy Ghost working most effectually in these sacraments, we may
not without great suspision of idolatry declare y^ thankfulness of our hearts,
with ye reuere^de and courtesy of our knees. I marvel M. Cartwright is so void
of sense, as to minister new occasions daily of detracting from due reverence:
seeing al men for the most part are grown so careless of those mysteries, as
rather means had need to be devised of kindling their affection, than quite
extinguishyng or robbyng their devotion. The reverence which is outwardly
exhibited to Princes in the state of policy breeds a maruaylous fear and
awe in subjects minds, which may serve us for a lesson, that in ministering of
the Sacrament the greater humility and reverence that is used, the more
vehemently are men rapt, and lifted up in contemplation of the mystery. And
the more conte^ptuously we repair unto that banquet, or the more basely we
stand affected to that actio^, the least it must needs be valued and esteemed
among the common sort: the simplicity of whose conceyte must needs be
somewhat furthered by the judgment of their senses. S. Paul giving express
commandment that no man should put on his cap or cover his head in the
congregation, because that omnis vir orans aut prophetans velato 1. Cor. 11.
capite deturpat caput suum: Every man praying or prophesying having his head
covered, does dishonest his head. Meant not as I suppose, that men should keep
off their cappes during the time of public prayer, and sadainly all courtesy
laid aparte cover their heads at the beginning of the Communion. Wherefore
either they must affirm that all men may communicate, their heads being
covered (which in all men's judgment viewyng and perusing of the text would
seem too great absurdity) or else give us leave to use our knees in sign of
honor, by the same authority that S. Paul commanded the cappe in token of
our reverence: for as the Apostle saw no fear nor light suspicion of
Idolatry to put him from the one: no more ought we upon light and vain
conceits to bannish and reprove the other. We read both manducauerunt, they
eat, and Psalm. 21.
adorauerunt, they worshipped, joined in one verse together, which S.
Augustine understands August. epist. 120.
of the Supper, and yet M. Cartwright will exclude quite the latter part,
which in deed is the chiefest part, if therein we comprise our tha^kfulnesse,
or else bring it fair and softly seven miles after for fault of easy
carriage. Is this mystery of so great weight as upon contempt it brings
judgment, 1. Cor. 11.
and yet withal accounted of so simple value, as the receyuer may use no kind
of reverence? must we humble our hearts which is the greater, and not
bend our knees which is the lesser? or may the knee be bente at the name of
Phil. 2.
Jesus, and yet restrained from reverence in communicating of his Sacraments?
what time is more convenient to adore our savior Jesus Christ sitting on the
right hand of God the father in heaven, than when the pledges of his promise
and seals of our redemption are most lively represented to us? Bylike if we
reposed as great affiance in this Sacrament, as the Israelites did in the Arc
which was of less account, when they thought it impossible for their enemies
to prevail so long as it were in presence, we should be thought to spoil God
of his glory, that thus are now condemned for the signs of due obedience. If
it were no Idolatry in the prophet David, Adorare Psalm. 131.
in loco vbi steterunt pedes eius, to worship in the place where his feet
stood, I cannot see, why they should be reputed such idolaters, Math. 26.
Luke. 22. Mar. 14. 1. Cor. 11.
that worship in the place whereas to the worthy receyuer is exhibited the
Sacrament of his body and blood No man is so foolish to adere the sign, but
the thing it self represented by the sign. For as S. Augustine says, while
the mind yet cleaves in these earthly things, it is more slowly quickened,
but after it is once advanced from these corporal similitudes to a more
spiritual and heavenly substance, figured by these similitudes, life comes
in the very passage, and is kindled as it were with a brande of fire. But if
we should always make so large allowance of our devotion, as not to worship
til we had received, this flame might rather be quenched by delay, than
nourished by contemplation. If a man should reason, that as lawful it is to
declare the thankfulness of the mind by the actions of the body at the
Communion, as at the preaching, and prove the liberty of the latter, by 1.
Cor. 14. where S. Paul reports of the simple man, that coming into the
Church, and finding the very secrets of his heart revealed, falls prostrate
on his face and worshippeth God, much could not be answered. And least
diversity of reason might force a diverse interpretation, the words following
either lean indiff^rently to both, or more partially to the Communion,
pronuntians 1. Cor. 14.
quod vere Deus in vobis sit, affirmyng that God is truly in you, for S.
Augustine says: Signa rerum diuinarum Deus esse voluit visibilia, August.
(...) Catec. R^ cap. 26.
res autem inuisibiles in illis bonorari. The signs of heavenly things, God
would have to be visible, but he would have honored in them things that be
not visible. And the words of the text are very manifest: Quae videntur
temp^ralie sunt, quaenon videntur 2. Cor. (...).
aeterna: Those things that are seen be temporal, but the things that are
not seen be eternal But this forsoothe in no case may be hidden, since our
savior Christ received sitting at the bourde with his Apostles. To this
objection I can not better answer M. Cartwright, than with his own
authority. And even as once a simple woman appealed from Philip king of
Macedonie ouershot with drink, to Philip king of Macedonie when he was more
sober, so do I appeal from M. Cartwright carried away with the veheme^^ie and
heat of quarrel, to M. Cartwright speaking upon better ground and
understanding. For in the latter end of this very treatise, he affirms
sitting not to be so necessary, wherefore if it be lawful to inuert the form
which by example was prescribed, the safer way is to exchange with greater
reverence than with more contempt: (...) they are better to be thought of, that
kneel at the Communion soberly, than they which wander up and down the Church
disorderly, as in most of M. Cartwrights Churches at this day we see the
practice. For sure I am that continual motion and stirring of the body, must
needs distemper the quiet of the mind, and quayle the earnest devotion of the
receiver. But some man will reply perhaps, that this rather makes against
walking than sitting, which our Savior Christ and all the Apostles used:
whereunto I answer, that albeit our Savior Christ being driven into great
streights of time and leisure, the passion drawyng on so fast, as he could not
finishe things with such solemnity as otherwise it is more than like he
would in the ministration of his supper, he after he was once set down to
the eating of the Paschall la^be, altered not the site and position of men's
bodies, but even as the figure ended, so brought in the verity without
altering any circumstance: yet is their haste and want of space, no reason, why
at greater leisure we may not use a greater reverence, no more than we are
bound to celebrate the supper in the night, because want of time enforced
Christ to leave that president: and as well may his example bind us in the
one as in the other. I doubt not but the Corinthians were as forward in
alleging Christ's example for supping before the sacrament, as our people are
for sitting at the same. When S. Paul charged them that there was no time to
communicate because that vnusquisque praesumeret coenam suam ad mandus 1. Cor.
11.
candum: every man took his supper before. But the Apostle would not be thus
slight ly answered: for making this ungodly custom no better than a contempt
of Christ's church, he asks them, an domos non haberent ad manducandum? if
they had not houses to eat in? Wherefore albeit in that place S. Paul,
expressly name not kneeling, yet by the self same reason y^ supping in the
Church is turned to supping at home, though Christ used both his supper and
communion in one place and instant, by the same may sitting be turned into
kneeling. For as the offenders in the one are reproved quia non diiudicant
corpus domini, because they make no difference between the Sacrament and other
common meats: so may the other be condemned for using no more reverence at the
Communion than at a common table. Sure I am S. Paul was not to seek of
Christ's example in this case, no more than our superintende^ts are in the
other, and yet it would not be taken in part of payment by the Apostle nor
admitted as a veil of their vnreuerente usage. But why stand we still upon
those nice and doubtful points, seeing the rule of Paul is still to be
embraced and holden as a sure foundation that any thing may be received, modo
honest and secundu^ ordinem fiat, 1. Cor. 14.
so it be done comely and according to order: wherefore, till they can prove in
kneeling dishonestie or disorder, these fond and vain persuasions will gain
but sle^der credit. No man I think indifferently considering the 1. Cor. 11.
will be hard to grant that seeing ye Apostle makes so great difference
between the sacrament and common banquets in the inward and privy
examination, but some difference should be likewise put in the outward action.
And to such as literally depend upon the example, let this suffice which has
already been alleged, with this addition, that as we are not bound to
imitate our Savior in girding himself with a towell laying away his garments
washing his disciples feet, John. 13.
to minister after supper, Mark. 14.
in a parlour, Luke. 22.
nor to use that kiss of peace, whereof we read Romans 16. 2. Cor. 13.
and which Calvin judges to have been joined and annexed to the Supper even
from the Apostles time: no more are we of necessity enforced to follow the
Apostles sitting, sith another site more reuerente and fit to kindle and
inflame our minds with true devotion may be appointed and prescribed by the
Magigistrate.

What though we read very seldom in the Scripture that the Apostles used
either cappe or courtesy to our Savior Christ while he lived yet among
them: was this no reason why Saint Paul might not inioyne the Corinthians to
pray bareheaded after Christ was glorified and ascended: or why we may not
use that comely reverence which is meet for mortal creatures? These
questions are to childishe for a Christian congregation, and meeter for a
Iewishe Synagogue. Wherefore seeing many things were at the first concealed
from the Apostles because they could not bear them, and the holy Ghost
promised as a guide or Scholemaster which from time to time should govern and
instruct John. 16.
them. So doubt I not but as Tertullian says, Ab illo Domini vicario ad
perfectam Tertul. de virg. vela^d.
producti sumus disciplinam, we are brought to perfect disciplyne by that
vicare of the Lord, who would not thus have suffered the people even from
Christ's time hitherto (for of less antiquity I speak not) to loyter in
ignorance and open Idolatry. Such cherishinges in sin may better agree
with the malice of that enemy which promised to be Spiritus mendax in ore
Prophetae: a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophet, than with the love
and charity of that comforter which shall continue with us, Vsque ad
consummationem seculi, to the end John. 14. 1. Cor. 11.
of the world: As Saint Paul did alter some things, promising at his
return to set other poynctes in order, which Saint Augustine
understands Epist. 118.
of that form and order of the Communion which is now observed. So doubt I
not but those things being marked which are gone before, it shall appear,
that even the Church of Christ, both may de iure, by right, and has de facto,
in deed decreed and determined as great a matter as this without controlment.
And albeit, no man has been assista^t at Gods secret Ierem. 13.
counsels. Yet if ever any were, it must be Paul who being rapt, in tertium
coelum 2. Cor. 12. Aug. epist. 118.
audiuit arcana quae nemini fas est loqui: into the third heaven heard those
secrets which is not lawful for any man to utter. Wherefore to conclude with
Augustine, that in things indifferent there can be no better rule for a grave
and sobre Christian, than so to behave himself as the Church does where he
lives, which advice was likewise given to Monicha, Saint Augustines mother,
by S. Ambrose, Aug. confess. lib. 6. cap. 2.
I will here content my self with that which has been said for kneeling at
the Communion, as sufficient to any reasonable person, though against such
p^uish quarellers a man can never be too well provided.

Of Holidays.
COncerning the lawful use of Holydaies although the Answer to the Admonition
has so gravely, learnedly, and sou^dly entreated, as scant any probability
may be found by Cartwright whereby to seduce ye people. Yet will I speak a word
or two of the strongest oppositio^s, and leave the rest to your grave
considerations. And first of al whereas ye reply defends that Gnatsarah may
not be proclaimed without Gnatsarah.
express commandment, page 120. let him show me by the text what express
commandment good Q. Hester had for Hest. 8.
proclaiming Gnatsarah after she had prevented and cut off the treasons of
wicked and accursed Haman. I would hear express commandments for keeping
holy the day of Iudithes victory among the Jews, not only for the present
time, but in perpetuum: Judith. 1^
for ever. What express commandment had Judas with the rest of his brethren
for keeping holy the feast of the altares, dedicating and instituting a holy day
in remembrance of the same, ab anno in annum, from 1. Mac^. 4
year to year. Which was not only continued til the abrogatio^ of the law,
but kept by Christ himself and honored with his presence, John. 10.
wherefore although an express commandment may be found in one place, yet
that is no proof why without ye same, others may not keep or proclayme a holy
day, we read not any fault or blame attributed to Herod for giving all his
people liberty from their daily work, at the feast of his nativity, but for
putting John Baptist to the sword, wherefore such dainty Marc. 6.
dealing in this point seems rather to seek a fault, tha^ to reform an
error. And whereas M. Cartwright says y^ by this means ye Christian Easter
which should be continual is fettered to a few days, as well may he remove the
Sabbath day, because our prayers are likewise fettered to y^ day, which should
be continual Who sees not in the Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 5.
from whence he borrows this silly shift that the Apostle allegorically
discourses upon the spiritual Easter, and nothing detracteth from the
co^memoration of Christ's death and passion. The very word^, Fermentu^ malitiae
and nequitiae, the leaven of malice and wickedness, open plainly ye meaning of
y^ letter. We may gather here the abrogatio^ of the Jewish ceremonies, but no
prohibition for Christian holy days, and though we be forbidden not to feast
in the old leven. Yet are we not forbidden to keep one solemn day in ye
co^memoratio^ of ye death of christ. If this be not guileful wresting and
violent racking of the scripture, let all the world judge. By this pretty
Logike we may conclude y^ the binding of ye Levites, to serve God morning and
evening, was a mean 1. Para. 23
to make the^ idle all the day besides. The calling of the people together at a
prescript time to hear ye word of God read, was a reason why at any other
time they should not read y^ scripture. But to let this pass, that we offend
not in that fault which S. Paul reproves in y^ place, which is the Jewish and
ceremonial observation of Easter, may appear by y^ which S. Augustine
notes, for whereas they did celebrate y^ feast of sweet bread, we keep the
feast of Christ's death and passion, not counting the weeks to Whitsontide
after the manner of the Jews, but reuerencing the coming of the holy ghost,
and if a man will but indifferently consider of the matter, he shall scant find
any likelihood or resemblaunce between the^, further than the eating of ye
La^be did figure Christ to come, as we in celebrating of ye supper retain his
death in memory. And to the ordinary objection of Dies obseruatis and te^pora,
you observe days Gal. 4.
and times, though I could with August. ad Ianu refer this place to prophestes
and predictions by star divinity, and turn it against astrologers, which
govern worldly accidents by times and constellations, or answer with S.
Jerome, that it makes nothing against the Christians holy days, yet this I
say, that forasmuch as only it impugneth those that cleave to Iewishe
elements, it cannot be applied against our approved sole^nitie for the same. S.
Augustine writes very truly: No^ obseruamus te^pora Augu. ad Adimantum cap. 16.
sed significata: we observe not times but things signified. where M. Cartwright
says we may as well abridge ye liberty given by ye. 4. commandment in
resting, as in working, when he shall prove y^ god the fathers meaning was that
as necessarily we should follow him in work, as sanctify his rest, we will
subscribe to his opinion: for besides the sundry limitations to y^ rule
dispersed through the Scripture to maynteyne the contrary, even common reason
does persuade, that the end of that commandment was the rest of the Sabbath,
not the working of the common days: and all the ancient Fathers so expound
it. It is no new invention, but has been a custom very ancient, and of long
time continued among Gods chosen people, there to erect some monument of Gods
mighty works where they have been atchiued, that ever they might be green
and fresh within men's memory, which as the Civil law reports, is Labilis
circa tempora, slipperie about times. The Israelites set stones upright Ios. 4.
in remembrance of the water dried up: The law was graven in pillars: D^. 17.
the censures were nailed to the altar, that as many as descended not of
Aarons line, might be discouraged from offering incense on the altar by the
example of the Number. 16.
Rebels. To be short, seeing the Israelites, were commanded to engraue a
monument of their deliverance from Pharao upon the walls, and to celebrate a
yearly feast in remembrance of the same. I think how far the benefit of our
redemption exceeds and surpasses all the rest, so much more diligente and
careful should we be, either by days, or any kind of circumstance to keep
it fresh in memory. For if the Iewishe feasts of Pentecoste and Easter were
so abolished, as none other Christian solemnity might succeed and enter in
their stead, I could be very precise in boulting out a reason why Saint
Paul after the consummation of the law, and ending of the ceremonies, made
such have from Ephesus, Vt si possibile sibi esset diem Acts. 10.
Pentecostes faceret Hierosolymis, That if it were possible he might keep
Pentecost at Jerusalem, and promises not to remove from thence till Pentecost
or Whitsontide 1. Cor. 16.
were past. These places make me think, that even upon the self same days
whereon these special benefits were bestowed, as the resurrection at Easter,
the coming of the holy Ghost at Whitsontide, some notable memorial was
instituted and appointed even in the Apostles time. Neither do I guess or ame
in this respect, without all probability, considering the circumstances both
of time and place. And whereas M. Cartwright needs will wrest S. Austines
inuectiue against multitude of ceremonies to our disputation of holidays,
either he is very ignorant, as not knowing that learned fathers reverent
estimation of such feasts, or very peeuishe and malicious in forcing him to
witness against that cause, which as it may appear by sundry of his works,
he had in singular reputation. For discrediting of M. Cartwrightes cause, I can
use no greater force than in driving his probation to the fountain and
original: for the self same place which is here objected. (...). Cor. 5. was
urged by that devilish and infamous heretic Aerius, skirmishing in the self
same cause and quarrel against ye holy church of christ more tha^ a thousand
years ago. For thus is he brought in speaking by Epiphanius, and uttering his
H^r^s. 7^.
own religion. Quid est Pascha quod apud vos perficitur? rursum Iudaicis
fabulis addicti estis, non oportet Pascha peragere, Pascha etenim nostrum
Christus immolatus est. 1. Cor. 5. what is Easter which you observe? you are
again addicted to Jewish fables, you ought not to celebrate the feast of
Easter, for Christ our passover is offered up? If this be not sound and
wholesome doctrine which springs from a venomous and poisoned Heretic of more
than a thousand years continuance, I report me to the Reader.

Of mourning for the dead.
NOw I can not leave untouched their senseless inuectiues against mourning for
our friends departed, being in deed warranted and confirmed by more textes of
Scripture, than any of that side ca^ bring for proof of any their unreasonable
Paradoxes. That Gods people have in all times and ages declared the heaviness
of their minds by the wearing of their garments, appears Baruc. 4. where ^a.
uc. 4.
he did put off the clothing of peace, and put on the sackcloth of prayer: by
Daniel, who persuaded the people to pray in fasting, sackecloth, and ashes.
Dan. 9. by the. 38. of Daniel. 9. Esaias. 38.
Esaias, where Ezechias being clothed with sackeclothe entered into the house of
the Lord: by the Ninevites, which in sign Ion. 3.
of mourning sat in sackecloth and ashes: by Judith, which clothed her self with
sackclothe: Iudit. 4. Hest. 14.
by Hester, which put off her Queenely apparel, and put on vestures meet for
mourning. By the example of Betsabe, which was not called to David's 2. Sam.
(...)
bed, till the time of mourning for her husband was expired. If these
fellows can allow the mourning for our sins in a prescript kind of
garment, and yet reprove the mourning for the dead, in special garments, as
Heathenishe and Hypocritical, they must be further pressed with Genes. 38.
where Thamar putting off the garments of her widowhoode, gave her self to more
cherefull kind of going and wearing her apparel: with the president of
Judith, which put off the Iudit. 16.
garment of her widowhoode: and specially by the advice which Ioab gave the
woman of The^ua in these words, feign thy self to mourn, and put on mourning
apparel, (...). Sam. 14
and be as a woman that had mourned her husband a long time. By which three
places it does manyfestly appear that even in those days as well as now
mourning in prescript apparel was allowed off. And if any man object the
places above cited of sackclothe and ashes, that albeit they were used in token
of contrition, yet did no man wear them as mourning garments for the dead: I
prove the contrary by the example of the Princely Prophet, giving warning to
all the company that attended on the corpse of Abuer to the grave, that they
should 2. Sam. 3.
put on sackclothe, and mourn at the funeral of Abner. But to these Master
Cartwright will answer, that many things were granted in the law to help ye
peoples hope, because they wanted that clear discerning of the resurrection
which we have now attained. Surely this inue^tion might carry some pretense and
color of the truth, if mourning for those which depart this life, were not
rather a calling of (...) back to the vanities of this vnstabl^ world, than a
raising or stirring of us up to the contemplation of a better state. Wherefore
(seeing the more plainly we discern the resurrection, the greater is our
liberty) it follows, that much more unto us, than those which lived under
the law, this mourning for the dead is lawful. But who told M. Cartw. that
our sight is clearer in the resurrection, than the fathers was which lived
under the law? In deed Christ had not yet risen for example, whom S. Paul
calls primitias dormientiu^, the first fruits of them 1. Cor. 15.
that slept, but otherwise that opinion was no less sincerely grounded before
Christ's coming, tha^ after our redemption. What help needed Job to encourage
and erect his hope, when he protested plainly, that his firm belief is to
rise again in the latter day, be clothed with his own skin, and see God in
his own flesh, concluding in those words, Quem visurus Job. 19.
sum ego and oculi mei conspecturi sunt, and non alius: reposita est haec spes
mea in sinu meo, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and
none other for me, this hope is laid up in my bosom. A thousand places in the
scripture might be alleged to convince M. Cartw. deep invention of manifest
untruth, and make evident the Fathers sound and perfect judgment before the
coming of our Savior Christ concerning the resurrection, without either
doubt or error. And as I can not deny but the faith of godly persons was
greatly strengthened in this article by the rising of our savior, so was there
nothing added to the soundness of their opinion, no more than his coming made
those which embraced him, to think better of his power, than they did expecte
in hope, before they could enjoy the fruition of his presence. For even as
Christ says, Abraham exultauit vt videret diem meum, vidit and gauisus est,
Abraham reioysed to see my John. 8.
day, he saw it, and was glad. So, for mine own part I think he did rejoice
to see Christ's resurrection, none otherwise than if he had at any time lived
amongst his ungracious posterity. But to return unto our matter whence we
have digressed: now that Scripture does begin to fail the adversary,
common reason or rather private fantasies must supply the want of learning.
Two fresh arguments therefore are alleged to exclude this mournyng: one,
because oftentimes it happens, that under a mourning gown lurketh a merry
heart: another, for that it seems dangerous by such instruments to provoke
our double sorrow. Such trifling circumstances were not unfit to amplify a
young man's tale in a school of Rhetoric, but how they will be accepted in
the Church of Christ, for the ouerthrowyng of a custom so ancient, godly,
civil, and universally received, I refer to every man's pryuate conscience.
But to be short, I answer to the first, that by the same reason we may
as well forbid assemblies in the Church, and public prayer, because many are
more busily occupied in thinking of their harvest, than harkenyng to the
Scripture, and though there be some greater necessity in coming to the
Church than wearing mournyng garments, yet seeing the one is as well allowed
of, and justifiable by the word of God, as the other, the abuse ought to be of
no greater force for removing one, than another. If hypocrisy in some may
condemn simplicity in others, and godly orders be neglected, because
sometime under a pleasant rose there lurkes a prini^ canker, neither may any
state be well directed, nor laws uprightly executed, for nothing is so
precious in the world, not the word of God it self, but the Devil has
been bold with it, and his ministers have abused it. What soever has been
said touching abuse in other things before, may serve this turn again. And
therefore to the second point I answer, that who so ever is not pinched with
grief upon the very chance it self, will less be moved with the garment:
and therefore as it cannot ground a sorrow unless it be procured by some
other mean, no more can it increase a sorrow where greater cause is ministered
of griefs by inward cogitation, than by outward^ view, and by the erring of
the heart, than the judgment of the eye. Wherefore if there be no stronger
oppositions kept in store for a rere defense, than have marched in the foremost
rank, women may keep on their mournyng gowns for taking cold this winter.

This mourning for the dead among the ancient Romans was reputed in women
so great modesty, in men such true fidelity, as the first laying her
mourning weed a part within a year after her husbands death, was noted of
infamy, the penalty whereof you may find ff. de his qui. The other were
discredited if at any time they did not mourn the departure of their friends.

That ministers ought to bury the dead.
AND whereas they will not in any case permit that Ministers should bury,
because no such kind of rule is found in Scripture I would know what
ground or warrant they have to maynteyne that those Disciples of John
Baptistes which buri^d him, Mark. 6.
were no ^elpers in his ministry, or that those y^ng (...) had no ministry
in the Church which buried Ananias and Act. 5.
(...) or that Joseph ab Arimathia, (which is (...) in the Scripture
Discipulus Jesus, the Disciple of Jesus) had made no entrance into his
ministry, when he buried his Master, Math. 27.
being afterward the first that ever sounded or professed the name of Christ
within this Isle of Brittannie. If this will not Polydor. lib. 2.
serve, I prove that the body of Saint Stephen was buried by ministers, if the
Apostles may be so accounted, by this plain and simple reason. The body of
Stephen was buried by those Act. 8.
which were at Jerusalem, but all the faithful and religious persons saving
the Apostles only, were fl^dde for heat of persecution eod. cap. verse. 1.
Ergo, the body of Stephen was buried by the Apostles. But the Prie^^es in the
law might not come near the dead: it forces not, seeing as well this
prohibition as other their injunctions being ceremonial, are dissolved and
abrogated by the death of Christ. And whereas further it has been objected
that by this occasion ministers are hindered from discharge of duty, I
maruayle what impudency moves these prelates to find themselves so greatly
burd^ned and oppressed with a deed of chariti^. It utteth as hea^ly upon
their shoulders, and grieueth them as sore to bury their Christian Brother in
the Church, as to labor a whole day at ^he ploughe. I am sure David had as
far to seek to direct and govern his dominions as our Ministers have to
the discharging of a simple cure, and yet was (...) neither combr^d with
attendyng upon the corpse of Abner to the grave, nor accompanying Ionathas and
Saul, albeit 2. Sam. 1. 2. Sam. 3.
upon either of them he bestowed a funeral commendation, the original
whereof Master Cartwright had rather draw from Thucidides a Paynime, than
from so many other learned and godly Bishops as have used that solemnity.

Of Women's veyles.
Much after this sort they reason against women's veyles at their coming to
Church after their childbedde, which they say importe some dishonest act
going before, which is very false, ^ith only feebleness of sight and
weakness of body is the reason why neither they can behold the light, nor
endure the pearcing of the air. I think even those women which chiefly
favor and promote their cause, will in this respect become their adversaries.
I maruayle that Rebecca feared not this report nor suspicion of dishonestie,
when at the first sight of her husband, she took her veyle, or Susanna
casting on (...). 34.
a veyle when she least respected the malice of her enemies in defense of her
good name and innocence. These are but scarecrow^s, and can drive away none
but such as know not a wispe of straw from a gadde of steel. But all their
modesty is not yet dis^ouered, for after their intemperate discourses against
women's veyles, they leap into their sheets, and enter so profoundly into
women's couerte dealings (in very deed altogether unfitting and unmeet for
common speech, much more for preachers utterance) as chaste ears can hardely
abide the vanity of their curious and uncivil reprehension.

Of interrogatories ministered to Infantes.
I Will not here blotte paper with confuting all their childishe cauillations
about Godfathers and Godmothers in baptism. First they take away the
lawfulness of the interrogation before they can reprove the Answerer of
presumption, which they shall never do, so long as Gods word gives full
assurance, that both the Jews before they were baptized by John confessed
their sins in public, which could not be without some interrogation: and
certain questions Math. (...). (...). 8.
were deinaunded likewise of the (...) before he was Baptized. If they can
allow these interrogations better in m^, than children, I answer, that seeing
by their flashly parents fault they got their fall, by their spiritual
parents promise they must be restored: and as they fell not by themselves,
so they can not rise without the help of others. Read S. Augustine de Nup.
August. de ^upt. and Concupis. lib. 2. ^a. 29.
and Concupis. Lib. 2. Cap 29. and there shall you find, that, Qui per sua non
possunt, per corda and ora gestantium Diabolo renunciant: they which by
themselves cannot, do by the hearts and mouths of such as carry them,
renounce the Devil. The same August. epist 106. proves that both by Aug.
epist. 106.
authority of the Scripture and tradition of the Church from the spryng of
Christianity, children have always answered by their sureti^s, when they
could not promise their own perseueraunce in future, by reason of their
infirmities in present. This liberty is given too wards in law during their
minority, much more to members of Christ's congregation in their state of
infancy. It is like inoughe the parents of the blind man would have
answered for him, if he had been under age, as may be gathered by their
words: He has John. 9.
age, let him answer for him self. And by as good reason, if it please them,
may our Preachers give parents of blind children, concey^ed and borne in
original sin, license to make answer, and to the little Innocents, quia
aetatem non habent^ respondere per alios, because they have not age, to answer
by others. This plain renouncing of the Diuill at the sacrament of bapti^me by
these seely Infants, is alleged as an argument invincible to resute the
heresy of Pelagius the heretic, denying original sin, and urged by Saint
Augustine as Apostolical, with such vehem^ncie of spirit and assurance of
the victory, as if all the world were not able to dissolve it. So he says in
another place, that mysterium credulitatis in August. de baptis. co^tra Donat.
paru^lis per eorum responsionem a quibus gestantur impletur, The mystery of
belief in Infantes is fulfilled by the answering of them of whom they are
carried. Tertullian sets this most godly custom as Tertul.
the strongest battery against their peeuishe ignorance which can brook
nothing in the Church, but what is literally and ad verbum expressed in the
scripture. Saint Ba^ mentions this, (...), Ba^ill.
that is, to renounce Satan and his Angels. Saint Ambr^se expounding the
place of baptism, Colloss. 2. uses A^bro. super Epis^lam (...) Col^ap. 2.
these words, Haec inquit commonent, vt pers^uerent in abrenunciatione pompae
and prestigiarum Sat^anae: repete hinc quid sis interrogatus: recognosce quid
responderis: renunciasti mundo and operibus eius etc. These do admonish that
they should persist in renouncing of the pomp and deceytes of Satan: call to
mind from hence what thou waste asked: remember what thou answeredst: thou
renouncedst the world, and the works thereof. Saint Hierome Hieronim. contra
Lucifer.
says not, that it was toying or da^lying, but Solenne in laua^hro post
Trinitatis confessionem interrogare, credis sanctam Ecclesiam? etc. That it was
usual in baptism, after the confession of the Trinity, to ask, do thou
believe the holy Church? etc. And Saint Cyprian reports, Cyprian.
that the Nouatians among all their innouations durst not exclude this
ceremony from baptism.

Of the sign of the the Cross.
AS for signum crucis, the sign of the cross, which you ^oath in baptism,
^sque ad nauseam, as though you would vo^ite at it, I say no m^re but with
Tertullian, that it was vna ex praecipuis diffe^n (...) Apo.
iis inter I^deos and Christianos, One of the chiefest differences betwixt
Jews and ^istians: With Cyprian ^ifying in Cyprian.
his ^yme, that those which were baptized, were signed with the sign of the
cross: And la^^e of all, with learned Augustine, Pr^sente signo cru^is
P^ganitatem obmutes^e^^, ^^g^st in Que^^. ^o^i ^esta. 114.
nec audere mutire ^b reuerentiam Christian^ maiestatis, that Paganism is put
to silence, the sign of the cross being present, and that it dare not mutter
for the reverence of Christian majesty.

Of Fasting.
THe question of fasting is in all points as profoundly handled as this other
marchaundise: surely it is so simply true that Princes may command a fast
upon any just occasion, and thereby bind the conscience of the disobedient, as
poynting to the textes of Scripture with my finger, whereby it does most
evidently appear, as. 2. Paralipo. 20. Esdras. 8. 2. Chro. 2^ 1. Esd. 8.
Hester. 4. Jonas. 3.
Hester. 4. Jonas. 3. and diverse others. But some could be content to fast,
if they were not tied to certain meats and dyets, alleging Saint Paul for
the indifferency of meats, which I grant to be very true, so that no
lawful Magistrate command or ordain the contrary, for then this liberty
is (...) a ^^ruitude, and we that before were left at large, are brought
within the compass of Christian obedience. (...) abstayned from beans,
because they were somewhat wyndie, and (...) the ^^^yne, and so ^^e many in our
days abstain from sundry dishes, not for superstition, but to subdue the
flesh. No man forbeareth wine because he thinks it to be unclean, but
because it is res luxuriosa, a thing that stirs Prou. 20.
unto wantonness. In which respect it seems men and women in the law, what
time they sanctified them selves, Number. 6.
were prohibited to taste thereof. Shall we call the Rechabites superstitious
fools, for using the prescripte and limited kind of abstinence even against
the persuasion of the Prophet, whom God him self commended for their
invincible Iere. 35.
and worthy constanc^e? or condemn the Prophet Daniell of too much
scrupulositi^, for preferryng sua legumina regiis dapibus, his pulse before the
kings Dani. 1.
dayntie dishes? No, Saint Austine has already put us out of doubt, that
Multi non ves^untur carnibus, nec tamen immunda^ ^as suber^ose putant, many
eat not flesh, and yet they think them not supersticiously to be unclean.
This liberty in eating, drinkyng, wearing of apparel, obeying Magistrates,
and almost whatsoever else commoth in their fingring, discrieth so what
contempt of public order, all their actions are directed.

Of Singing.
TOuching singing, if a man may quietly debate this matter, why should they so
greatly grudge at it, which the Prophet David has so much commended? The
Psalms and books of the Kings are to well stored of textes of confirmation
for me to travel in the repetion. Surely if this be so ungodly an occupation
as we are taught, both the. 4000. Levites which did nothing else but canere 1.
Para. 2
in organis quae David fecit ad canendum, sing on the instruments which David
made to sing on, spente their time vnthri^tily. And David was as much to
blame, who after all his wars were ended, as Josephus witnesses, Vario
genere carminum Iosep. lib. 7 cap. 10. A^ tiq Iud.
odas in bonorem Dei compos^it, instrumentisque mus^cis comparatis, docuit
Leuitas ad pulsum eorum lauds Dei dec^ntare, tam Sab^^tis di^bus, quam in
caeieris festiuitatibus: In diverse kinds of verses made hymns to the honor
of God, and preparing musical instruments, taught the Levites at the sound of
them, to sing praises unto God, as well on the Sabbath days, as at other
feasts: and Judith was as ill an h^swife for persuading Judith. 16
men to begin to sing in (...), and other instruments the new song. It was
as great an oversight in Ez^chias to appoint so many singers and Musicians with
cimbals, vyals, and harpes, in the house of God, at the commandment of David,
G^d the Kings S^^r, and ^than the prophet, which are all three sufficient
paternes of our conformity. But 1. Para. 29
they say, our minds are withdrawn from weighing of the dittie by sweetness
of the note. Hereunto I answer, that Ehseus was of an other judgment, when
he thought him self to be greatly quickened, and lifted up in his prophecy by
the harmony of a good Musician. And Saul 1. Reg. 3.
by experience found the contrary, the text reporting that when the evil
spirit came upon Saul, David took an harp and played with his hand, and
Saul was refreshed and was eased: for the evil spirit departed 1. Sam. 1^
from him. Wherefore if Music have such force in daunting evil spirits, it
has (I doubt not) as great power in suppressing ill affections, and therefore
might find greater favor than to be expelled and thrust out of the Church
with so great extremity. Of plain and simple (...) though it be to simple
for ye house o^ God, M Cartwright can well enough allow, marie of this
exquisite and perfect cunning, though it be a special gift of God, he can
conceive no liking. But seeing that both himself does think it greatly for his
credit, and somewhat for surderance of the cause, wherein he trauayleth to
deck his tale with flowers and ornaments of Rhetoric, sith^ cunning saying,
and cunning singing are al one in effect, and Aaron is commended for using the
one in his legal ministry, I find no warrant to reprove the other in the
ministry of the gospel And if any answer that this skill of music is more
tolerable in any other place than in the Church, whenever they shall prove
that either Christ or any of the ancient fathers were of ye judgment, I will
subscribe to their opinion. Such ought the singing to be in the Church as may
well be heard and conceived by the people, which limitati^ being well observed,
it makes no matter how many lavish tongues utter their cankre^ venime against
so laudable and godly an exercise. The best is, nothing is usually song in the
Church, but what the people has by rote, and therefore need we the less to
fear their want of edification, so long as the scriptures are distinctly
read, and the Psalms treateably and in good order sou^ded. In the mean time
it may be noted, that singing men are nothing so much beholding unto the^, as
they were to Ezechias, for whereas he (as ye scripture witnesses) spoke
comfortably to as many as had knowledge to sing unto ye lord. They 2. Chro. 30
rail on them, and slander them in the most opprobrious and contemptuous
manner, that possibly can be devised, and as hardly does this order agree with
the counsel of the wise man, Musi^am non impedies, thou shalt Eccles. 32.
not hinder Music. But forsooth this pricksong is not verbally or literally
commanded in the Gospel, and therefore may not be allowed. Whereunto I answer,
that being not ceremonial it is sufficient for any Christian being clear and
free from the Manichies opinion, that the old testament has approved it. Mary
put the case y^ in neither of the^ both either this or other rights and
ceremonies of the Church be expressly mentioned, must we therefore straight and
in all post haste reject the^? By what express scripture did Abel, Noe,
Abraham, Moses, and other of the ancient fathers, before the law was
published, build altares, and offer sacrifice unto the Lord upon private
zeal without any general commandment? By what text of scripture did the
Jews abstain in all their meats from eating of that sinewe, which shronke
in Jacobs thighe after he had struggled and wrestled Genesis 32.
with the Angel? By what express commandment did Elias build an Altar
only upon twelve stones in remembrance 1. Reg. 18.
of the twelve children of Jacob? And to be short, what ground or warrant of
the scripture had those Rechabites which forbear the taste of wine by solemn
vow, not at their heavenly and everlasting, but earthly and mortal fathers
H^^r^m. 35
bidding: what warnyng had the three wise me^ to offer Aurum, gold, Thus and
Mirram, incense and mirrhe, or Magdalene for Math. 2.
anointing Christ's blessed f^ete: N^chodemus Luke. 7. John. 19.
to imbaul^e his glorious body, or the people to spread their garments in the
way as our Savior went to Jerusalem? Mark. 11.
I doubt not but such precise correctors, would have made some quarrel
against those zealouse ministers, and have cried out with Judas against such
wastfull prodigality: John. 12.
but then should they discrie by Christ's acceptaunce, how pleasant oftentimes
our pro^^rs are though the present be of simple value. These things were
devised by those godly persons to glorify our saviors bo^y, without
commandment and these ceremonies which are now established in the Church are
devised to none other end, but to garnish and adorn his ministry, wherefore
since it does by this appear, that Christ sometimes accepts somethings which
himself gave not in charge, as oftentimes he did among the Kings of Judah,
neither the beesomes nor the sunffers which M. Cartwright has borrowed out of
the tabernacle shall ever be able to extinguish y^ liberty and freedom of the
Gospel. By what other authority than the force and strength of faith was the
woman encouraged to hope for health if once she might but touch the hemme of
Mark. 5.
Christ our saviors vesture? What scripture had those godly Christians to
maintain Act. 8.
their care about the corpse of Stephan, seeing Christ commanded that disciple
which would have buried his father, that he should suffer the dead to bury
the Math. 8.
dead? By what express commandment did the Apostles receive the charity and
Act. 4.
benevolence of the people, and dispose it at their own arbitr^t, appoint
De^cons for the ^asing of their ministry, call Act. 6.
a counsel for resolving of the question that arose de suffocato and sanguine
of strangled Act. 15.
and Houd, bind women to the covering of their heads, mislike of eating
common 1. Cor. 11.
meats before the ministration of 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 16. 1. Tim. (...).
the Supper, make contribution for the faithful, to appoint widows for the
benefit of the Church? to take order for meat offered up to Idols, and a
thousand 1. Cor. 8.
other presidents which would be rather tedious than profitable to the reader.
For where S. Paul without any warrant of yt scripture, as he says himself,
determines their state to be most happy which abide in true virginity, if
any man allege ye latter end in defense of that particular where he affirms
that he has the spirit of God, by the same reason will I defend as much as now
is called in question, since the same spirit is assured to the faithful as a
guide and scholemaister, not for a month or two, but to the end of ye world.
But no way shall this matter sooner be decided, than if we should examine how
John. 14.
exactly these instructors keep the letter of the Scripture, that would
prescribe so straight a diet for all the world to follow and yet be clear
enough themselves from fasting and from prayer, or at least such prayer as God
has promised to accept, being void of love and charity. For surely it is not
like that they are guilty in their conscience of breakyng any iotte, which
take upon them to refourme both religion and discipline quite through all the
realm. Our savior Christ forbad his disciples to possess gold or silver, or
two coats, and Math. 10.
yet is there never a one of these refourmers, but if he were thoroughly ^^fted,
in his storehouse he would be found to have both gold, silver and three
coats. Christ had no house wherein to shrowde his head, Math. 8.
and they have houses and possessions to maintain their brotherhood. Our
savior charged his disciples not to premeditate what they should answer, and
they continually study upon their problemes. The Apostles might neither call
any man Math. 23.
Father upon earth, nor themselves be called Masters: but with our people is
neither rule nor order unless they be accounted both Masters and Fathers
too, how unnaturally or discourteously soever they bear and behave themselves.
Christ taught none other kind of prayer than that which we usually term the
Pater Math. 6.
noster, but these will pray at pleasure, and be guided only by their private
motion. The prophet Esaie demau^deth in the person of God what house can be
built to ^^ay. 66.
him. Solomon says, that the heaven of heavens cannot conteyne the Lord,
much 1. Beg. 8.
less the house that he builded unto him. Christ when he went up to pray,
went up into y^ m^u^t alone. He bad us shut our Math. 14.
chamber doors when we gave our selves to prayer and contemplation. He
ministered Math. 6.
his supper in a parlour. He appeared to his disciples after his resurrection
not in a Mark. 14.
temple but in a dyning chamber. The time John. 20.
is promised in the Scripture when neither in this mount nor at Jerusalem the
true worshippers shall adore but in spirit and truth, that is, men's prayers
shall not be tied to any certain place but be left at liberty to every go^ly
conscience: the Apostles after the Ascension came together, John. 4.
not in a temple but in a parlour. Act. 1.
God dwells not in temples made with hands: and to conclude, Saint John
describing Act. 7.
the holy City could find no Temple in it. These things standing Apoc. 21.
thus by warrant of the scripture, I mar^yle with what conscience our brethren
can assemble in an open Church, and not rather pray in hedges, as a number do
of late in I^gton and other towns adherent to the City. Thus may a man refute
the godlyest orders that are now observed in the Church, if every text
unfitly applied may be allowed for a sound and pithy argument against the
government and direction of a state. But to go forward in that order which I
have begone, to the supper of the Lord no women were admitted, and yet from
our sacraments they are not now excluded. Why refuse they not al Lawyers and
Judges, because there is but Legislator and Iudex vnus, qui perdere Jacob. 4.
and liberare potest, one Lawyer and Judge which can save and deliver? Why have
they many readers and instructors, seeing as S. James says, Vnus est magister
n^ster, one Jacob. 3.
is our master, non est necesse vt nos doceat aliquis, vnctio enim eius docebit
nos, There is no need that any teach us, for his holy spirit shall teach
us? And Jeremy prophesying of this time, says, Non d^c^bit quisquam Hier. 31.
proximum suum and fratrem, dicens cognosce dominum quia omnes scient me, a
maiore vsque ad maiorem, No man shall teach his neighbor or brother, saying,
know the Lord, for all men shall know me from the least to the greatest. Why
sell they not their goods Man. 19.
and lands, and give them to the poor? why give they not away to every one
Luke. 6.
that asks, and lend without requiring of the principal? why inuit they to
their feasts and bankettes their brethren, Luke. 14.
friends, and kinsfolks, which is forbidden? why go they not like friars
barefoote? Esaias. 20. Luke. 7.
why bury they not without the City? why make they weekly their provision on
the Saturday for all the six days following, being forbidden to be solliciti
Math. 6.
in crastinmu, careful for to morrow? why pray they not without ceasing? why
will Luke. 18.
they needs be retained in service by Peers and noble me^, seeing the Apostle
forbids 1. Cor. 8.
ministers to be serui bominu^, servants of men? Why does Calvin require a
declaration of our faith in baptism, and the Calu. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3.
sect. 5.
child to be sent home again with thanksgiving, whereas no such order is
commanded in the scripture? why go ministers to law with other brethren,
seeing as S. Aug. August. ^pist. 48.
says, Apostoloru^ nullus de iure suo litigauit, none of the Apostles
co^tended for his right? why do they communicate fasting, which Luke 22.
Christ with his Apostles did after the supper? why keep they Sabbath on the
Sunday, which Christ observed according to the first institution on the
Satterday? why feed they not on todes, serpents, and unclean beasts, as well
as others, sith omne quod viuit nobis est in Genesis 9.
cibum, what soever lives is meat for us? Wherefore to conclude, whereas
these with many other things expressed in the letter are omitted by these
refourmers, and a multitude of other substituted in their roumes, which are not
to be feu^d in scripture, and yet as they think Gods co^maundeme^ts not
empeached or broken, seeing they allege none express commandment for many
things above rehearsed, which notwithstanding were not unrewarded at the hands
of god, whereunto also I may a^ioine S. Paul his resolution, ne fidelis maritus
vxore^ 1. Cor. 7.
rel^quat infidele^, that a faithful husband may not leave his unbelieving
wife. Moses gathering a bu^ch of Isope when he was comanded Exodus 12.
to sprinkle yt posts wc blud. Iethros offering of sacrifice: Moses joining of
other Exodus 18.
in commission with him self without commandment, whereas only he had
warrant from almighty God, eodem cap. And last of all, his breaking of those
very table^ (wherein God himself had written) only upon a zeal and great
displeasure conceived upon the peoples ignorance. Exodus ^2.
Last of all, seeing the Aposrles being straightly charged by the words of
their commission, to baptize all Nations in the name of the father of the
son, and of the Math. 28.
holy Ghost, did notwithstanding upon great respect and consideration, as it
should seem, baptize in the name of Christ. So Acts. 19.
Paul purified himself after the Jewish manner in the temple without any
warrant. Acts. 21.
Whereof ^othe are diligently to be observed by those that truly follow
Christ's line in the obedience of the Gospel. I think for my part the ^iuill
Magistrate may command whatsoever is not re^ugnan^ to the word of God, both
Luke. 1^. August. de T^in. lib. 7, cap. 4.
for that we read in Luke. He that is not agayust us, is with us. And as S.
Augustine says, Licuit loquendi and disputand^ necessitate, tres personas
dicere, non quia scriptura dicit, sed quia non contradicit, ^t was lawful
through necessity of speaking and disputing, to say there be three persons,
not because the scripture says so, but because it says not against it. These
things being well considered, let these breeders of dis^ention now remember
how many instruments of Christ's spiritual buyl^ing they have condemned of
corrupt religion, I mean those learned fathers Cranmer and Ridley, which
neither ran without sending, Iere. 23. John. (...).
brake into the fold refusing the door and ordinary mean of calling,
spoiled Aaron of his priesthood, burned incense Number. 16. 1. ^ara^. (...).
without commission, supported the Arc without commandment, or with wicken
Donatus cre^ted temple against temple, altar against altar. As Well may they
deface the^emorte in the Calendar, as blot their worthy credit with malice and
surmised slander. But if these points now called into controversy, were
neither imp^dime^ts in their course, nor stays to their profession, if the
degree and ^diction of an Archbishop were no hinderance to B. Cranmer, in the
end of his worldly pilgrimage, nor a Rochet sat so hard on B. Ridley his
shoulders, but he was able with the same to climb even to the highest step of
Martyrdom, if the Priests gown which he ware even to his death, were
changed into the robe mentioned in the Revelation, and his Tippet turned into
a crown of immortality: to he short, if these garments were thought not
unworthy to be worn at the wedding of the lamb, and the greatest part of
these which watered the profession of their faith with streams of blood,
acknowledged the Bishops due pre-eminence, Christened with godfathers and
interrogations, buried the dead, preached funeral sermons, ministered the
Communion kneeling, and to be short, strictly and exactly performed all things
prescribed in the book of common prayer, (which opprobriously they term a
very imperfect book, picked out of the Popish dunghyll) we must require some
respite for a time to stay and suspend our judgment upon these grave and
learned examples, till equal proof may purchase equal credit. Some of this
company (as I suppose) in Queen Mary's reign was for a time content to
forbear the pleasure of their country, till they might enjoy the liberty of
their conscience Then was none other doctrine preached than that which at this
present is impugned, wherefore either they were then blind and ignorant
confessors, or at yt least pernicious and vainglorious hypocrites: either the
doctrine which they professed in those days was erroneous, or else y^ articles
now indiscreetly published are sedicious. The scripture says it is bonu^ and
Psalm. 133.
iucu^du^ habitare fratres in vnu^, a good and pleasant thing for brethren to
dwell together. Christ co^pareth him self with a hen which gathers her
chickens together, not with (...) kite which scatters and seuereth the^ a
sunder. Al Israel came together as it had bin one man with ye same mind and
counsel, not I^^. 10.
with as many opinions as persons. The whole fraternity of those which believed
at y^ first had but one heart and one soul: the Acts. (...).
holy Ghost found all the Disciples vnanimes in domo, all with one accord in
one place, Acts. (...).
not praying under hedges. S. Paul requires unity of mind and
understanding, 1. Cor. 1.
because the fullness of the law is charity, not hatred, backebyting, and
Romans 13.
slaundering. The same Apostle teaches that all authority is from God, not
from Antichrist, and he will be the author of peace and quietness, not of
quarrels and disorder. We know how unluckelie Roboam spedde in forsaking his
grave and ancient Counsel, and following those lusty yonkers, which led
him by the level of their rash conceyte, not by the certentie and assurance
of his Countries vauntage. Such wrangling interpreters can not derive their
petegree by lineall descent from the God of peace. It is now to late after
long experience to basell men's eyes with shows and seeming verities. S.
Hierome calls it a childishe praise (as in deed it is) which can not be
attained without abasing other men's reputation. It is folly far them to strive
against the stream, or spurn against the prick, wherefore I will here make
an end, wishing that all quarrels set aparte, all private grudges quite
forgotten, all ambicious ostentation and aspiring unto credit now removed,
they will ground them selves upon the rock, and not be shaken with every
blast and puff of doctrine. If they be the children of Abraham, let them trace
their fathers steps: if they be Eagles, let them not forsake the body, which
is the Church of Christ. Practice must be lynked with preaching, and the time
not wasted in bayne and childishe questions: let them not be curious in
trifles, and rechlesse in more wayghtie causes. They must beware of enquiring
after other men's affairs, and negligence in discharge of their own vocation.
They must acknowledge a duty to their superiors, and presume not too far
of their rustie talent. They must continue in seruent prayer with hearty
contrition, and not refuse these means which God has appointed for subduing
of our unbridled and untamed affections. Let them content them selves with
their own estate, and climb not high for fear of a great fall. So may they
find the narrow way, if they trust their guides, by humble knocking be
received into everlasting bliss, if they keep the wedding garment of
charity, where shall be life without death, truth without error, and felicity
without disturbance, one fold, and one shepherd, in perfect unity for ever
and ever.

Amen.
Faults escaped in the Print.
Page 74. li. 9. for vniuersus read vniuersalis.

Page 85. lin. 17. for (...) read (...).

Page 93. lin. 11. to being given, add, to Samuel the Prophet.

Page 109. lin. 10. for Ghost, read holy Ghost.


