A FIG FOR THE SPANIARD, OR SPANISH SPIRITS.

Wherein are lively portraihed the damnable deeds, miserable murders, and
monstrous massacres of the cursed Spaniard.

With a true rehearsal of the late trobles, and troblesome estate of Aragon,
Catalonia, Valencia, and Portingall:

Whereunto are (...) of much marvel, and causes of (...) consequence.

Magn^ est veritas (...) praeualet.

LONDON Printed by John Woolfe, and are to be sold by william Wright. 1591.

TO THE CVRTEOVS GENTLEMEN READERS, HEALTH.
GEntlemen, though Philip of Spain be old and bed-redde yet he is not quite
dead, and though his forces for the present be somewhat weakened, yet is he not
utterly conquered: in good time he may be by divine assistance, and your
worthy valors, show your selves therefore the right inheritours of the virtues
of your ancestors: that is, in peace to be mindful of war, and in war most
studious of peace, bearing always upright minds, and forward hearts, to help
your friendly neighbors. For if our friendly neighbors farewell, then like all
friends we shall fare the better, but if they fail of peaceable success, we
can look for nothing but warlike vproares: your wisdoms know what I mean,
let it be then briefly, pro lege, pro rege, pro grege: Macte virtute sitis.

Yours at commandment, G. B.

portrait

HAec est virgo poteus, haec est Regina fidelis,
Haec est Diua latens muliebribus alma figuris,
Quae tot lustra gerens apud Anglos nobile sceptrum,
Regibus est redamata bonis, populoque, Deoque.
LENVOY.

ONe thing remains thee (Reader) yet undone,
Cast up thine eyes, and see her splendent grace,
Whom Graces so adorn that she has won,
From Monarkes all the first and highest place:
And reigns on Earth like Goddess sent from love,
In mercy, peace, prosperity, and love.
To her for succor, kings do fly from far,
No king (save one) but joys our Sabaes plight,
Poor strangers from their soyles expeld by war,
For Christ's sake, find favor in her sight:
From North, from South, from East, and from the West.
To her they come, and here they find a rest.
O happy Realm, where mercy bears swaie,
O happy Realm, where Hypocrites auaunt:
Such Hypocrites I mean, that counsel aye
Naught else but death, and Princes brains inchant:
Such Hypocrites in Friars habites lurk,
That rapines, rapes, treasons, guyles, murders work.
Ask France hereof, such Hypocrites they rue,
And England when king John was poisoned:
Her Majesty has found it too too true
But Jove has vowed (...) save his daughters head,
Jove her defend from all such monsters fell,
And from the Romish monster, that monstrous feend of hell.
Pro Lege, pro Rege, pro Groge.
A FIG FOR THE Spaniard.
IT has been seen from the heginning, There has been always from time to
time, a troublesome people in the world, and great molesters of their
neighbors, examples follow.
and (...) is proved most true, that among the nations there has always been
one several people, far surpassing the other in ambitious price, and
tyrannical policy, not seeking by neighborhood to quench their unlawful
thirst to rule: but quickening the flames of their unnatural dropsy by hawty
rage, the one purchasing them deadly hatred abroad, the other continual
tumults at home, both endless unquiet of their restles thoughts.

In the green spring of the world (what time In the second reign of Orifiel
spirit of Saturn. The pride and tyranny of nimrod, spro^g of the seed of
Cham.
ambition thrusting out her monstrous head, began freshly to sow common discord
among men, and general contempt of God himself.) Nimrod of the seed of cursed
Cham, termed in holy writ a strong hunter: that is, such a one as compelled
men to obey, either by force, or for fear, in loftines of mind forgetting
himself to be mortal, and faining himself, and fellow Princes immortal, by
ouer-maistring his simple neighbors, reared a tower, whose strange height
might match the top of heaven, and consequently (like God) ouer-looke the whole
earth. But as he that sits above the Cherubins, and laugheth to scorn the
fond devices of worldlinges, with wonderful patience pampreth the proud a
while, and suffers them like coped Lions to swing their short course, so when
they begin to grow intolerable, never was their lift so lofty, but their fall
is as low, if not lower, to the lowest nook of hell.

A present and perfect mirror is this Nimrod, who when he had tyrannized over
his commons, The effects of tyranny.
usurped over his neighbors, foraged their Countries, neglected divine rites
extinguished true religion, and in the mount of his pride (for such is the
insatiable and swelling ^^^come of ambition) opposed himself against God, was
suddenly thrown The fall of Nimrod first king of the world, and Emperor of the
Chaldeans.
down, despoiled of his Crown, his glory rent from him, his Majesty
impaired, his dominions translated, and all his stock defaced by Assure, of
whom proceeded afterward the Monarchy, and masterdome of the Assirrians.
These gallants enjoying the Empire, and his Metropolis Babylon, The example of
the Assirians proceeding of Assure.
more years then Nimrod, but with no less pride, thought it no offense with
Nimrod to opresse their subjects, rob and spoil their friends, depopulate
foreign countries, slaughter their neighbors, usurp over their Territories,
and count all lawefull pillage which their swords could wrongfully purchase.

But as these caualiers dealt with the Chaldeans, Such measure as we meat to
others, such measure shall be met to us.
so likewise are they measured unto, and matched by the Medes, who perceiving
their discipline of war, changed altogether into delicate ^^^^^nesse, their
wealth reapt by prowess, rupt on the backs of strumpets, and that their
riches made them rechlesse, more apt to take their present case, then to
delight in their former exploits, took hearty grace, suddenly invaded them,
speedily conquered The original of the Median Monarchy, in the fall of wanton
Sardanapalus.
them, and forced the woman-like man, and vnmanlike King Sardanapalus, as he
was sitting and spinning among his Curtizans, wittingly and wilfully to end his
own life, which (as some Authors affirm) was the only ^eed that ever he did
to show himself a man, spending the rest of his days The Chaldeans and
Assirians, the first that made was in the world.
more like a woman. Thus were the vain glorious Chaldeans, and arrogant
Ass^yrians the first seedmen of seditions, the stirrers up of bloody broils,
maintainers of deadly wars, and usurpers over their neighbors, though
happily not so will, politic, and cruel as they; yet as wise, as warlike,
and more religious.

In like violent actions succeeded the Medes, and The Persians, Greeks, and
Romans, resembled in pride, and tyrany to the Caldeans, Assirians and Meads.
Persians, after them the Greeks, and Romans, so that the world has
hitherto never wanted some one nation: sometime it has had mo, that have been
scourges, whippes, and terrors unto the residue. But at this present day,
whether our age does want one, especially beautiful Europe, in many quarters,
whereof the glorious light of the gospel At this present time the southern
part of Europe affords a proud disturber, and injurious molester of his
neighbor Princes.
shines most clearly, that seeks to bannish and blemish her splendent
beauty, that vexes the other noble princes unjustly, disquieteth his
neighbors both by sea and land maliciously, usurps over Crowns, kingdoms,
and countries most impudently, governs his own tyrannically, commits
massacres incessantly, breaths out bitter threats opprobriously, snatcheth
at all greedily, and aymeth at all with violence, and arms, ask his own
dominions first (for he names all how ever it be gotten his own) and next all
the estates of Christendom will answer with one consent, and readily deside
the controversy. But Papists, or Neuters.
some will say, who either know little, or hear less, or see least of all,
for that happily, or rather unhappily, they are of purpose ignorant, deaf for
the nonce, and wilfully blind (as in this point a great number are) Sir I
neither know nor hear, nor see any such matters in Christendom, as you
mention: but to make further trial, let us examine the attemptes and practices
of all kings christened: and see who it is, that is guilty of these most
heinous The right terms of Recusantes, and Traitors.
crimes you object, beginning first with the most worthy, the king
Catholic, eldest in years, mightiest in power, richest in substance, and
most The Adversaries arguments to prove the innocence of king Philip.
devout in religion: He for that he is a catholic, and pillar of the Church,
loves, imbraceth, and nourishes the Gospel: He for that he is by nature
mild, and taught by Gods laws not to murder, seeks no man's blood: He for
that his Ancesters have been just, and peaceable, lives with his neighbor
princes uprightly, and lovingly: He for that he cleaves unto the Pope, cannot
err, but is full of compassion: He for that he tendreth his Jesuits has
learned to be humble and meek: He is full of charity, and therefore not
covetous: He is old and decrepit, and therefore cannot invade, much less
usurp, or do violence, all which untruths in a word or two, shall be confuted.

If he did sincerely love, embrace, and nourishe The former reasons confuted.
the Gospel, would he xxxiii. whole years together molest the Prince, envy
the people, and disturb the Realm, that generally above all other loves,
Meant by the Queen and people of England.
imbraceth, and nourishes the gospel? If he loved, embraced, and nourished the
Gospel, would he seek by all means possible to hinder the rightful
possession, and orderly proceedings of a king, who The most christian king of
France.
these many years has impouerished himself by seeking to plant the Gospel,
and so many times has, and yet daily does fight, and hazardes his Cuius
contrarium, verum est.
life for the Gospel?

But so truly he loves, imbraceth, and nourishes the Gospel, as he burns
and bannisheth out of his territories, infinite swarms of rich Jews, sworn
enemies to the Gospel. The Gospel wills us to yield unto Caesar those
things that are Cesars, and unto God those things that are Gods: but he
teaches them all together treasons, rancor, and matice a against their
Sovereign. Among all these nations the Spaniards swords have been busy.


Lastly, so he loves, imbraceth, and nourishes the Gospel, that he makes his
Jesuits, and Shauelinges forget all Gospel, and mangleth, and massacreth all
true professors of the Gospel. That he is mild by nature, and seeks no
man's blood, First ask his slaughtered son, and wife, ask the millions of
Moors, and poor Portingales, ask thousands of Neopolitanes, and Dutchmen,
ask Frenchmen, and Italians, yea and the English, that have been tortured, and
tormented to death by him, and they all but that he has made them sure enough
from crying, would with their woeful cries, and grievous clamours resolve you,
or at the least all Christendom yet living, that have noted his drifts and
dealings these forty years, will supply their office? How peaceably, and
lovingly he lives with his neighbor Princes: how full of compassion, humble
and meek he is, and whether he do usurp, and offer violence, England, Each
of these countries had their parts but these 33. whole years he has had
continually a fling at England.
France, Flanders, Poland, the Venetians, each dukedom in Italy, Aragon,
Portugal, Navarre and Bearne, yea, and the books that are daily printed in
them, and sent abroad from them touching our present matter do testify: and
having so many autentique witnesses, what need I more proof in an open cause?
Only this leave I request to think that the prophecy that was found in the
University A prophecy found in Portingall.
of Conimbua in Portingall, in the reign of Dom Emanuell, is verified in him,
that the little King of Parrius Rex Austri per singula climata mundi, Nobilis
ingenii dicitur, sed tamen omni Europa fietterrori vt rector Auerni.
the great South, should be renowned through out the world for his policy,
and redoubted in all christendom for his tyranny; for whom (notwithstanding he
possesses at this day more large territories, and greater store of wealth,
then any of his progenitors, or any other prince Christian ever did, and al
his proud Partisans thundering out whole worlds of threats: little England,
the noble and victorious Queen of England, the honorable Nobility of England,
the valiant Gentlemen If England fear God, and be true within it self, it may
boldly bid a fig for the Spaniard.
of England, the true hearted commons of England relying upon God the defender
of their right, do bid a Fig, in respect of any great danger, or strange
detriment, they can inflict either upon her royal person, or her loyal
subjects at home, or her Majesty's approved friends abroad, which action that
it is both princely, politic, and discreet, as also christianlike, sincere,
and charitable, shall appear by the sequel. First therefore to prove The
Spaniards guile.
that the Spaniardes, as it is their guise, rather thundereth rigorously,
threatens terriblie, and spitteth out his spite vennemously, then means (as
they say) good earnest simply, how ever he holds our Jesuits in hand, to make
the^ persist in their wicked exploits: we will be so bold, as to consider his
own domestical affairs, the late accidents, and cross business that befell
in Aragon, and other places, and see whether in likelihood he be able now to
perform, as whilome in the ears of Great garboils of late between the
Spaniards and the Aragonians, between the Portingals and Castilions.
the world he boasted. For who does not hear that lists to hearken after
news, what uncouth troubles, dangerous skirmishes, daily mutinies, and
plentiful effusion of blood, have lately happened between the Spaniards, and
Aragonians, between the Castillions, and their other vassals: the tenor whereof
shall briefly be touched. Antonie Teretz The common rumor is for stabbing a
lusty younker favored of the King of Spain.
Secretary to the king of Spain, upon what occasion is yet uncertain (for
that it is the Spaniardes dissembling nature, to mind and revenge one thing,
but to pretend another) being committed to prison, found the means partly
through his wife, who daily had access unto him, and partly by his letters
directed to his friends about the Court, that he escaped, some say in the
habit of a Countriman, who being secretly conveyed to Saragosa The occasion of
the first rising in Arago^
in Aragon among his friends, made known unto them, how indirectly, or rather
injuriously the king and inquisition proceeded against them contrary to
justice, and the privileges of their Realm, to what purpose they did it, and
to what effect it would ensue, if it were not remedied. As of small drops, rise
great floods, and of a spark is kindled a great fire: so of this (in man's
judgment, but a small molehill is made so great a mountain that it may be a
secret judgment of the Lord, to cause to spring from thence, either so great
a flood, that may drown all Spain for their sins, or so forcible a light
fire, that may purge and purify them from their dregs.

But to the matter, news being brought unto the King, and inquisition of the
escape of the secretary and that he had gotten Aragon, a strong Mandamus The
light fire of the gospel
was sealed to the Viceroy, to make all speedy and diligent search after him:
wherein the Viceroy proved so painful, that once again the Secretary THe
double diligence of the Viceroy.
was taken and cast into prison, no doubt, but much more narrowly watched then
before. The holy Fathers of the Inquisition, the catercappe devils, Doctors (I
should say) that like bloody butchers, continually thirst after blood, thinking
them selves sure, and all things in safety: whilst they are preparing to sit
in judgment upon the said Anthony Teretz, and dispatch him in the way, were
suddenly encountered by a multitude that lay closely in ambushe for the purpose,
in and about the City from the Country and mountains there about, whereby
the Secretary was re-deliuered, many of the holy Fathers slaughtered, their
Couches some of them burnt, some hackt and hewed in pieces, their servants
scattered, the Kings and Vice-royes powers discomfited, and to the number of
150 persons slain. The King having intelligence of this great dishonor and
unfortunate repulse, standing upon thorns till he were revenged, forthwith
dispatched a band of 4000. against them; who knowing that the boon of a tyrant
is blood, and his grace nothing but death, resolved every man to try the last
dice of fortune, and so die, then yielding, be brought into a second slavery.
In fine, so well the The rendering of the cities and kingdoms of Catalonia
and valentia.
citizens and kingdom of Aragon demeaned themselves against the kings forces,
that they drew unto them the cities and kingdoms of Catalonia, and Valentia
also: which three kingdoms are up in arms against the King, partly to
revenge the deaths of those noble personages, whom most cruelly he murdered:
and partly to defend their ancient rites, and privileges: and upon many and
weighty considerations, have elected them (as some report) a new King.

The names of the Nobles, whom lately the King of Spain has put to death. The
names of the nobles who lately suffered in Spain.

be these. The Duke of Ossune. The Duke of Ferill. The County of Orgus. The
County of Micas, governor of Granado. strangled and burnt
The Archbishop of Corduba confessor to the King. The Bishop of Cadis. Don
Francisco Lapeto, president of the Kings counsel.

Don Vasques Secretary to the state, is fled with 7. Nobles more, and Anthany
Teretz also, whose discourse ye have heard is fled, and safe with the French
King, who is his rightful Liege. These unexpected tumults, and sudden claps of
war, though they have bin of short continuance, yet have they been very
combersome and bitter unto the Spaniard, and have not only caused great
hart-burning against him with the Laiety, but also some rancour of the Clergy,
as may appear by this probability.

On All Saints day last, there chanced a Jesuit A pleasant, story of a
Jesuit and a friar confirmed by certain persons of sufficient credit, who
have received the truth of all these matters.
(which order is most odible to all other Cloysterers) to preach in Saragosa
before diverse men of account in the city, who among other matters began busily
to handle the present mutinies, and vnreuerent rebellions of the land, against
their Sovereign, and holy Fathers of the inquisition, showing the emolument
that came by them, and inconveniences that would ensue, if they were resisted:
concluding with this corollarium, that it would be meritorious, both for their
bodies and souls, peaceable to the Realm, profitable to themselves, their
wives, children, and kinsefolkes, yea, and auailable for their lands and
liuinges (for which they were now in contention) if they would quietly lay down
those arms, and readily betake them to the mercy of his Catholic Majesty,
and favor of the holy inquisition. A. Friar happily hearing him, and warily
noting more then the common people, (although generally enough was noted) in
his Epiphonema, or shutting up of his matter, not mistrusted approached the
Pulpit, and suddenly threw a chain or collar of puddings about the Jesuits
neck, A pudding is too good meat for a traitorous Jesuit.
crying out good people, here is meet dinner for the Jesuits good sermon:
which deed notwithstanding there were present men of authority of the City,
and questionless very many of the current stamps, yet generally it was so well
taken, that out of the Church, the Jesuit was haled into the street, and there
disguised in a fools coat, carried upon men's shoulders to be scorned up and
down the City, and whether he escaped with life, is not yet signified. And
here by the way I wish all men, that either hear or read these truths, truly
and duly to consider, what great cause Don Philip of Spain has either to
pretend, or practice any invasion, upon any K. Philip if he look about him,
at this time hathsmal cause to broch new broiles.
Prince foreign this year, having so much ado at home, not only with his
temporaltie, but also with his darling and sweet nurserie his sacred and
spotles spirituality. Thus far concerning the state and affairs of Aragon:
now let us see what is and has been done this year in Portingall. A Roceio
is an open place, where gentlemen walk for their pleasure in Lisbon.
Portingal gentleman walking in the Roceio of Lisbon, espied a base Castilion
of such proud and presumtuous demenor, so fantastical in his attire, lofty in
his looks, and slow in his pace, (as though he had bin treading of measures)
could not long bear him, but bearded him, and iustled him, whereupon The
original of the last dissentions in Portingall.
the matter was debated by Stafford law, the Portingall slain, and the Spaniard
escaped into the Castle. Immediately certain Portingall Gentlemen of his
familiars swore revenge, and not long since have had their wills. For on S.
Mathews day last, finding a crew of Castilions reuelling in a brothell house,
suddenly set upon, and slew five of them, which caused the other Castillions
of the Castle to come down in extreme heat of choler, and offer great
violence through the city, until the great multitudes of Portingals that
were hastily swarmed together, made them betake them to their heels, and ever
since more watchfullie, and warily guard their But thus it is not ended: for
since we have had knowledge of diverse other bickerings.
castle. The matter being brought in question before the Cardinal (who now a
while keeps warm the K. of Portingals seat,) and being found that the
Spaniards were chief masters of misrule and mischief, (as they are always)
they were punished severely, but all in vain: for old rankor is not easily
forgotten, A Paradox. King Philip to enjoy the crown of Portingall, especially
committed these three most damnable iniquities, first he betrayed to death his
own Nephew, next set paking the Cardinal, and lastly exiled and keeps in
exile the right heir.
nor the ancient malice between those two nations lightly forgiven. For it is
impossible, and may pass for a Paradox to think that those two Nations, the
Portingall and Spaniard will ever be fully reconciled. F^^ as often as either
they shall remember, or their cronicles report the fraudulent feats of false
Philip against his neighbor K. and kingly nephew Don Sebastion so brave a young
prince, and only hope of the Portingals, record the damned usurping of the
spiteful Spaniards, and miserable exile of Don Anthony lawful, and indubitant
heir, now favored and fostered by her Majesty: so often as they shall either
speak, or think upon the cursed acts of Christophero de Moyra one of the
Kings favorites: as often as they shall either hear or think upon the heaps
of their poor country men, that have bin within this 13. years most
desperately murdered, and of their own intolerable servitude they endure at
this instant, they will have as good and fell stomaks; as ever they had at the
I Will of Terferes, what time the brave and wise gentleman Don Cyprian Figuredo
Christo de Moyra sent a counterfeit cook into France to poison Don Antonie.
This governor gave the king of Spain great battles, and overcame in both,
living now with his King in England.
Vasconsalus was governor there to the Spaniards cost, to rip out their hearts,
and eat them with salt. Wherein I advertise all those of our Nation, that
without any sufficient trial of their detestable deeds, and knowledge of their
crabbed nature, are such great friends, and stout favorites of the enemies of
the world, not to be deceived, but as they be men, and should have the spirit
of reason, so to be governed and guided by reason. Suppose the Spaniard as
they wish (but God be praised he is very far from) should make a conquest in
this land, and bring all to his bay, as he has done in other countries over
whom he usurps: Would he (tro ye) spare this more then them? No: he will
find five hundred times more cause to ^^ce and ransacke our cities, to pill
and pole our country, to murder and massacre our people, then theirs. For they
were his neighbors; we mere strangers: they have been sometime his friends;
we always (as he counts) sworn enemies: they are of his own religion, we
altogether contrary: they have the Pope to mittigate his wrath, if he be to
fierce; we have both Pope and Pope-lings to incense him unto further ire, that
he may be more froward: so that whatsoever the Pope and he could do, that
they would do say they) promise they, swear they never so much to the
contrary) and whatsoever they will do, may not be gainesaid as unlawful.
Wherefore let all English hearts and true hearted Englishmen, say with the
Poet.

Aurea libertas gemma preciosior omni.

And whilst they have it, embrace it, and not betray it, but hazard lands,
lives, lims and all, to maintain it. Finally, let those regions, over whom the
Spaniard already tyranizeth, be examples unto us, whose cofers are already
impouerished, whose people are mightily impaired, whose lives are not their
own, whose lands upon every light quarrel are confiscate, whose
antient-rightes are contemned, peculiar privileges infringed, wholesome laws
violated, and all in all corrupted: then may we courageously say, God the Lord
of hosts (who is, and has always been our defender) is our right, and
cheerfully vaunt, a Fig for the Spaniard.

We have hitherto discussed how unlike, and unable the Spaniardes is in
respect of the foresaid troubles, which as yet on no part are fully pacified,
to pursue his determination: now let us pry a little more narrowly into
matters of no less consequence, and by examining them we may easily
conjecture, what he is able to effect. The scarcity therefore of bread, and
defect of all other store of Wonderful great dearth throughout all Spain.
victual, wherewith Spain, especially the seacoasts thereof, this present
year have been plagued, would rather have been a terrible warning to any
other Prince of corrigible nature, to have humbled himself unto almighty God,
and to continue in prayer for the auoydance of so great a misery, then to
prepare and threaten bloody wars against his neighbor Princes, better able for
the present to maugre, and endure arms then he: yea the flourishing kingdom
of Naples, which for his God punishes the people sometime for the
transgressions of the Prince.
wonderful fertility was wont to be termed the Garden of the world, has
these two years so ill prospered, not only in her corn, and fruits, but
also in her vintage, and other provision, that it is found not to yield the
third part that it was wont: whereby the people perish most lamentably, the
Nero Emperor of Rome, when he saw the City flaming with fire, laughed and
soong verses containing the destruction of Troy.
land is wasted pitifully, and all in all lament rufully: only Philip who
should be more grieved, and pensive then the rest, like his great grandsier
Nero, when he saw Rome on fire, is so far from mourning, that he rather
mocketh, and triumphs risit Sardonico. But say that neither these plagues of
swelling sedition, or pinching famine, happily sent by God himself to none
other end, but to relent his stony heart, and set him at peace, with other
Princes that seek after, and delight in peace, can quallifie his hautie humor,
or quench his hot desire of revenge: Let us yet weigh if there be not occasions
of as great moment to move and mollify him, except he mean his people,
ships, artillery, and warlike furniture should rather perish by war, then
consumed through famine. Who is In Flanders, France, and England.
ignorant of the great slaughters of Spaniards, that have been committed
within these four years? who is ignorant of the huge loss, both of men and
ships he has sustained in this last Indian voyage? who does not know that he
that inioyeth much, has need of Argus eyes, Mercuries brain, and Hercules
strength to maintain it? and who does not know that his storehouse of Sicilie
for this The Sicillons made him plainly answer, they had not corn enough for
themselves.
year is empty? Seeing then Spain cannot presently sustain, much less
relieve, or repair such infinite losses both of men, ships, artillery, and
all other provision of victualles, within The Duke of Florence will have a
saying to the Spanish Lantado, for abusing his colors, defeating the people of
the provision of their corn, and many other injuries The last pope finely,
and wittily denied the king of Spain many requests: These and such like
dealinges have caused the deaths of 5. Popes within these 17. months.
her own bounds, seeing such innumerable cares depend on their necks, and
that they cannot endure them without the assistance of others: Let us now
reason what possibility they have to be succored by others, and begin first
with their own neighbors. It is possible they may command a few hungersterued
slaves in Naples, and the parts adjoining (whereof they have the government)
but in other parts of Italy, especially Genua, Florence, and Venice, where he
is loved, as the Devil loves holy water: he may command, and go without, and
entreating, obtain as man^^ bands of men, and thousands of crowns, (which some
suspect was the death of the last Pope) as a chicken can hold in hi^ fist. As
for France and Flanders, therein his jolly brauo have such gallant
counterbuffes daily, the one part by the most Christian mirror of chyualrie,
the french king, the other by the puissant and politic prince Grave Maurice,
that they look for aid of him, who Sigismund king of Poland maintains the
tumultes of the Jesuits at Gacow, where they have beaten down and rased the
Churches of the reformed religion.
is himself aidlesse, rather then any way find themselves of strength to
succor their hapless Monarchs. Likewise Germany, and especially Poland, in
many corners, whereof he has closely couched his rabbles of Jesuits, and set
all in vprores, are so unable, and unapt to succor him, that they are skant
able to defend themselves. Finally from England, wherinto daily he sends whole
herds, and hundreds of Jesuits, Seminaries, and Priests to disturb our peace:
although her Majesty ever loving, and longing after peace, has sought always
rather to gratulate him, then any way to grieve him: yet in any of these
attempts he is to hope for no help, except he would employ Philip mantained
John Marilian hy^ Ambassador three whole years at Constantinople to increate
for peace, which at length was obtained in such sort, that neither Christian
nor Turk thought it would continue, for both Princes applied them selves to the
time, rather then that either of them desired any friendship of other.
his forces to better use, then only to seek the spoil, and effusion of
christian blood. Princes of former years living together in amity, and linked
with the sweet chain of christian-like charity, were wont to levy all
their powers against the untamed Pagons, and ennemies of Christianity, but he
has been lately convinced to do quite contrary: how then of Christians can
he look for courtesy. But some will object, and say, Tush Philip is ric^ he
possesses whole Mines of coin, he is the golden Cheuallier, he needs no
man's courtesy. Let him but hold up his finger, he shall have friends,
followers, and soldiers inowe: this argument is both weak, and slender, and
has partly been refelled before: therefore in three words with the Poet,
thus briefly I confute it. Malo virum pecunia, quam pecuniam viro indigentem.
Hitherto concerning his business at home, and condition with his bordering
neighbors. Now let us look what hope the Spaniardes has to enterprise any
invasion, or conquest in respect of England.

The first, and chiefest reasons therefore, wherewith his Partisans, and
partakers use to induce him, and hale him on (whether of his own will he is
readily enough inclined) are these three Three reasons our English Traitors
use to urge to Philip.
in number. The first is drawn from the weakness of her Majesty's Navy. The
second of a supposed evil contentment of a number of people in the land to
serve the Queen, and her government against her enemies. Lastly, and most
principally of a great strong party, that will be found here in the favor of
them for religion A mere fable and of no likelihood.
that will take arms against her highness, upon the sight of the Catholic
Navy on the coasts of England: all which that they are but imagined surmises,
and untrue reports, has already been proved, Anno. 1588. at what time the
courageous force, and forcible courage of our Navy sufficiently appeared, when
as at the first encounter with the mighty Spanish Armada, our Some say it was
their Viceadmirall: but how ever it was, a most huge barge.
simple Fleet of Fish-boates (as it pleased them to term it) took their
Viceadmirall, and for the space of 8. or 9. days together, so scattered,
slaughtered, sunk, and chased them, that they were forced to fly from the
coasts of Flanders near Calice, toward the unknown parts of the cold North:
all their hopes, all their buildings, founded but upon a conceited conquest,
utterly overthrown and (as it were) with an Earthquake, all their costs, and
comfortes by the omnipotent, and outstretched arm of God, brought to the
ground. As to the second branch of their hope depending upon opinion of some
great miscontentment of many, and sundry persons against the Queens Majesty,
the proof of the contrary so appeared the self same year, both of her
Majesty's actions to maintain the liking of all her people, and of the
general earnest devotion showed to her Majesty, by all estates, Noble and
mean, rich and poor, protestants and papists, as I think no prince
christened ever had greater cause of comfort in her people.

Now to the last point, that there shall be found here in the Realm a strong
party of Catholics to join against the Queen, and assist the inuaders, by
the former relations of the general great, and fervent love of all the land
toward her excellent Majesty, of the great offers of service, made by the whole
Nobility of their goodly shows of brave men, and stately steedes, of their
infinite costs and expenses, of the universal forwardness of the commons in
all actions, and of their prompt minds to execute all duties of good
subjects, even unto the loss of their lives, this their foundation is weak,
feeble, and of no force, and therefore no way to be feared.

We have already proved by many reasons, and those substantial enough, how
unlike and unable the Spaniard is, both in respect of himself, in respect of
the help of his neighbors, and in respect The Spaniard unlike to conquer
England for three reasons.
of our own right, and might, to master and molest us with any huge hurt, or
singular scath: all which notwithstanding are thus, for that we often see man
proposes, but God disposes, to be understood, and restrained that they may
and shall prove true, so long as we serve God truly, Si Deus nobiscum quis
contra nos. The Spaniard is not yet brought so low, but that he may rise, rage
and reign again, if we be not thankful to almighty God, pliable to our
countries peace, and watchful for his coming. Nam qui semel caepit esse
hostis, and iterum erit, si nactus fuerit occasionem.
live in loyal service, and dutiful obedience toward our Prince lovingly,
honor our Magistrates reuereutly, live together charitably, and detect and
discrie wicked treasons, and obstinate traitors willingly: otherwise the Lord
will renew, revive, and increase the Spaniards strength exceedingly, cause him
prevail mightily, and triumph over us spightfully, so that no man amidst all
that has been spoken, is so far to presume, that either he omit any jot
of christianlike service toward almighty God, or loyal obedience toward his
natural Prince, or sacred honor toward the supriour Magistrate, or sincere
love toward his home borne neighbors, but as we were seen not yet a
Prentice years Anno 1588
sithence, (at what time the minds of many were daunted with a sodaiue fear of
the enemy) to serve God devoutly, obey our prince cheerfully, reverence the
Magistrate discretly, and live and love together faithfully, so to continue, and
(if need once again require) to spend lands, lims, lives and all as then we
proffered readily for God and our country, and not to hatch treasons closely,
nourish traitors covertly, succor fugitives wilfully, or support shameless
runnegats continually, men of no conscience, sworn enemies to God, their
Prince, and country: which that we may do to the glory of the eternal GOD,
comfort of our dread Sovereign, joy of our vigilant Magistrates weeding out of
hypocritical rebels, wholesome Thus if we do, then may we boldly bid a Fig
for the Spaniard, either a fig of his own, or, as they say vna higa Italians.
preservation of mutual charity at home, and godly consolation of our poor
distressed brethren abroad, the Lord of hosts in mercy grant for his sweet
sons sake, to whom with his Christ our only peacemaker, and the holy Ghost our
comforter, be al honor, lawd, praise, and thanksgiving for all his
unspeakable loving kindnesses extended on the sinful people of England both
now and for ever, and let all that fear his name, and wish the blessed peace
of his Church, say in devout zeal, and zealous devotion of spirit,

Amen.
FINIS.

