ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF, BY THE Church Wardens and Swornemen within the
Archdeaconrie of Middlesex;

And the truth thereof to be by them upon their oaths certainly presented to
M. Doctor Squier Archdeacon there or to his Officialles, with particular
aunsweare to every Article.

1582.

VBIQVE FLORESCIT.


LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, dwelling at the Sign of the Fox in Old
Fishstreate near the Sign of the Swanne.

ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF, BY THE CHVRCHWARDENS and Swornemen within the
Archdeaconrie of Middlesex: and the truth thereof to be by them upon their
oaths, certainly presented to M. Doctor SQVIER Archdeacon there, or to his
Officials, with particular aunsweare to every Article. Anno Domini 1582.
FIRST, whether Common Prayer be said in your Church or Chapel upon the
Sondayes and Holy days at convenient hours reverently and distinctly in
such order, without any kind of alteration, as is appointed by the Book of
Common Prayer, and the Laws of this Realm? and whether your Minister so
turn himself, and stand in such place of your Church or Chauncell, as the
people may best hear the same? Whether the Holy Sacraments be likewise
ministered reverently, in such manner as by the Laws of this Realm is
appointed? And, whether upon Wednisdayes and Fridayes, not being Holy days,
the Letanye and other Prayers appointed for the day, be said accordingly, and
the Excommunication against sinners, read thrice yearly?

2 Whether you have in your Church or Chapel all things necessary and
requisite for common prayer and administration of the Sacraments, specially,
the book of Common Prayer with the new Calendar, two Psalters, the English
Bible in the largest volume, the two Tomes of the Homelies, the Paraphrasis of
Erasmus translated into English, the Table of the Ten Commandments, the
Table for the degrees of Matrimony, a convenient Pulpit well placed: a comely
and decent Table standing on a frame, for the Holy Communion, with a fair
linen cloth to lay upon the same, and some coueringe of Silk, Buckerame, or
other such like, for the clean keeping thereof, a fair and comely Communion
Cup of Silver and a cover of silver for the same, a sure Cofer with two locks
for the keeping of the Register Book, and a strong Chest or box for the Alms
of the poor?

3 Whether any person or persons be admitted to aunsweare as Godfathers or
Godmothers at the Christening of any Child, except he or she have before
received the Holy Communion, and can give account of their Faith, and will
recite the same before the Minister, if he or she be thereunto required?

4 Whether any person or persons, not being ordered at the least for a Deacon,
do either say Common Prayer openly in your church, solemnize Matrimony, or
administer the Sacrament of Baptism, or deliver to the Communicantes the
Lords Cup, at the celebration of the Holy Communion, or do bury the dead,
or give Thanks for Women after their Childbirth, and what he or they be that
so do?

5 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Farmer of your Benefice, do cause any Curate
to serve in your Church before he be examined and admitted by the Ordinary,
or his Deputy in writing, and your Minister have his sufficient letter of
Orders or no?

6 Whether your Minister or you have suffered any Interludes to be played in
your Church or Chapel, where Gods Word and Prayer are to be used, or there
be any in your Parish that does violate or break the Lords Day by any kind
of work or pastime whatsoever, or any Minstrels that use any playinge upon
their Instruments in your Church or Chapel, or your Churchyard, or other
that has made any fray, or used any brawlinge or unseemly noise there, or any
that use any Dauncinge or other kind of vain pastime in the foresaid places
at any time, And whether there be any Dancing, Rifling, or gameplaying, or any
bodily labor, as ploughing, carting, or any handie craft used in your Parish
upon the solemn Feasts, or Festival days?

7 Whether the people of your Parish, especially householders having no lawful
excuse to be absente, do faithfullye and diligently endeavor themselves to
resort with their children and servants to their Parish Church or Chapel
on the Holy days, and chiefly upon the Sondayes, to Morninge and Eueninge
Prayer, and upon reasonable let thereof, to some usual place where Common
Prayer is used, and then and there abide orderlye, and soberlye, during the
time of Common Prayer, Homelies, Preachinges, and other Service of Gods word
there used, reverently and devoutly giuinge themselves to the hearing thereof,
and who they be that either negligentlye or wilfully absente themselves, or
come very late to Church upon the Sondayes especially, or that walk, talk,
or otherwise irreverently behave themselves in the Church, or use any gaminge
abroad or in any house, or sit in the streates or churchyard, or in any
Tavern, or Alehouse upon the Sunday or other Holy day, in the time of Common
Prayer, Sermons or reading of the Homilies, either before noone or after noone,
or else resort to Faires, Plays, or games, in the same time?

8 Whether the forfaiture of twelve pence for every such offense appointed by
a Statute made in the first year of the Queens Majesty's reign be levied,
and taken by the Church Wardens of every person that offends, and by them
be put to the use of the poor of the Parish, and if it be not, by whose
default it is not levied, and what particular sommes of money have been
forfayted that way, and by whom since the Annuntiatio^ of our Lady in the year
of our Lord 1581. until the day of giving up the presentment concerning these
articles, and to whom such forfaitures have been delivered?

9 Whether there be any Innekeepers, Alewiues, Vittaylers, or Tiplers that
suffer or admit any person or persons in their houses to eat or drink, or
play at Cards, Tables or such like games in time of Common Prayer or Sermon on
Sondayes or Holy days, and whether there be any shoppes open on Sondayes or
Holy days, or any Butchers or others that commonly use to sell meat or other
things in the time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or readinge of the Homilies.
And whether in any Faires or common markets falling upon the Holy days, there
be any showing of any wares before the divine service be done.

10 Whether for the putting of the Churchwardens and swornemen the better in
remembrance of their duty in observing and noting such as offend in not
coming to divine service, your Minister do openly every Sunday, after he
have read the second Lesson at Morning and Evening Prayer, monishe and warn
the Churchwardens and Swornemen to look to their charge in this behalf, and
to observe who contrary to the said Statute, offend in absenting themselves
from their Parish Church, or irreverently as is aforesaid use themselves in
the time of divine service?

11 Whether your Minister do exercise himself in godly study of Holy
Scriptures, and virtuous bringing up of youth, as in teaching of the Catechism
lastly setfoorth by authority, and other godly exercises from time to time?

12 Whether your Minister do at the least every Sunday and Holy day, openly in
the Church call for, hear and instruct, all the Children, Apprentises and
servants of both the sexes, that be of convenient age within your Parish, or
at the least so many of them, as the time will serve, and as he may well hear
and instruct, for half an hour at the least before, or at the Eueninge
Prayer, in the X. Commandments, the Articles of the belief, and the Lords
Prayer, and diligently examine and teach them the said Catechism?

13 Whether all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Dames of your Parish, cause
their Children, Servants, and Apprentises, both mankind and womankinde,
being above six years of age, to come to the Church on the Sondayes and
Holy days, at the time to them appointed, or at the least such and so many of
them as your Minister shall appoint, and obediently to hear and be ordered by
the Minister until such time as they have learned the same Catechism? And
what be the names of these that do not cause their Children, Servants and
Apprentises so to come to the Church to be instructed and examined? And how
many of the said Children, Servants, and Apprentises be in your Parish, which
being above seven years old, do not aunsweare to the said Catechism, and
what be their names and age, and with whom they dwell? And whether do you
which are the Church Wardens diligently observe the offenders in the
premises, that you may quarterly make true presentment of them?

14 Whether your Minister, or any man or woman in your Parish do wilfully
mainetaine or defend any Heresy, false opinions, Popish errors, contrary
to the laws of Almighty God, and true doctrine, by public authority in this
Realm now setfoorth? And whether any keep any (...) secret Conuenticles,
contrary to the Laws, or any within your Parish be suspected to be
Papists, Anabaptists, Libertines, or of the detestable sect of the Family
of Love, or of any other notable heresy, and what be their names?

15 Whether, does your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Minister keep any suspected
woman in his house, or be an incontinent person, given to dronkennes, idleness,
or be a haunter of Tauernes, Alehouses, or suspected places, or be a Hunter,
Hawker, Dicer, Carder, Tabler, Swearer, False dissembler, or otherwise
suspected of any notorious crime, or give any evil example of life?

16 Whether your Church be void of an Incumbent, how long it has been so
void, by whom, and at whose order the fruits are gathered, and bestowed, by
whom and at whose appointmente the cure is served?

17 Whether your Minister use to pray for the Queens most excellent
Majesty (Queen Elizabeth) in your Church: and whether he exhort the people
to obedience of her Highness, and other Magistrates being in authority under
her, or no?

18 Whether your Parson or Vicar has preached or caused to be preached in
your Church his quarterly or monthly Sermons, as by the Queens Injunctions
he is bound, and what be the names of him or them, that so did preach, and
whether he admitted any to preach, not being lawfully licenced, or have
let or inhibited those that were licenced, and whether if there be no
Sermon, your Minister do read every Sunday distinctly and plainly some part
of the Homelies appointed by the Queens authority to be read? And whether
does he Quarterly read the Injunctions?

19 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, have publicly, or secreatly taught
any doctrine tendinge to the discredit of the received order, for gouernemente
or public Prayer, in the Church, or make any innovation? and whether they
have permitted any man so teaching or making any such innovation, who they be
and what be their names, that so did teach?

20 Whether your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, after the Gospel, have read openly
in your Church twice this year plainly without addition or change the
declaration of certain principal Articles of Religion setforth by both the
Archbishops and the Bishops of this Realm, for unity of doctrine, being
appointed to be read upon some Sunday within one month next after Michaelmas
and Easter yearly?

21 Whether your Minister has admitted to the receiving of the holy Communion
any open and notorious sinner or evil liver, by whom the Congregation is
offended, or any malicious person that is out of charity, or that has done
any open wrong to his neighbors, by word or deed, without due penance, first
done, or reconciliation had, to the satisfaction of the congregation?

22 Whether your Minister has admitted to the holy Communion any of his Parish
either mankind or womankinde, that cannot say by heart the X. Commandments,
the Articles of the Faith, and the Lords Prayer, and that cannot say by heart
the Catechism authorized, or are not diligente to learn, to render a reason
of their Faith, and whether he marry any persons which were single before, that
cannot say the said Cathechisme, and whether he uses to examine his
Parishners at conueniente times, to the intent he may know whether they can say
the same which is required, and whether there be any that do refuse so to be
examined or no?

23 Whether there be any in your Parish man or woman being of conueniente
age, that has not received, the holy Communion thrice at the least this last
year, and namely at Easter last or there about, and what their names are? And
whether yearelye before Easter or at such conueniente times as your Minister
shall think meet, and require his Parishioners to recite unto him the
Catechism by heart in English, if any do wilfully and stubbernely refuse to
recite the same, the Church Wardens and Swornemen or any of them do assiste
and aid the Minister therein, that such stubberne persons may be rebuked
and repelled, from the Communion at that time?

24 Whether there be in your Parish any that are known or suspected to be
malicious, contentious or uncharitable persons, any swearer, or blasphemers of
the name of God, any fornicators, adulterers, incestuous persons, baudes, or
any that receive such incontinente persons, or any that harbor women with
child which be unmarried, conueying or sufferinge them to go away before they
have done any penance, or make satisfaction to the Congregation, or any
persons that are vehemently suspected of any of these or such like faults, or
that be not of good name and fame touching such crimes, whether there be in
your Parish any dronkardes, common slaunderers of their neighbors, raylers,
skoldes, or sowers of discord between neighbors, either baudes or any other
evil or suspected livers of incontinente life, who they be?

25 Whether the Schoolemasters or Schoolemistresses that teach in your Parish,
either openly or privately in any gentleman's house or others be of good and
sincere Religion and conversation, and be diligent in the teachinge of youth
in the Catechism lastly setfoorth by authority, as also in other godly and
necessary documents of learning, whether they be examined, allowed and
licenced to teach by the Ordinary or his deputy, and what be their names that
be not licenced?

26 Whether there be any that be married in degrees forbidden, or that have
married two wives or two husbands both living, or that live not together with
their wives, and what be their names?

27 Whether there be any man or woman in your Parish that uses witchcraft,
coniuring, southsaying, charms, or unlawful Prayers or inuocations in Latin
or English for or upon any Christian body, or beast, and what be their names,
or any that do go or seek for help at such sorcerers hands?

28 Whether you do know, or have heard say, that within your Parish there is,
or are any person or persons notoriouslye known or suspected, to offend
contrary to the Statute made in the seven and thirty year of the reign of
King Henrye the eight for reformation of usury, and revived by an Act made in
the thirteenth year of the reign of the Queens Majesty?

29 Whether your Minister do Church any unmarried women, after they have been
delivered of their children begotten unlawfully, before they have acknowledged
their faults openly, according to the order prescribed by the Ordinary or his
deputy?

30 Whether your Fontes or Baptisteries be removed from the place where they
were wont to stand, or any persons leauinge the use of them, do Christen or
Baptize in Basins, or other profane vessels, not accustomablie used in the
Church before time? And whether any Christen without Godfathers and Godmothers,
or after any other order then is prescribed, by the book of Common Prayer?

31 Whether your Church, Chapel, or Chauncell, and every part thereof be all
in good and sufficient reparations, and cleanely kept, and the mansion house
of your Parson and Vicar with the buildings thereunto belonginge, likewise
repaired, and your Churchyard well fenced and cleanely kept, and if any of
the same be ruinous and in decay, through whose default it is so? And whether
the Church Wardens of the last year were enjoined to have repaired any part
of the Church or fenced the Church yard and did neglect to do the same?

32 Whether the Church Wardens of the last year have given to the Parish a
just account of the Church goods, that were committed to their charge, and
what Church goods they have sold, and whether to the profit of the Church or
no, or any that do withholde any stock or money belonginge to the Church?
And whether any person suppress the last will of the dead, and perform not
Legacies bequeathed to the Church or to Orphans, poor maids marriages, high
ways, schools, or any other godly use?

33 Whether when any christian body is in passinge, the Bell be tolled,
especially in great Towns where they be near the Church or Chapel, so that
the people may be moved thereby to pray for the sick person, and whether
there be any other vain ringing but one short peale before the burial and an
other after?

34 Whether your Minister do keep well and orderly your Register book of
Weddinges, Christeninges, and Burialles within your Parish, and do present a
copy of them once every year, by Indenture to the Ordinary or his Officers?

35 Whether there be within your Parish any evil disposed persons which have
by any means irreverently abused your Minister, either by word or deed?

36 Whether there be any within your Parish, that have been presented as
offenders heretofore, which have not done their penance prescribed unto them,
or that stand willfullie excommunicated, and who they be?

37 Whether you know or have heard that the Church Wardens and Sworn men of
your Parish the last year have left any person or persons punishable for any
offense by the Laws Ecclesiastical vnpresented, whereby they have escaped
unreformed, and by whose default, and what are the parties names that have so
offended, and wherein have they offended?

38 Finally, whether you know or understand of any other matter or cause
Ecclesiastical worthy of presentmente, herein not expressed, and you shall
present the same?

FINIS.

