ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF IN THE METROPOLITICALL VISITATION OF THE MOST
REVEREND FATHER, WILLIAM, By GODS Providence, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England; and METROPOLITAN: In and for the Dioces of LONDON, In
the year of our LORD GOD 163^, And in the (...) year of his Graces
Translation.

EX IGNE RESVRGIT VIRTUES


Printed at London, by Richard Badger. 163^.

The Tenor of the Oath, to be Ministered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear, that you, and every of you, shall duly consider and
diligently enquire, of all and every of these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain, or fear of
displeasure, or malice set aside; you shall present all and every such person,
that now is, or of late was within your parish, as has committed any offense,
or made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles; or which are
vehemently suspected or defamed of any such offense or default: Wherein you
shall deal uprightly and fully; neither presenting, nor sparing to present
any, contrary to truth: having in this action GOD before your eyes, with an
earnest zeal to maintain truth, and to suppress vice. So help you GOD, and
the holy Contents of this Book.

Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof and the Churches possessions.
IMprimis, Whether have you in your several Churches, and Chapels, the whole
Bible of the largest volume, and the Book of Common Prayer, both fairly and
substantially bound. A Font of stone, set up in the ancient usual place: A
convenient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk, or some other
decent stuff, continually laid upon the same at time of divine service, and a
fair linen cloth thereon, at the time of the receiving of the holy Communion.
And whether is the same Table placed in such convenient sort within the
Chancell or Church, as that the Minister may be best heard in his Prayer and
Administration: and that the greatest number may communicate. And whether is it
so used out of time of divine service, as is not agreeable to the holy use of
it; as by sitting on it, throwing hats on it, writing on it, or is it abused to
other prophaner uses: and are the ten Commandments set upon the East end of
your Church or Chapel where the people may best see and read them, and other
sentences of holy Scripture, written on the walls likewise for that purpose?

2 Whether are the afternoones Sermons, in your several Parishes, turned into
Catechizing by question and answer; according to the form prescribed in the
Book of Common Prayer? and whether does every Lecturer read divine Service,
according to the Liturgy printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood before
the Lecture? And whether are his Majesty's Instructions in all things duly
observed?

3 Whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat for your
Minister to read Service in, together with a comely pulpet set up in a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or cufhion for the same, a comely large
Surplice, a fair Communion Cup, with a cover of silver, a Flagon of silver,
tin, or pewter, to put the Wine in, whereby it may be set upon the Communion
Table, at the time of the blessing thereof, with all other things and ornaments
necessary for the celebration of Divine Service, and administration of the
Sacraments? And whether have you a strong Chest for Alms for the poor, with
three Locks and Keys, and another Chest for keeping the Books, and Ornaments
of the Church, and the Register Book? And whether have you a Register Book in
Parchment, for Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, and wether the same be kept
in all points, according to the Canons in that behalf provided? And is the
Mothers Christian name therein Registered as well as the Fathers, and a
transcript thereof brought in yearly within one month after the 25 of March
into the Lord Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese his principal Register? And
whether have you in your said Church or Chancell, a Table set, of the degrees
wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry?

4 Whether are your Church and Chapels, with the Chancels thereof, and your
p^rsonage or vicarage house, your parish Almes-house and Church-house, in good
reparations: and are they employed to godly, and their right holy uses? Is your
Church, Chancell, and Chapel decently and comely kept, as well within as
without, and the seats well maintained, according to the 85. Canon, in that
behalf provided? Or have any Patrons or others decayed the Parsonage, houses,
and keep a stipendary Priest or Curate, in place where an incumbent should be
possessed? Whether is your Churchyard well fenced with walls, railes, or
pales, and by whom: and if not, in whose default the same is, and what the
defect or fault is? And whether any person have incroached upon the ground of
the Churchyard, or whether any person or persons, have used any thing or place
consecrated to holy use, profanely or wickedly?

5 Is your Church or Chapel decently paued, and is your Churchyard well and
orderly kept without abuse? Are the bones of the dead decently interred, or
laid up in ^ome fit place as beseems Christians? And is the whole consecrated
ground kept free from Swine and all other nastinesse, as becomes the place so
dedicated?

6 Whether have any ancient Monuments or Glasse-windowes been defaced, or any
^rasse Inscriptions, Lead, Stones, or any thing else belonging to your Church
or Chap^ell, been at any time purloyned, and by whom?

7 Whether have you the Terrier of all the Gleabe Lands, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tithes
(whether within your Parish or without) belonging unto your parsonage or
vicarage, taken by the vsew of honest men in your said Parish? And whether the
same Terrier be laid up in the Bishops Registery, and in whose hands any of
them are now? And if you have no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, together wi^h your Parson or Uicar, or in his
absence with your Minister, are to make diligent in^uiry and presentment of the
several particulars following, and make, subscribe, and sign the said
Terrier, as aforesaid.

1 How many several parcelis of Glebe-land, do you know, or have you credibly
heard to belong unto your Rectory, Church, Parsonadge, Uicaridge etc. and by
what Names are they (or any of them) commonly called and known; And what
yearly Rent have you known or heard to have been paid, unto the Parson,
Uicar, or to his or their Asignes, for every, or any of the said parcels?

^ In Whose occupation, are the said parcells at this present? How much does
each pa^cell conteyne by measure of the 16. foot Poale? How is each parcel
Butted, on eu^ry part? And who is to repair the Fences on each side thereof?

3 What hedge, ditch mere, tree, thorn, doole or distination, is there now,
at this pr^sent, whereby the said parcells of Church Lands may be apparentlie
known and di^^inguished, from the lands of other men, upon whom they do abutt?

4 What Cart-way, Horse way, foot way, Gates or Styles do lead from your
Parsonadge or Uicaridge-House, unto every of the said parcells of Gleab-land?
Decl^re your knowledge therein.

5 Whether do you know, or have you credibly heard, that some Styles, gates,
hedges, ditch, mere, Tree, Thorn, or other Doole (formerlie growing or being,
between the said parcells of Gleabe (or some of them) and the Lands of other
men) have bin digg^d up, felled down, destroyed, put by or defaced? And who
had the said parcel (so wrong^d) in occupation, when the said Style, Gate,
hedge, ditch, mere, Tree, Thorn, or oher ancient Doole, was so dug up,
felled down, destroyed, put by or defaced?

Concerning the Clergy.
1 Whether does your Parson, Uicar, or Curate, distinctlie and reverently say
Divine service upon Sundays and Holidayes, and other days appointed to be
o^serued by the book of Common Prayer; as Wednesdayes, and Fridayes, and the
Eues of every Sunday and Holiday, at fit and usual times? And does he duly
observe the Orders, Kites and Ceremonies, prescribed in the said Book of
Common Prayer, as well in reading public prayers and the Letanie, as also in
administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sick,
burying the dead, Churching of Women, and all other like Rites and Offices of
the Church, in such manner and form as in the said Book of Common prayer he
is enjoined, without any omission or addition. And does he read the Book of
the last Canons yearly, and wear a Surplice according to the said Canons?

2 Whether have you any Lecturer in your Parish, who has preached in his
Cl^ake and not in his Gown, and whether have you any Lecturer who will not
profess his willingness and readiness to take upon him a Living or Benefice,
with cure of sotles, or who has refused a Benefice when it has been offered
unto him?

3 Does your Minister bid Holidayes and Fasting-dayes, as by the Book of
Common prayer is appointed? And does he give warning beforehand to the
Parishioners, for the receiving of the holy Communion, as the two and twentieth
Canon requi^th: and whether he does administer the holy Communion so often,
and at such times as that every Parishioner may receive the same, at the least
thrice in every year: whe^eof once at Easter, as by the Book of Common prayer
is appointed? And does your Minister receive the same himself, on every day
that he administreth it to others, and use the words of institution according
to the Book, at every time that the Bread and Wine is renewed, accordingly as
by the prouiso of the 21. Canon, is directed: And does he deliver the Bread and
Wine to every Communicant severally, and kneeli^g? Whether he has admitted to
the holy Communion, any notorious Offender or Shismaticke, contrary to the 26.
and 27. constitutions, or received any to the Communon, being not of his own
Cure, or put any from the Communion, who are not publckly infamous for any
notorious crime? Does he use the sign of the Cross in Baptism, or baptize in
any basin, or other vessel, and not in the usual Font, Or admit any Father to
be Godfather to his own Child, or such who have not received the holy
Communion, or baptize any Children that were not borne in the parish, or
wilf^lly refuse to Baptize any infant in his Parish, being in danger, having
been informed of the weakness of the said child: and whether the child dies
through his default without Baptism?

4 Whether has your Minister married any without a Ring, or without Banes
p^blithed three several Sundays or Holidayes in time of Divine service, in
the several Churches or Chapels of their several abode, according to the
book of Common p^ayer, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice
published, without a Licens^ or dispensation from the Archbishop, the Bishop of
the Diocese, or his Chancellor, ^rst obtained in that behalf? Or not betwixt
the hours of eight and twelve in the f^renoone, or have married any in any
private house, or if the parties be under the age of 21. years, before their
Parents or governors have signified their consent unto him?

5 Does he refuse to bury any, which ought to be interred in Christian burial,
or defer the same longer than he should, or bury any in Christian burial,
which by the consttutions of the Church of England, or laws of the Land, ought
not to be so interred?

6 Is your Minister a Preacher allowed? If yea, then by whom? If not, whether
does he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach monthly amongst you
at the least?

7 Does your Minister (being licensed,) preach usually according to the Canois,
either in his own Cure, or in some other Church or Chapel near adjoining,
whre no other Preacher is, and how often he has been negligent in that
behalf, and dot^ he preach standing, and with his Hat off? Or whether does he
or his Curate upon eury Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read an homily, or
some part thereof, accordng as he ought to do: or in case he be not licensed
to preach, does he take upon him to Preach or expound the Scriptures in his
own Cure, or elsewhere? If so, then you ^e to present the same, the time and
place, when, and where he did it?

8 Does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King Charles, and for
the Queens Majesty, Prince Charles, and all the royal Progeny, with addition
of such Style and Titles as are due to his Highness, and exhort the people to
obedience to his Majesty, and all Magistrates in authority under him: And does
he also pray for all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons?

9 Is your Minister continually resident upon his benefice, and how long time
has he ^in absent, and in case he be licensed to be absent, whether does he
cause his Cure to be s^fficiently supplied, according to the Canons? Or in case
he has another Benefice, whether does he supply his absence by a Curate
sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cu^e where he himself is not resident?
Or otherwise, in case the smalnesse of the living cannot find a preaching
Minister, does he preach at both his benefices usually?

10 Does your Minister or Curate, serve any more cures than one: If yea, then
what other Cure does he serve, and how far are they distant?

11 Does your Minister or Curate every Sunday and Holiday, before Evening
pra^er, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of ^is Parish in the Ten Commandments, Articles of the Belief, and
in the Lods Prayer, and the Sacraments, according as it is prescribed in the
Catechism, set forh in the book of Common prayer only? And if he do not,
where is the fault, either in he Parents and Masters of the children, or in the
Curate neglecting his duty? And in ^e careful to tender all such youth of his
Parish as have been well instructed in there Catechism to be confirmed by the
Bishop in his Uisitation, or any other convenient time, as is appointed by the
book aforesaid?

12 Does your Minister in the Rogation days, go in perambulation of the
circuit of the Parish, saying and using the prayers, Suffrages, and
Thanksgiving to God, appo^nted by Law, according to his duty, thanking GOD for
his blessings, if there be plenty on the earth: Or otherwise, to pray for his
grace and favor, if there be a fear of ^carcity?

13 Has your Minister admitted any Woman, begotten with child in adultery or
for^ication, to be Churched without license of the Ordinary?

14 Has your Minister, or any other Preacher, baptized children, churched any
woman, or ministered the holy Communion in any private house, otherwise than by
Law is allowed?

15 Does your Minister endeavor and labor diligently to reclaim the popish
Recusa^ts in his parish from their errors (if there be any such abiding in your
parish.) Or whether is your Parson, Uicar, or curate, over conversant wish, or
a favorer of Recusa^ts, whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in Religion?

16 Has your Minister taken upon him, to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Pophestes, or exercises, not approved by Law, or public authority, or has
used to met in any private house or place, with any person or persons, there to
consult how to impeach or deprave the Book of Common Prayer, or the doctrine
or discipline of the Curch of England: If yea, then you shall present them all?

17 Has your Minister stayed the publication of any excommunications or
suspentio^s, or does he every half year denounce in his Parish Church, all
such of his parish a^ are excommunicated, and persevere therein without seeking
to be absolved, or does he vittingly and willingly keep company with such as
are excommunicate: And has he a^mitted into your Church any person
excommunicate, without a certificate of his abs^ution from the Ordinary, or
other competent Judge?

18 Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from
time to time call upon his Parishioners to give some what, as they can spare to
godly and ch^ritable uses, especially when they make their Testaments.

19 Whether your Minister or any, having taken holy Orders, being now silenced
or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as you have heard, hold
any co^uenticles, or does preach in any place, or use any other form of Divine
Service ^ha^^s appointed in the Book of Common prayer: If yea, then you are to
present their name, and with whom?

20 Whether is your Curate licensed to serve, by the Bishop of this Diocese,
or b^ any other, and by whom?

21 Does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel, as by
^e 47. Cannon is enjoined: is he of sober behavior, and one that does not use
such bodlie labor, as is not seemly for his function and calling?

22 Is your Minister noted or defamed, to have obtained his Benefice or his
orde^, by Symonie, or any other way defamed, to be a Symoniacall person, or any
way no^d to be a Schismaticke, or schismatically affected, or reputed to be an
incontinent person, or does table or lodge any such in his house: or is he a
frequenter of Tauernes, Inns, or Alehouses, or any place suspected for ill
rule: Or is he a common Drunkard, a common Gamester, or player at Dice, a
Swearer, or one that applies himself not at hs study, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his function or Ministry?

23 Does your Preacher or Lecturer read Divine service, before his Sermon, ^r
Lecture, and Minister the Sacraments twice a year at least in his own person,
acc^ding to the Canons?

24 When any person has been dangerously sick in your Parish, has he
neglectd ^o visit him, and when any have been parting out of this life, has
he omitted to do ^s last duty in that behalf?

25 Does your Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, in his or their Sermons deliver
suh doctrine as tends to obedience and the edifying of their Auditorie in faith
and Religion, without intermedling with matters of State, not fit to be handled
in the pulpit, but ^o be discussed by the wisdom of his Majesty and his
Council. And if you find any fault herein, you shall present them?

Schoolmasters.
Does any in your Parish openly or privately take upon him to teach School,
wi^out license of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Religion now
establishe? And does he bring his Scholars to the Church, to hear divine
Service and Sermons? And does he instruct his Scholars in the grounds of the
Religion now established ^n this Church of England, and is he careful and
diligent to benefit his Scholars in learning?

2 Does your School master teach and instruct his youth in any other
Catechism than is allowed by public authority? And what Catechism it is
that he so teaches?

3 Is any Living or means given toward the erection or maintenance of any
School withholden back or otherwise employed, and by whom?

4 Does any keep School in the Chancell or Church, by which means, that hoy
place, and the Communion Table are many ways profaned, and the windows brok^^?

Parish Clarke and Sextons.
1 Have you a fit Parish Clarke, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conuersati^^, able to read and write? Whether are his and the S^xtons wages
paid w^^out fraud, according to the ancient custom of your Parish: if not,
then by whom are they so defrauded or denied? by whom are they chosen? and
whether the said Clarke be approved by the Ordinary? And has he taken an
Oath, as in such cases is fit and ^^quired^ and is he diligent in his Office,
and serviceable to the Minister, and does he tale upon him to meddle with any
thing above his Office: as Churching of Women, burying the dead, or such like?

^ Does your Clark or Sexton keep the Church clean, the doors locked at fit
times? Is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church, through his default? are the
Communion Tble, Font, Books, and other Ornaments of the Church kept fair and
clean? does he suffer any unseasonable ringing, or any profane exercise in
your Church? Or does he (wen any is passing out of this life) neglect to toll a
bell, having notice thereof?

Concerning the Parishioners.
1 Whether any of your Parishioners, being sixteen years of age or upwards,
or others lodging or commonly resorting to any House within your Parish. d^e
wilfully absent themselves from your parish Church, upon Sundays or Holidayes
a^ Morning and Evening prayers? Or who come late to Church, and depart from
Church before service be done upon the said days? Or who do not reverently
behave thmselues during the time of Divine service, devoutly kneeling, when the
general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten Commandments, and all
Prayers and Collets are read, and using all due and lowly reverence, when the
blessed name of the Lord jesus Christ is mentioned, and standing up when the
Articles of the Belief are read; (...) who do cover their heads in the Church
during the time of Divine Service, unless (...) be in case of necessity, in
which case they may wear a Night cap or Coyfe? Or who ^^e give themselves to
babbling, talking, or walking, and are not attentive to hear the word
preached, or read? Whether any of your Parish, being of sixteen years of age
o upwards, do not receive the holy Communion in your Church thrice every
year: ^^ereof once at Easter, and whether they do not devoutly kneel at the
receiving thereo? And whether any having diverse houses of remove, do shift
from place to place of p^rpose to defeat the performance of their Christian
duties in that behalf?

2 Whether any of your parishioners, being admonished thereof, do not send their
Childen, Servants, and Apprentices, to the Minister, to be catechized upon such
Sundays ^^d Holidays as are appointed? Or whether any of them do refuse to
come; or if they cme, refuse to learn those instructions set forth in the Book
of Common prayer?

3 Whether any of your Parish do entertain within their house, any soiourner,
cmmon guests, or other persons, who refuse to frequent Divine Service, or
receive (...) holy Communion, as aforesaid, present their names, their
qualities, or conditions?

4 What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish, or other Sectaries? present
t^eir names, qualities, or conditions? whether they keep any School master in
their h^use, which comes not to Church to hear Divine Service and receive
the Com^uni^n? What is his Name, and how long has he taught there, or
elsewhere?

5 Whether any of the said Popish Recusants, or other Schismatics, do labor
to ^ouce and withdraw others from the Religion now established? Or instruct
their familes or children in Popish religion: or refuse to entertain any,
especially in place of g^eatest service, or trust, but such as t^ntur^e with
them in their opinions?

6 How long have the said popish Recusants abstained from Divine Service; or
from the Communion, as aforesaid?

7 Is there any in your Parish that retain, sell, utter, or disperse, any
Popish books. o^ Writings, or other Books, Libraries, or w^itings of any
Sectaries, touching the Religion, State, or Government Ecclesiastical of this
Kingdom of England, or keep any Monuments of Superstition uncancelled or
undefaced?

8 Whether have you any in your Parish, which heretofore being popish Recusants
or Sectaries, have since reformed themselves, and come to Church to hear
Divine Service, and receive the Sacraments: If yea, then who are they? And how
long since have they so reformed themselves? And whether they still remain and
abide in that conformity?

9 Is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their Children Baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking
excep^ion against him, and what causes or exceptions do they allege; or have
any married Wives refused to come to Church, according to the Book of Common
Prayer, to give G^d thanks after their childbirth, for their safe
deliverance? And whether do any of, or ^n your Parish, refuse to have their
children Bap^ized in your Parish Church, according ^o the form prescribed in
the book of common Prayer?

10 Do any of your Parish usually go to other Parish Churches to hear Divine
Service or Sermons? Or do they communicate, or Baptize their Children in any
^ther Parish?

11 Whether there be any in your Parish who will come to hear the Sermon, b^t
will not come to public prayers ap^ointed by the Book of Common Prayer,
making^ Schism or division (as it were) between the use of public prayer and
preaching?

12 What persons within your Parish, for any offense, contumacy, or crime,
(...) Ecclesiastical Conusance do stand excommunicate? present their names,
and for wh^ cause they are excommunicated, and how long they have so stood, and
what person (...) persons do wittingly and usually keep them company?

13 Whether any, not being in Orders, do execute any Priestly or Ministerial
o^fice, in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, and what be their names?

14 Whether any in your Parish, that having heretofore taken upon him the orde^
of Priesthood or Deacon, has since relinquished the same, and lives as a
Lay-ma^ neglecting his vocation?

15 Has any person in your Parish quarrelled, or stricken, or used any
violence (...) your Minister, or have stricken or quarrelled with any other
person within your Chur^ or Church yard, or demeaned himself disorderly in the
Church, by filthy or prophan talk, or any other base or immodest behavior?
Or has disturbed the Minister in tim of Divine Service or Sermon, or has
libelled or spoken slanderous words again^ your Minister, to the scandal of
his vocation, or defa^ed any of his Neighbors, to^^ching any crime of
Ecclesiastical Conusance?

16 Whether any of, or in your Parish, without consent of the Ordinary, or
other lawful authority, have caused any to do penance, or to be censured or
punished for an^ matter of Ecclesiastical Conusance, by any Uestrie meetings,
or otherwise by their own authority? Or have taken any money or commutation for
the same? Present their names that have done it? And who have been so
punished? In what manner, and upon what cause?

17 Whether any person in your Parish, do exercise any Trade or labor, buy o^
sell, or keep open Shops or Warehouses upon any Sunday or Holiday by
themselves their Servants, or Apprentices, or have otherwise profaned the said
days, contrar^ to the orders of the Church of England? And whether there be
any Inne-keepers, Ale housekeepers, Uictuallers or other persons, that permit
any persons in their houses, t^ eat, drink or play, during the time of Divine
Service or Sermon, or reading the Ho^milies in the forenoone or afternoon,
upon those days?

18 Whether the fifth day of November, be kept holy, and thanksgiving made t^
God, for his Majesty's and this States happy deliverance, according to the
Ordinanc^ in that behalf?

19 Whether any of your Parish hold or frequent any conuen^^cles or private
Con^gregations, or make or maintain any constitutions, agreed upon in any such
assem^blies? Or any that do write, or publicly or privately speak against
the Book o^ Common prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of
the Articles of Re^ligion agreed upon, in Anno 1562 or against the Kings
Supremacy, in causes Eccless^^sticall, or against the Oath of Supremacy, or
of Allegiance, as pretending the same t^ be unlawful and not warrantable by
the Word of GOD? Or against any of the ^ites or Ceremonies of the Church of
England, now established? Or against the Government of the Church of England
under the Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
and other Officers of the same: affirming; that the same is repugnant to the
Word of God, and that the said Ecclesiastical Offi^rs, are not lawfully
ordained? Or whether there be any Authors, Maintainers or Fa^urers of Heresy
or Schism, or that be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines, ^rownists, of
the Family of Love, or of any other Heresy or Schism? present their ^m^s?

20 Whether any in your Parish have married within the degrees by Law
prohibited, ^^d where, and by whom? And whether any couple in your Parish being
lawfully ma^ed, live apart one from the other, without due separation by the
Law, or any that have been divorced, which keep company with any other at
Bed or at Board?

21 Whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead without lawful
autho^ty, or suppress the last will of the dead? Or are there in your Parish
any wills not yet ^oued, or goods of the dead (dying intestate) left
vnadministred? By authority in that ^halfe, you shall not fail to present the
Executors and all others faulty therein: and ^^o how many persons being
possessed of any goods and chattels, have died within your ^arish, since the x.
day of February? 1635.

22 Whether any withold the Stock of the Church, or any goods or other
things, even to good and charitable uses?

23 Whether your Hospitals and Almes-houses, and other such houses and
corporati^s, founded to good and charitable uses, and the lands, possessions
and goods of the same, ^ ordered and disposed of as they should be? And do the
Masters, Governors, Fellwes, and others of the said Houses and Corporations,
behave and demean themselves acording to the godly Ordinances and statutes of
their several Foundations?

24 Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge or by common fame or
^port, which have committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest: or any which have
im^dently bragged or boasted, that he or they have lived incontinently with any
person or ^rsons whatsoever: or any that have attempted the chastity of any
Woman, or solici^^ any Woman to have the carnal knowledge of her body, or
which are commonly ^puted to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy
Name; common ^wearers, common Slanderers of their Neighbors, and sowers of
discord, filthy and ^sciuious Talkers, Usurers, Symoniac all Persons, Bawdes,
or Harborers of Wo^en with child, which be unmarried, or Conueying or suffering
them to go away be^e they have made satisfaction to the Church, or any that
having heretofore been pre^nted, or suspected of any the aforesaid crimes,
have for that cause departed your Pa^h, and are now returned again? Or any
which have used any enchantments, sorce^es, incantations, or witchcrafts, which
are not made felony by the Statutes of this ^ealme, or any which have committed
any perjurie in any Ecclesiastical Court, in an ^cclesiasticall cause, or
which have committed any forgerie, punishable by the Ecclesi^^icall Laws, and
the procurors and abettors of the said offenses: you shall truly pres^t the
names of all, and singular the said offenders, and with whom they have committd
the said offenses, in case they have not been publicly punished to your
knowledge (...) the same crimes?

Physicians, Chir^rgions, and Mid-wives.
2 HOw many Physicians, Chirurgions or Mid-Wiues, have you in your Parish? How
long have they used their several Sciences or Offices, and by what authorite?
And how have they demeaned themselves therein, and of what skill are they
accountd to be in their profession?

Touching the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1 Whether you and the Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen from tine to
time, do, and have done their diligence, in not suffering any idle persor to
abide either in the Churchyard, or Church Porch, in Service or Sermon time, bu
causing them either to come into the Church to hear Divine Service, or to
depart, an^ not disturb such as be hearers there? And whether they have, and
you do diligently se the parishioners duly resort to the Church every Sunday
and Holiday and there to renaine during divine Service and Sermon? And whether
you or your predecessors, Ch^rch-Wardens there, suffer any plays, Feasts,
drinkings, or any other profane vsag^s, to be kept in your Church, Chapel,
or Churchyards, or have suffered to your and heir uttermost power and
endeavor, any person or persons to be tippling or drinking in any Inn or
Uictualling house in your Parish, during the time of Divine Service or ^ermon,
on Sundays and Holidayes?

1 Whether, and how often have you admitted any to preach within your Churh or
Chapel, which was not sufficiently licensed? And whether you together with
your Minister, have not taken diligent heed and care, that every parishioner
being of sixtene years of age or upwards, have received thrice every year,
as aforesaid: and also hat no stranger have usually come to your Church, from
their own Parish Church?

3 Whether have there been provided against every Communion, a sufficient
q^antitie of fine white bread, and good and wholesome wine for the communicants
that ^all receive? And whether that wine be brought in a clean and sweet
standing pot of pewter, or of other purer metal?

4 Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the Parishiones
And have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for their time, and
deliu^red to their successors by Bill indented the money, and other things
belonging to the Church which was in their hands? And are the Alms of the
Church faithfully distributed to the use of the poor?

5 Whether do you see the names of all Preachers which are strangers and
pre^ch in your Parish Churches, to be noted in a Book for that purpose, and
whether eu^ie Preacher do subscribe his name, and of whom he had his License?

6 Whether any man do trouble or molest you for doing your duties?

7 Whether there be any Legacies witholden given to the Church or poor people
o^ to the mending of Highwayes, or otherwise by the Testators? In whose hands
it is, by whom it was given, and by whom it is withheld?

8 Do you know of any thing that has been complained of, that is not yet
redress?

Concerning Ecclesiastical Magistrates and Officers.
1 Whether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition or agreement,
to, or with any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, or Officer, for wil^ing at
or sparing to punish any person for any offense of Ecclesiastical Conusance,
^r for suppressing or concealing of any excommunication, or any other
Ecclesiastical C^sure, of or against any Recusant, or any other offender in
the cases aforesaid? Wh^t sum of money, or other consideration has been
received or promised, by, or to any ^f them, in that respect, by whom, and with
whom?

2 Has any person within your Parish, paid or promised any sum of money or
^ther reward, for commutation of penance, for any crime of Ecclesiastical
Conusance? If so, then with whom? When, and for what, and how has the same
been impl^yed?

3 Are your Ecclesiastical Judges and their substitutes Masters of Arts, or
Batcellors of the Laws at the least, Learned and practiced in the Civil and
Ecclesiastic^l Laws: Men of good life and fame, zealously affected in
Religion, and just and v^right in executing their Offices? Have they heard any
matter of Office priuatel^e in th^^^ Chambers, without their sworn Registers,
or their Deputies presence^

4 Do you know, or have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or
Mi^nister has received or taken any extraordinary fees, or other rewards or
promises, b^ any vayes or means, directly or indirectlie, of any person or
persons whatsoever, either for the granting of the administration of the Goods
and Chattels of those that have die^ inte^^te, to one before another, or for
allotting of larger portions of the G^ods and Chatels of those that have died
i^testate, to one more than to another: or for allowing large and unreasonable
accounts, made by Ex^cutors or administrators: or for giving them Quietus est,
or discharges, without Inuentory or account, to defraude Creditors, Leg^aries,
or those who are to have portions. And what summ^s of money do you knov, or
have you heard, that any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer has taken out of the
s^te of any dying intestat^, upon pretense to bestow the same, in Pios vsus:
and how ^aue the same been bestowed?

5 Has any Ecclesiastical Magistrate, Judge, Officer, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this your Diocese: Or any Advocate,
Register, Procter, Cla^kes, Apparators, or other Minister belonging to the same
Ecclesiastical Courts exaced or taken by any ways or means, directly or
indirectly, extraordinary or greater Fees than are due and accustomed? And
whether is there a Table for the rates of all Fee^, set up in their several
Courts and Offices? And whether they have sent or suffered my Process to go
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts otherwise than by Law they oug^t? Or have
they taken upon them the Offices of Informers or Promoters to the said Courts,
or any other way abused themselves in their Offices, contrary to the Law and
Canons in that behalf provided?

6 What number of Apparators have every several Judge Ecclesiastical? And
whe^ein, and in what manner is the Country ouerburthened by them? And wherein
hau^ they caused or summoned any to appear in the said Courts, without a
presentme^t or Citation first had? Or whether have they threatened any to
prosecute them in the said Courts if they would not give them some rewards, and
what bribes in that behal^ have they taken?

7 What reward or fees has any of the Apparators taken, to save the iournies
to the Ec^esiasticall Court of any persons, and what (after composition so
made) have they or any of hem taken and received, and what acquittance or
discharge have they given or promised them, and whether have they not cited
some to appear before the Archdeacon, or his Official, after they have been
ordered by the Commissary, and done their penance acc^rdingly, and whom have
they so cited and troubled, and what has it cost them, as you (...) or have
heard, or by inquiry can find?

I^ you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Conusance, you
are to ^^^ent the same by virtue of your Oaths?

^he Minister of every Parish, may and ought to join in presentment with the
Ch^rch-wardens, and Side men, and if they will not present, the Minister may
and ou^ht himself to present the defaults and crimes aforesaid: and there must
be several pr^entments made to every several article: and the Minister,
Churchwardens, and Sw^rne-men, are to meet and confer about the said
presentiments, and answering of eu^ry of the aforesaid Articles?

FINIS.

