A new Song, called Jacke Doves Resolution, by which he does show, That he
cares not a rush how ere the world go.
To the tune of, To drive the cold winter away.


O all my good Friends, these presents I send,
yet neither to beg nor to crave,
though some have store, and I am but poor,
I Am content with that little I have;
I Will nere for my want, turn Sycophant,
though many there be that do so)
(...)t I Will honest be, love them that loves me,
And care not how ere the world go.
though fortune frown, I Will not cast my self down
But mildly bear what does fall;
(...)re will make me but worse, and nere fill my purse,
(...)ut the day may come will mend all,
(...)en it is but a folly, for that to be sorry,
which must be whether I will or no;
(...)t impatience in rest, then I Will hope for the best
And care not how ere the world go.
why should a man care, or drown in despair,
though his fortunes be nere so unkind?
why should I be sad, for what I nere had,
(...)r foolishly trouble my mind?
(...) I do hate, to pine at my fate,
(...)here is none but fools will do so,
(...) and be fat, for care kills a Catte,
and I care not how ere the world go.
To sigh and to wail, what will it prevail,
or any whit better my fare,
When a little good mirth, mong'st friends, is more worth,
and better then a great deal of care;
Then I Will cheer up my self, for content is great wealth
let sighing and sorrowing go,
I Will laugh and be merry, with a cup of old Sherry,
and care not how ere the world go.
Though many a Chuffe, has more then enough,
why should I repine at their bliss?
If I am content with what God has sent,
I think I do not amiss:
Let others have wealth, so I have my health,
and money to pay what I owe,
I Will laugh and be merry, sing down a down derry,
and care not how ere the world go.
I Will make much of one, for when I am gone,
then what is all the world unto me?
I Will not be a slave, to that which I have,
but mong'st my friends let it flee,
And least there rise debate, about my estate,
when my heads laid full low,
Or some knaves circumuent it, to whom I nere meant it
I Will spend it, how ere the world go.
The second part, To the same tune.


SOme Men do suppose, to go in brave Clothes,
does purchase a great deal of respect;
Though I am but poor, I run not on score,
I think my self honestly decked:
Let others go brave it is my own that I have,
and I think they can not say so.
And I like that I wear, though it cost not so dear,
and I care not how ere the world go.
I Would rather go mean, then be like to them,
which living in pomp and state,
Maintain all their bravery, with private knauerie,
getting gold at any rate:
Such conscience profess, but use nothing less,
deceiving the world with a show,
But the time it may com will pay such knaves home.
but I care not how ere the world go.
Your delicate Cates your hippocrites eats,
and Wine of the best do drink
Much money they spend, but to little end,
and never on their end they think.
Low Shrubbes be secure, when Cesars endure
all storms and tempests that blow,
Let others rise high, but so will not I,
for I care not how ere the world go.
For ambitions best scene, is but a fine dream,
which for a time tickles the mind,
And the hap of an hour, with such envy may lowre,
as may turn all ones hope into wind,
Then worse then before, they may sigh and deplore
to ^^e themselves cast off so low.
When I all the while, do sit and smile,
and care not how ere the world go.
The flattering Curres, which fawn upon surres,
and hang on the Noble-mans beck,
That crouch at their heel, whilst their bounty they feel
professing al love and respect,
Yet when they do fall, they run away all,
but I hate to dissemble so
What I do for my part, shall come from my heart,
and I care not how ere the world go.
I Will wrong none not I, but if some through envy,
do wrong me without a cause,
Or if me they disdain, I Will slight them again,
and reckon not of it two strawes;
Dissembling I scorn, for I am free borne,
my happiness lies not below,
Though my words they want art, I speak from m^ hear^
and I care not how ere the world go.
G. B.

FINIS.
Printed at London for John Wright and are to be sold at his shop in
Giltspur-street at the sign of the Bible


