This must come in in the 23. page, after these words in the 12: line. To
render our reasons.
But Lord how unfitly the text of leremie is Wrasted against us as though he
had exhorted the lewis to seek the peace of the Bailonians, by receiving such
attires, rites and Ceremonies, as migh make them seem one people, and in one
religion, with the Babiloniall Idolaters. And touching S. Paull, hit has been
the custom of the Chirch of God, to strive for the treuth, even to the death.
I ynally S. Augustyn spekith of civil laws, and not Ceremonies, Which are
profitable to sustain our liffe: and hurt not the religion of God.

The Fortress of Fathers, earnestly defending the purity of Religion, and
Ceremonies, by the true exposition of certain places of Scripture: against
such as would bring in an Abuse of Idol stouff, and of things indifferent, and
do appoinct th'aucthority of Princes and Prelates larger then the truth is.

Translated out of Latin into English for there sakes that understand no
Latin by I. B.

ACTS, IX. Saul, Saul why presecutest thou me. What art thou Lord? I am Jesus
whom thou persecutest. It is hard for the to kick against the pricks: etc.

Go into the City and hit shall be told the what thou shall do.

M.D.LXVI.

The Names of the Fathers in this fortress.
1 Saint Ambrose. B. of Millane. 2 Theophilact. B. of Bulgaria. 3 Erasmus
Roterodame, the Peerle of this age. 4 Martine Bucer some time Reader of the
Divinity lector in Cambridg. 5 Peter Martyr sometime reder of the Divinity
lector in oxford. 6 John Epinus superintendent of Hamburg. 7 Matthias Flacius
Illyricus. 8 Philip Melancthon. 9 John Alasco, Baron of Poleland, and
superintendent of all the strangers chirch in England. 10 Henry Bullinger. 11
Wolfgangus Musculus Reder of Divinity in Berna. 12 Rodolphus Gualterus.
The places whereon those fathers in this Forteresse do stand.
In thold Testament.
The Judges. Peter Martyr upon the. 8.
The 1. Reg. Peter Martyr upon. 18.
The 2 Reg. Peter Martyr upon 10. and. 2.

The Places of the New Testament
In Matthew. Erasmus upon th. 11. Bucer upon the. 18. Musculus upon the.
22. Philip Melancthon upon. 27.
Marc. Rodolph. Gualter upon. 2.12.
Act. Gualter upon the. 1.6.
Romans Peter Martyr upon. 13. Philip Melancth. upon. 13, and 14.
1. Cor. Ambrose upon the. 7. Theophilact upon the. 7, Peter Martyr upon
the. 7.
2. Cor. Musculus upon the. 2.
Ephesians. Martine Bucet upon 1. Musculus upon. 2.
1. Pet. Erasmus annotac. upon. 5.
In There tractesies. Musculus in Chap. of Magistrates Musculus in Chap. of
Minister of the word. Bullinger in his Decade. 5. ser. 9. Bullinger De orig.
haeres. c. 6.
John Alasco against the same things. John Epinus. against the same things.
Matthew. Fiacius. against the same things.
TO ALL SVCH AS Unfeignedly hate (in the zeal of a Godly love) all monumentes,
and remnauntes of Idolatry. The translator wishes perseueraunce into thend,
through Christ Jesus.
THis has always ben the practice and policy of the Fend, to trouble the
Congregationes of Christ, (that have rece^ued some strength in Doctrine,)
with the questions of Ceremonies, of things indifferent, and Dominion: as a
me^^e vvherby he often does assuredly prevail, vvhyl^st that the brethern
only regardinge the direct Doctrine of faith, do littel attend that these
things in there use, touch and concern often times, the first table, but
aivvayes the second, and so in regard of the second, also the first. As in
Corinth it did appear in Paul's time, and sithenc in diverse ages. By practisinge
of which devise, he thincketh now (onles God help us) to overthrow the
work of God begone amongst us in England. Against which danger it behooves
all men, as in a commune al arm, to put forth him self, to serve But for as
much, as it has hither to ben reported, that this is but a particular combat
against the Mimsters of London: I have here translated into our English
speech, the Judgments of certain fathers being on those Ministers side. To
this intent, that both truth of Religion, Reuerene of these Fathers, orels
shame, might prevent the enemy by causinge the lordinge. B. to cease, and
retire there folly. And also may strenghthen such as stand, and restore those
that are fallen through there devises: And to the fuller accomplishing her of I
have poincted ovvt, where, and on whose side, those reverend Fathers: Master
Bullinger, and Gualter, ar, and stand. Whose letters they have iniustely
abused, as having obtained them the plain case and truth, of the deformed
estate of the Chirch of England, not opened truly to them. As er^ hit belong
you shall dear Christians (I hope) understand by there writings: if they
cease not to abuse there first. Thus thristinge your health in Christ, I
humbly eraue your prayers to God: that by his spirit, he will guide me to
know his will, and to perform the same through Christ.

The Lord Jesus keep you, and bless you all, Amen.

CERTAIN CONCLVSIONS partly holden and defended by good Docters sentences
contained in this book, and partly to be defended by the Translator, if the
same be not sufficiently defended by the Doctors mentioned in this Book,
against all that will write against them.
THE King Prince or other supreme Magistrate has power and authority, to
exercise his sword and to punish with it all the Bushoppes Elders and Clerckes
of his Realm or Country if they be offenders and Breakers of Gods, law
either with imprisonment, or deprivation, or with Death: or any such like
punishment, according to the greatness of the offense that is committed.

If the Bishops or Elders either do not their duties in preaching, or preach
false Doctrine and commit faults worthey depriuatio^, he may command the
Clergy that is neither infected with false doctrine, nor Idolatry neither
defiled with any notable crime of evil life, to examine the fautie Bushops and
their Doctrine, and if they deserve hit, suspend them, deprive them, or to make
them recante.

The Lordshippe of Bushops now exercised over both the rest of the Clergy, and
over the lay people, has no ground in the word of God.

Christ is only the head of his mistical body which is the Chirch, as the
Prince or chief Magistrate is the head of the Politic body of his Realm and
country.

The supreme Magistrate is bound to obey the word of God, preached by Christ's
Messen gers, and he is also subject to the discipline of the Chirch.

Neither the Prince nor any Prelate has any authority by the word of God,
to make any ecclesiastical law or rite, to bind men's consciences in pain of
dedly sin to keep them.

Princes have aucthoretie so to reform the Chirch, that they reform it not
after any Doctrine or traditions of their own making or any other man's
making: But only according to the written word of God, and then shall they
bring none of their policies into the Church be they never so gorgeous and
goodly to look to.

As the jews were greatly to be commended which offered their bare necks to
be cut of with the Souldiars swords, rather then they would contrary to their
law, and liberty suffer the Emperors Image to be brought into their Temple:
So the Pall ors of Christ's flock are greatly to be commended that had lever
lose their goods and lives, then suffer any men's Polytique Rites and
traditions to be brought into Christ's Chirch, whereby either the whole Church
and especially the Ministers should be brought into any bondage or the word of
God should be hyndred thereby and man should be made as it were a God, or take
unto him the honor of God.

THE EXPOSITION OF certain parts of Scripture, according to the minds of the
chieffe Doctors, that, in our time were in reformed chirches, and also of some
old doctors, wherein thou shall so the true doctrine of indifferent things, of
garments, and of th'auctoritie that Princes, and Prelates, have to set out
rites and ceremonies.
Saint Ambrose Bishop of Millane upon thevij. of the former Epistell of
Saint Paul to the Corinthians.
YEar bought with a price, be ye not made the bondmen of men. It is true
because we are bought with so dear a price, that we could not have been bought
again, of any but only of Christ, who is ritche in all things: Therefore he
that is bought with a price, ought more to serve or to do his dewtie in
th^office of a bondsman, that he may after a manner, make recompense to his
byer. They ar bo^d men, that subdue tho^ selves to men's superstitions.
Therefore those that are bought of God (that is, of Christ) ought not to be
boundmen, of men: But such ar bondmen of men, that subdue them selves or obey
men's superstitions.

THEOPHILACTVS Archebyshop of Bulgaria, upon the vij. chapter of the former
Epistel of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, and upon the same words.
TH'appostel reasons not these matters only to slaves or bondme^ but he
speaks them, to those that are free: or he rather does enstruct all sorts, To
execute euel comaii dements for man's sake is to become man's servant.
yea the Christians them selves, that they do not any thing for man's sake, or
pleasure, and that they do not execute, or fulfill those commandments of
men, which ar naught for that were to serve men, even by such, as ar raunsomed
for a price. And a littel after, he having spoken of thu worldly and spiritual
bondage, vvriteth thus.

Therefore, the Apostel has provided very well in both cases, (to were) first,
least under the pretense of God his service, servants should depart from there
masters, in whose power there bodies ar. To please the bodily Master further
then they ought, is, to become^ bo^d men.
Secondly, least they should fall from God, when as they will serve there bodily
Masters, further the^ becomes, or that they ought to do.

ERASMUS ROTERODAMVS, in his book of annotations, upon the fifth chapter of
the former Epistel, of saint Peter.
NEque cou Dominium exercentes aduersiu Cleros, etc. Neither shall ye be as
exercisers of Lordsship against the people, or parishes. For he understands
by this word Cleros, not Dyacons, or Elders, but the flock which fell to every
man by chance, Brought as little to use Lordship ever the com mon people,
asouer there fellow Elders.
to be governed, least any man should judge, that Bishops were forbidden, to
exercise any Lordship over clerks, but that hit was granted them, to be
Lords over others And here he calls Elders Bishops, for as yet, there was
not, so huge a nombre of priests, but as many Elders as there were, so many by
shops there were. This commaundemet of the Prince of the Apostells, should have been written in golden letters, and set up in all palaces of the Bishops: Feade
(faith he) the flock, oppress hit not. pill hit not, and do this not un
willingly, but of a sincere desire, and mind, as fathers, neither for filthy
lucres sake: as though he had seen before, that there upon should rise a plage,
or pestilence to the chirch. To conclude, not plaing Lords after the manner of
Kings, but feed with example, and overcome with good deades. Now a days, the
common sort of Bishops, hears nothing of there learned flatterers, but
Lordships, Dominions, Swords, Kayes, and Powers: Whervppon rises in sum of
them, Some B. at pompous at Princes and some more cruel then Tyraunt^.
more pompouse Pride, then some Kings use, and more cruelnes then some
Tyrauntes occupy.

Also, in th-same work, upon xi. chapter of Saint Matthew's Gospel.
SVrely, saint peter in thactes of th'apostelles, does openly call the law of
Moses (which was laid, for a time, upon the rebellious people of the Jews)
an hard and a heavy burden, which neither we nor our fathers, were hable to
bear, neither can any man doubt, but that it is truth which the truth has
pronounced. The yooke of Christ is, in very deed pleasant, and his burden is
light, so that no men's traditions be laid upon men's sholders, beside, or more
then that thing, which he has already appoincted: and he has commanded
nothing else, but that one should love another, and there is nothing so bitter,
but that Charity will seasone, and make his sweet. Whatsoever is accordig to
Nature, it may casely be born, but there is nothing, that agrees more with
Man's Nature, then Christ's Philosophy, which goes about to do no other
thing, almost then to restore our Nature, (that is fallen), to her innoce^cie,
and sincerity, again. But even as the ordinances of men, did make heavy the
law, being by hit self, grievous enough for the Jews: The law of Man may make
^^^uy the light yoke of Christ.
Even so must we diligently take hade, that the additions, ordinances, and
doctrines of me^, make not the law of Christ (which of hit self, is
pleasant and light) heavy and hard to bear. Which ordinances so at the first
crept in, as though they were small, and ought not to be cared for, or
regarded, or else, they being commended with the she we of Godliness be gladly
received of them, that are more simple, the^ foresighted. Those that are once
received by pecemele, do grow and increase, unto a huge quantity, and do
press down and overthrow me^, whither they will or no, either by the help of
custeme (whose violence is a certain tyranny) or else, Thinstrumentes of
spiritual bondage.
by the authority of Prinees, which hold stiffly, hit that is rashely
received, abusing hit for there profit and gains. And a little after. There are
some that knitt together, either a cold sillogisme of a piece of scripture,
which they do not understand, or else make an article of faith, of a man's
ordinance, and of such men ar we judged, to be Christians, or no Christias,
which appertain nothing attall to Christian Religion. And a little after. The
burden of Ma^s ordinances and traditions.
What avails it to speak of the burden of Man his institutions, when as many
years ago Saint Augustine, in a certain epistel, to Ia^uarrus, he is angry,
and bewaileth the estate of Christ's church, so to be burdened, that the
condition of the Jews was almost more tolerable then the condition of the
Christians: what if he saw the fre people of Christ, snared with so many
laws, and ceremonies, and not only oppressed with a single tyranny of
profane Princes, but also of Bishops, Cardinals, Popes, Not only profane
princes, But also. B. ar oppressors of the chirch.
and most of all of there servants: who being disguysed, with the visure of
Religion go busily about, the business of there bellies. The Jews had no
certain kind of apparaile forbidden the^, more then that which was made, of
flax and wolle together, how many constitutions at there made now for
apparraile, and what superstition, is there in garments, and in colors of
the same, at this present time.

Also, again in the same work. upon the xxiij. of Matthew.
SOme wrest this place so far, as, Such. B. we have sum now a days in
England.
men ought to obey, all manner of things whatsoever the Bishops, Presidences,
or Rulers command, although they be ungodly, and that for there aucthorities
sake: when as Christ did speak only, of them which did teach rightly the law
of Moses, and not of such, as did snarre men with there ordinances and
constitutions. Now peradventure after the same manner a Bishop might be heard,
which preaches truly the gospel, although he live but a little according to
the same. But who can abide, that they should occupy an open tyranny against
Christis doctrine, and make laws for there own advantage, measuring all
things according to there gain (...) glorious majesty's. They that snare the
people with rites and ordinances, devised for there profit, and to fulfill
there tyranny, do not sit in the chair of the gospel, but in the chair of
Simon magus and Caipl. as.

Martine Bu^er upon the first chapter of S. Paul to the Ephesians.
Amongst the members of this chirch, there is none in all the earth that is
the had thereof: There is no member of the chirch that can be bed.
But the chirch, has Christ hedd thereof, in heaven. The princes in deed, and
the Magistrates of all places may be called heddes, but not in the
ecclesiastical body, but in the politic body, and in the politic
government. And a littel after he says. Christ by him self, is governor of
the chirch, yet not withstanding he uses the service of Angels, and of men,
and yet for all that he is always pre sent with his chirch. And a little
aster. Seeing that the chirch, has Christ her hedde, he surely as a good
shepeherd, with his word gathers together his shope that go astray, and he
comes to open his father to his sheep, and to draw all thing to him, to open
there minds, that they by true faith may understand the gospel, by the which
faith he justifies them. This faith is mighty in working thorough, Charitie^,
which Charity seeks not lier own, whersore there is a wonderful unity, and
joining together of the members', as hit was said in the primative Chirch,
They had onesowle and one heart in the Lord. Furthermore, for as much as Christ.
is the Ruler, and governs hit in all things, as Paul bears witness
hereafter in the fiueth chapter, monisheth women that they should be subject,
or obedient unto there husbands, as the chirch is unto Christ. He purges hit,
or makes hit clean with his blood, although he use in hit, diverse
ministeries or services, yet is he the chieff governor, the first, and the most
strong and mighty. And a little after. Wherein stands or consists the unity
of the chirch? Not in garments, VVherin the unity of the chirch consists.
Not in ceremonies.
not in Ceremonies, as thou shall se here after in the fourth chapter, in
these words, Indeauoring or laboring to keep the unity of spirit, in the
bo^de of peace, etc. Therefore the unity of the chirch, stands in the unity
of the spirit, of Charity, of the word of God, of Christ, of the sacraments,
and in the communion of gifts, that we may consent in one, that we may agree in
one thing, that we may speak one thing, that no man shall rule him self, but
give him self to be ruled, unto Christ, and the Spirit, that we should consent
with the will of our heavenly father, that we should allow altogether the same
things, and reprove also the same: for by the Spirit in the same place he does
understand, the inward power of the spirit, from whence come all our
counsels, and doings, which in all things ought to be the same and like hit
that is of God, opened unto us in the word. There is one word, one Scripture,
one Baptism, and one death of Christ, one Father, one Religion, and one
Charity, one sacrament of thanks giving, and one laing onne of hands, and
one discipline, and one consent of the Ministers, and of those by the which
these ar ministered: To conclude all things that are ordained, to the buylding
or profitt of the Chirch, we must have all those as one thing. But whatsoever
is not declared in the word, there is no ne cessarie unity in that, but rather
liberty, etc.

Upon the same chapter he vvriteth thus. To the bylding of godliness, al things
ought to be done in the Chirch, Prelates ar become Tyraunts in making laws.
and hit is commanded that the Rulers of the Chirches, should teach those
things that Christ has commanded: wherefore, they ought not to make the^
selves Tyrauntes, in exacting or requiring of men's consciences, that which
Christ never commanded.

The Same BVCER in his commentaries on Matthew, upon these words. Matthew. 18. Luc
7.
Woe unto the world for offenses.
AN offense is, what so ever we say or do by any means which rises not of
sound or perfect faith, and is not ordered of sincere and true love, promoting
Gods glory, and our neighbors Salvation.

After that this Doctor has spoken, of offenses generally, and showed them not
to beseme Christians, and has also perticulerly amplified the matter, in
deeds of them selves not euel, but done contrary to Charity, with abuse of
Christian liberty as. Romans 14.1. Cor. 8. This note first given, that saint
Paul often with sum force, repeateth this name, A brother: He concludes that
this is the Scope and drifte of all. So to order and do all things, that they
may make to the edifie^g of our Brethren, so shall hit fall out that
sommetime liberty is to be used some time not: for when as words ar to be
confirmed with deeds, then must (says he) the liberty that is preched needs
be confirmed with examples. This he sets out with the examples of Peter. etc.
at Antioch. Galat. 2. Commending his using of Christian liberty in meats, and
discommending his dissimulation: and also of Paul in not circunciciding of
Titus. Galat. 2. Wherein he notes thus.

1 First, if in this slippery place Peter caught a fall, who is hit, that ought
not to be careful herin, and to take heed.

2 Secondly, in reproving of Peter's dissimulacion he says. To conclude, for
that we must always prease, to perfection and fulness of faith, greater respect
was surely to be had to the gentiles, which had already receued Christ Plans
plainly, then to them which did lewdly stick yet, to the Elementis Mandi.
ceremonies of the world: who in conclusion, by long bearing with, might be the
more confirmed in there error.

3 Thirdly, we must further consider, whether they be true or false brethern,
which go about to infring or weaken Christian liberty, for we must regard only
the true brethern, to bear with them herin.

These things, premised after this manner, he applies the whole doctrine of
offenses, by the example, of outeward things, and ceremonies, to our time and
state of Religion, in these words.

As in our time, if a man would still dissimule, or hide the liberty, of
owteward things, which the visured chirch men, by subteltie and tyranny, have
taken from christian people, for th'obstinate enemies of the gospel sake, who
do abhor and blaspheme all that does come from us: seeing they abhor and
blaspheme Christ, and the gospel hit self, hit should not only, not adme^d
those, but rather should more confirm them in euel, and very much offend such,
which have received Christ, whilst the Minister preaches unto them, truth
utterly voyed of examples. For they are many, which hardly can be persuaded,
that we have all things in Christ whilst men's Inue^tions, are had in such
price and estimacion. Owte of question great fault is here in, now a days
committed, and that not of the rude and common sort of people: But of the head
protesta^tes and chief gospellers. I confess in deed, that all though all the
ordinances against the liberty of owtward things were of Antechriste his
bringing in (as is difference of persons, meats, days, places, and infinite
such other things) yet for that the common people were born in hand, that they
all, were commandments of the Chirch guided by gods spirit, and so
generally received of me^, as things, proceeding from Gods will and
apoinctment: that therefore we should use the liberty (purchased unto us by
Christ) circumspectly, and warely, even now a days, and with Paul many times,
circumcide Tymothe, (that is to say) for our parts use well some ceremonies,
which other men abuse, so as hit were. seking occasion, to preach Christ
sincerely and purely: Although in deed these devises of Men, can by no means
be compared to Circumcision, and such like orders of God.

But what is the common practice? Ma^ny fearing forsooth the offense of the
cross, and in vain going abowte, to please both men and God, after long
preaching of the word, when words and talk, requier now example and deeds,
(prete^ding other men's infirmities, when in deed they are therein let with there
own wekenes) both them selves becam yet slaves, to men's tradiditions, and
cause other men also to be the like. Oh say they, nothing is to be tempted
rashely, these things have continued many years they cannot be put away
suddenly, regard must be had to the weak, with hasty speed we should not plant
the gospel, but overthrow hit.

I would wish these men first considered, what that sentence means. Matthew. 11^
The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent catch hit unto
them. Thee^ that these things, are not hasted rashly, but the^, when they are
changed, Christ not yet being once commended and withowt faith: and not when
Christ is already preached, and the nett of the gospel so long cast forth, that
hit has in a manner taken, as much as may be taken in that circuit, or
compass of sea, and now there remains nothing else but to confirm, and bring
creditt to words, by example in doings. Surely the case thus standing, works
also wherein men have put there co^fidences, more then in Christ, are to be
forsaken, and men must remember that there can be no fellowship, had between
Christ and Antechrist.

Again, hit is a thing very absurd and folish, that because, that falshod has
by littell and littel, and of long time crept in, and grown, therefore to go
about to prescribe long time also to receive the truth in Christ, otherwise
should, Christ, no more be esteemed of us, then Antechrist. Certainly if we shall
not receive Christ, so sone as we know him: we shall never enjoy him. Moses,
Samwel. Elias, Ezechias, Josias, dealt not after this sort: But as soon as they
had restored, the knowledge of the law to the people, by and by they abolished
and attonce all abominations, and restored the ceremonies of God.

Wherefore it is nothing worth, that they say, who allaw aies brag, that
there are greater thin ges to be urged, then reformation or admendment of
ceremonies, so become Patrones to Antechristes relictes. As for ceremonies,
they are coguisances or testimonies of our Religion, and therefore we also
begin our Religion with the ceremony of Baptism: and if any be to be recea
ued again, by means of his repentance, after that he is excommunicated for
his wickedness, he is straight reconciled to the chirch, by the sacrament of the
supper: Wherefore they must needs be vveake in the faith of Christ, which
differ the removing of Antechristes ceremonies, and nevvnes of life will
surely, very lately appear in them, if ever hit appear at all And in deed we
se at this day cold and slack proceeding in christian Religion, and profession,
in those places where Antechristes ceremonies be born vvithall, and all
things much more lively, and effectual, where they be abolished and done
away. For if they stay at any time, this only is the cause, that the word of
God, either is not thouroughly credited, or not esteemed accordingly. For how
so ever, those that suppose them selves to be strong in faith, use not these
things: where I pray you, is there zeal, for Christ's glory, or there
prethorn, whereas they still use them, so no doubt they do hit of weakness of
faith.

Cerminly as there is no agreement at all between Christ and Belial, so sincere
and unfeigned Christians, can by no means abide any of Antechristes trumpery.
Although with this there zeal, they endeavor them selves to purge, the chirch
here, as the glory of Christ may thereby chiefly be auanced, yet to the wea^^er
sort thy will have such respect, as to do nothing rashely or out of seasone,
but will teach the weak with gentelnes, to wax stronger in knowledge. Yet will
they do there endeavor, with examples, to bring them forward, not regarding
the blindness of a few, who ar to much addicted to Antechristes ceremonies, and
perhaps no true and unfeigned brethern. Offending there, whilst very many
other weak ones, continually thinck thus with them selves. If these things
were so euel, they should surely be abolished: if eitber they were so good al
men (especially that reck on them selves Christians) would in deed receive and
embrace them. These men surely, if they be elect, shall at the length be
confirmed, all though all the world offend them, and no man edifle them. But
woe in the mean time, unto them, by whom they are offended. Wherefore as soon as true godliness, has been preached and professed of manny, Antechristes
ceremonies, and rites must by and by be abrogated, neither must delay be made,
till godliness be in all poinctes grown up to perfection, else should, that
trash, never be abolished, and removed.

These myld and toe, toe moderate and sober Christians, who can bear all
Antechristian things, in very deed like unto them at Corinth, who knowing
that an Idol was nothing, did eat things offered unto Idolles, and boasted
(as these our men do) in outward matters we are free: what is that to me that
another abuses the se things naughtely? I will use them well. For as those
weakened the faith of many, both in that they less abhorred Idolles, through
there example and also in that they for the most part communicated with the^
against there co^scie^ces, so no doubt do these our lukewarm gospellers, now
adays. What is Antechrists ceremonies.
They know right well that all Antechristes ceremonies (that is to say, all such
have been brought in withowt gods word) are not worth a rush: And because they are owtward things wherein we have liberty, they will use them as freely forsooth,
not waighing that many things ar lawful, which are not expedient, and that our
liberty, must serve, either whom they in the mean time offend, or obscure
the glory of Christ. For they confirm those in there error, which as yet
know not, that these things ar free, and at liberty. As for the defenders
thereof, the professed ennemies of Christ they make them glad and bo^d, They
shut Christ owte of Doors that bear with ceremonies.
and finally they weaken the febles faith, which had forsaken and cast them
away.

Thus on God his name they provide fairly for the weak ones, yea rather they
serve herin there own bellies, in that they study to gratify, either
Christ's ennemies, or else backsliders. For no man other then these, will
earnestly contend for superstitious ceremonies. This is there modesty or
bearing, where with they are so far from helping the gospel, or increasing
hit, that by little, they displace hit. Surely we have to thanck these men,
that at this day all thing is gone hack ward, and turned vpside down, in
many places, where the gospel has been long time preached: whereas no example
can be brought of like alteracion in those places, where Christ being
earnestly, and purely preached, ceremonies also ben reformed, according to the
rule of his word. For as for those things, which have disordredly, or
confusely happened, Christ either not at all, or not sincerely preached, they
appertaing nothing to us.

For as much therefore, as Christ so sore detesteth offenses, and cries, woe
unto the world by means of offenses, woe unto the man by whom offense comes:
we must with all diligence take heed both in these and other things, that we
be offensive to no man, but especially to the littel ones, those I mean not,
that are in in age only such but in faith and understanding also. The perfect
knowledge of God and Christ is lyff everlasting, whatsoever therefore may be
any means, either hindre or obscure hit, let hit neither be spoken, ne yet don
of us: but to the uttermost of our powers let us remove those things away.
Then let us provoke them, both by exhortations, and examples, that men will
express those things in there lyff, giving no place herin, either to our
oune affections, or other men's seeing that it is better to be drowned in the
sea, then to give offense, etc.

Peter Martyr vvriting upon the. 13 chapter of Saint Paul to the Romans, on
these words: let every soul be subject unto powers that are set in high
authority.
IF, as we have concluded, they are to be reproved, that render evil for euel,
and it is thoffice of Christian men, to show thoffice of charity unto them
that have deserved euel of us: they are doubtless greatly to be reproved, which
for good deeds, restore evil deeds, and show not unto men that have been
friendly unto them (as the Magistrates be) honor and obedienee. Because
thapostel is about to entreat diligently, and largly of this matter, that we
may understand the better what his meaning is, we will define, what is a
Magistrate? A Magistrate is a chosen person and that of God that he should,
defend the laws, and peace, and repress and hold down vices, and all things
that are euel, with ponishmentes, and his sword. The efficient cause is God.
The End is the keeping of the laws, and of peaces, and driuyng away of vices,
and all hurtful things, and thencrease of virtues. Th formal cause is, the
order that he apoincteth by the providence of God in matters that apperatine
unto men, or in wordly matters. The material cause, is a man or a person, for
who soever is chosen to be a Magistrate, he is one chosen out of Men. The right
way, and compendious manner of theachings, is almost general. First it is
ordained that all men shall be under the power of the Magistrate. And afterward
that is proved of the cause efficient, that all such powers ar of God. And
after hit is proved by the contrary, that they that despice the cheeff Ruler,
ar ennemies to God, and that to there harm. And furthermore the same thing is
proved by the end, or final cause, that the Ruler is made for our great profit
and commodity. And upon the same chapter in the 604 page and xii line, he
vvriteth of the same chieff Rulers thus. But these Ecclesiastical Papists will
say that the kings the^ selves, and the common powers, have given over of
there own right, and have willed that clerks, should be exempted. But we
ought not to look what Princes have done in these matters, but what they
ought to have done. For it lies not in there power to put down the laws of
God, wherefore if this godly commandment of Paull, will that every soul
should be subject to the higher power, in any case men must needs obey hit. For
those things that God has ordained, and decreed cannot be called back again
by man's auctority. How be it these words ar to be restrained, and drawn
together: that we may understand, that we are subject unto the Magistrate, no
further then belongs unto his vocation and office, but if he would go beyond
those bonds, and command any thing that is contrary to godliness or the law
of God, we ought rather to obey God then men.

Also upon the same chapter, on these words, Quae sunt potestates a Deo
ordinatae sunt: Those powers that are, ar ordained of God, etc: he vvriteth
thus.
THe matter now will not suffer us to cover with silence, how that Bonifacius
in his extrauaga^t, (which begins, vna^sanctam abuses the words of the
Apostel, to confirm his Pride. For here upon he would prove, that those things
that are of God, have some orders amongst them selves that there dignities may
be known one from another being distinct and separated by certain degrees,
and that there upon hit follows that the powers that are of God are not all a
like, and that is the higher power which is exercised or occupied about the
worthier matter, and because the Ecclesiastical power is occupied in spiritual
matters, and the civil in bodily matters: Therefore hit followith says he,
that the Ecclesiastical power is highest, and ought not to be subject unto the
civil Magistrate, for the Pope (says he) has jurisdiction over all Princes,
because Christ did say what soever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, etc. And to make the matter more plain, he alleges out of Jeremy
these words. Behold I have ordained the above kings and nations, that thou
should pull in pieces, and destroy, and that thou should byld and plant.
But as these arguments ar full of Pride, and swelling: So ar they most full of
vanity, for first to begin withal. Paul does not speak here, of the degrees of
powers distincted or disseuered amongst them selves, for he only says thus,
that all powers what soever they be, ar ordained of God, and I do not deny but
the Ecclesiastical power, or the power that Ecclesiastical persons have, is
in spiritual matters, for hit is occupied in the Ministry of the word of
God, and therefore we grant that, that power, is the gretest because the word
of God ought to command and rule all men. But this power makes men to bring
to subjection all understanding, and to bring down or destroy the highness of
all men's reasons. Let these excellent great lords do these things, let them
preach the word of God, and let them leave there inuentio^s of men, and then
if there be any that will not hear them, We do not doubt, but that they
condemn them justly, whether they be Princes, Kings, Monarchs, or Emperors:
yet for all that it shall not follow, that they are not subject, unto the
politic power in things pertaining to this bodily lyffe, and to possessions,
and lands, howsen and Manners. Nay rather (as concerning the Princes office)
they ought to be subject to a godly and Religeous Magistrate, not because
vvethinck that the word of God or Sacraments, ought to be subject or Subdued
to man his laws, but that it is thoffice of a Magistrate to ponish or
displace chirch Ministers if they behave them selves ill in there office, or
Iugle with the truth, or deface it, or do falsely minister the Sacraments. Let
them bind and lose (that is to say) by the word and preaching let the^ declare
who be bounden, and who be losed: yet for all this they ought not to exempt
them selves from the civil Magistrate. For even as a king though he excel in
his excellent dignity, is bound to obey the word pronounced by the Ministers
of the chirch: Even so an ecclesiastical man, although he be set in an
excellent place, and office is not exempted, or discharged from the obedience
or subjection of the Magistrate.

Also in the same work, page 609 on these words, De^minister est vltor ad
Iram: he vvriteth thus. Even as he is the officer of God, unto thy good and
profit if thou do well: Euenso is he thofficer of God unto wrath, that is to
say, to revenge and ponish if that thou behave thy self naughtely: Neither
ought he to whom the sword is committed, to be ignorant that he is the keeper
not only of the latter, but also of the former table: wherefore he ought
diligently to take heed that Religion be ministered out of the word of God And
let him not thinck as many Princes now adays bear them selves in hand, that,
that charge appertains nothing unto them: for they will in deed deal ovvte
benifces and Byshoprickes to whom soever they list, but they care not whether
they, whom they have promoted to such dignities do there duties or no.

Also upon these words of Paul to the Corinth in the first Ep stell the 7
chap. Nolite fieri serui hominum.
There are other bondages of Men which ought also to be eschewed; that for the
getting and purchassing of Riches, we should not be Parasites, flatterers, or
men pleasers, or we should not be to much affraied, and for these causes should
be turned to Idol service, and evil Kinds of worshipping. They are grieved
with this kind of bondage, which obey the naughty will of there ungodly
Masters, or Lords and set more by them then by God. It appears by these
things, that the Corinthians came to this opinion, that, such as came to Christ
should chaung and ouertourn all things. And with this kind of folishnes ar the
Religious men now a days sick, which will have there garments, there
manners, and the owtward condition of there liffe new, in so much, as they
must change there old names also, where with they were named before. But Paul
denies that we should do so, and he does determine that those ar to be holden
that are not contrary unto the word of God.

Also upon the 13 to the Romans
SVrely the state of christendom was never in worse case then since the
Bishops did vsurp and take unto them the sword: for every man does se that
these two offices (that is) the Temporal, and Ecclesiastical, do so hinder
one another, that he that occupies the one, cannot exercise the other, for
there is not any man that can be found so prompt, and diligent, that he is
hable to excute either of both of them rightly, and in order.

Also upon the 8. chapter of the Judges.
Moreover the Bishop of Rome did boast, that he was made hedde of the chirch,
with thing cannot in any wise appertainge unto any man. For both moving and
the five wits called senses, flow down from the hedde, through the sinnewes
into the members, as Paul does very truly treache in his Epistels, both to
Thephesians, and Collossians, but there is no man that is hable to perform
that, as of him self, by ioinctes and tosettinges to quicken the members of the
chirch with the spirit of God. It belongs only unto Christ to deal owte
unto his members spiritual motions, the litghtening of the mind, and
everlasting lift. In deed, Kings and Magistrates may be called the heddes of
the people, because the civil government is exercised by them, and we may
look to have from them good laws, and civil motions: But in the chirch it is
not entreated of the civil lyffe, but of the spiritual and everlasting, which
we cannot look for of any, but only of God, neither is there any mortal man
that can quicken the members of the chirch. I do judge that the Kings and
Magistrates that are godly ought to be set or counted in the chirch in the
formest or highest place, or dignity, and that hit belongs to there office,
if that Religion be evil handeled, to correct the defaultes, for they bear
the sword for that end, that they may defend the honor of God, but they cannot
be the heddes of the chirches. Paul to the Romans and Corinthians (where he
makes co^paracions between the members of the chirch) makes some of the^ to
be eyes, some to be nosthrilles, ears, hand and feet: but he vouchsaueth not
to deck any member with the dignity of the hedde. And yet the same Paul writing
to the Ephesians. says of Christ, that God gave him, to be hedde of the body of
the chirch. Therefore let the Papists, show, where hit is said in holy
scripture, that there was another hedde given unto the chirch beside Christ. If
they can do that let them have the victory: but I am sure they are never hable
to do hit. For if such a hedde should be given to hit, then the chirch should be
A monster with two heddes.

Also upon the. 10. chap. of the. 2. of the Kings.
Iehu brought to pass that the temple of Baal should be ouerthrown, so that it
should not be any more occupied, as hit was before. Wherefore ma^nie thought,
that it was not well done that Christians (after that they had embraced the
gospel of the son of God) should yet still keep undestroyed the instruments
of the Pope after a manner. And they do much better promote godliness which did
bring to pass that all Images, standing Images and others, and that all
ornaments of the Popes devise, should be utterly destroyed at once. For as we
read in the Ecclesiastical Histories, when Constantine the great became. A
Christian man, he com maunded that the Idolles temples should be shutt up: But
because they remained so un put down, it was an easy: matter for Julian the
Apostata who came after to open them again, and to bring in the Idolles of
thold superstition to be worshipped in the same places. The which thing the
nobel Prince Theodosius perceaueng, commanded them so to be put down, that they
should no more be restored again. After this manner did Iehu, because the
Idolles should not be restored again.

Ioannes Epinus abovvte the year of our Lord. 1549 in the preface set before
the book of Matthias Flacius Illyricus, called Deveris and falsis adiaphoris.
THe Devil could not have found, or devised any thing more crafty or subtle,
to destroy the true worshipping of God, and to overthrow the true chirch of
Christ: then the changing, and bringing in of things called indifferent. He
has profited more there with, then if he should have gone abowte with cruelnes,
and tyranny: for there is such strength in this poison of indifferent things,
that hit can make men that were before in other matters talkatiue, and most
fullest of words, utterly doume and speachles, and other that were eloquent to
be now stutters, and sum that were honestly and rightly brought up, to be
doubtful, and wavering, some that were shepeherdes to become wolves, and some
that were Christians to be Epicures, that is to say, godles, and of no
religion, and only giving them selves, and studieng to get, and hold the
commodities, and riches of this world. That transformation and change, that
is written by Homere, to have been wrought, by sorcerous charms and cups of
the famous witch Circe, is nothing to be compared, to this new change which is
brought to pass by the sorcery of things indifferent. This is the best
council of all, that godly Doctors, and Teachers of the Chirch join there
minds together, there studies, there labors, prayers, and there confession,
that they may defend the doctrine and learning of Christ, and true
worshippinges of there Chirches, with one consent, with the sword of God his
word, and the bearing of Christ's cross.

The Prophets and Apostells following this counsel, overcame the whole world,
and did purge and skoure the chirch from ungodliness and Idolatry. There cannot
be any better council found, then God him self has given. It belongs to us
to do our dewtie, and to commit, (with our prayers) unto the Lord the
success and prosperous end of the matter.

Matthias Flacius above named, in his own work. De Adiaphoris.
FIrst for as much, as I entend to write of things indifferent, as they are
named, and some ar so in deed, it is best to tell what this word indifferent
means. Indifferent is called in the Greek Adiaphoron, and in Latin
Indifferens, and in Duytch eine mittelding. And hit signifies a thing, whereof
is made no matter, whether a man keep hit or do not keep hit, or whether hit be
handeled after this manner, or that manner. Therear in the Chirch certain
things which are indifferent, and that there is such in the chirch of God, it
may easily be proved by Paul, as in the former to the Corinthians the 7.8.10
and 14. chapiters, also to the Romans in the. 14. chapter may appear. Of
which sort ar: to live married, or un married, so that hit be don in Chastity,
to eat meats or to abstain therfro, to keep days, or not to keep days,
withowte superstition, to take wagis of them, to whom a man preaches to, or
to take none at all, to use a prescribed manner of teaching in the Temple, to
hear or to singe.

If any man would call back again, and restore the garments or vestementes of
Ethnish, or Popish sacrifices, and bring the^ into the chirches after the use
of them were once put down, he should do contrary to that which is semely and
comenly.

It lies not in the power of any man, to ordain any worshippings of God,
withowte the commandment of God.

Althinges that are indifferent, ar so far indifferent, as they serve for the
glory of God, and the profit of the Chirch. But if they pass beyond those
bonds, they are not indifferent: but ar, ungodliness, and abominations, and by
all means, of all men to be eschewed.

Whatsoever Antechrist does, the same he does for the Diuelles sake, whose vicar
he is, and of whom he is stirred up to play his part: And whatsoever
unchristian Princes do in Religion, they do hit for Antechristis sake, and his
seats sake, as the letters of the Pope, unto the Bishops, and the Bishops
letters sent to Popish Princes, and to diverse chirches bear witness. And
further, whatsoever the Popish Princes, and unchristian courts do in these
matters, and chaunges, they do hit for the pleasure and favor of the supreme
governors. Also whatsoever thold divines do in these matters, they do hit to
gratify the Court, and the inferior Princes. At the last, whatsoever the
younger divines do, either to set forth or not to hindre this mischieff of
indifferent matters, they do hit for the pleasure of there old Masters.
Wherefore from the first to the last, they serve all Antechrist, and the Devil,
and committ whoredom with the great whore, and drinck of her cup, as hit is
prophicied in th'apocalips (not witowt a cause) of the last times.

We need not to care for that which some do often time rehers, that the chirch
has allwaies ben in sum bondage, for although hit has been allwaies in
politic bondage, yet she never did tempre her self, or fashion her to the
Religion of ungodly me^, neither would God, that she should be subdued unto any
spiritual bondage, But rather that she should steadfastly defend her liberty, and
not to be made the bond woman of men, seeing that she is redeemed with the
precious blood of Christ: Wherefore seeing that these Rites ar thrust upon the
chirch whether she will or no, and that of the greatest, and most openly known
ennemies of Christ (that is of the Pope and both of learned and lay Papists)
it is not lawful by any means to receive them, neither ar they things
indifferent, but the wicked commandment of Antechrist and Antiochus.

Our indifferentiaries that are of stowter stomaches, would not beso nice, and
of a straight conscience, that they dare not defy the gold of the golden calf
but that they would desire some fat part of hit to be given unto them.

Those things that have been offered in Idol service, or served Idolatry, they are Idolatrous, and can not serve God, and he would that such should be cast away.

The brazen serpent was ordained of GOD, VVhatthen to surplesses.
and that by Moses the servant of GOD, and his great Prophet, but after his
served Idolatry, it was no more God his serpent, or Moses serpent, but the
serpent of Idolaters, and the Diuelles serpent, and Ezechias is praised (who
brak hit) for that deed.

Even as we defy and abhor, the garments or cote of a theeffe, of a
Murderer of A Hangman, or of a common whore, though the garment hit self be
innocent and has done no harm, neither will any honest man do so much as
gladly touch hit: So all they that are godly in deed, defy such Popish trifles
with all there hearts, because that they have served in the Popedom, and ben
occupied with abuses and wickedness: and have served the sacrificers that were
polluted and defiled with idolatry.

Austin says, that faith is in great icoperdy, when it is amongst a great
number of ceremonies.

This is most true in all things, that the man that is occupied about many
things does not sufficiently take heed to every one of the^, and therefore
it is truly said:

They that in the fire, many irons hold:
Must needs have some of them right cold.
SO the people, being charged to keep all the commandments of god and his
ordinances, and more straightly commanded to keep mo ordinances of men then
goddis commandments, must needs coldlye keep some of the commandementes of
God.

If that the indifferentiaries go forward to reform the chirch of Christ as
they have begone, and will set in the place of godly and learned prechers: whom
they have put away fools and courtly flatterers, shortly we shall have no
godly preachers at all.

Were there is a heavy bondage in ceremonies, and in the worshipping of God,
there cannot the glad liberty of Christ be.

Ceremonies ar the chief sinews or strength of the popedom: and the greatest
posts and stays of religion stand therein among the papists. When the
indifferentiaties propound, offer unto the ministers (that do not gladlye
receive any popish thing) the quere cote, called in duch chorr^k (which we
call commonly in english a surplesse,) and they will not receive it: then the
traditioners make exclamation, saying, what a small matter is it to wear a
surplesse, or a whit cote above a blak, but in deed if they can get the^ once
in these cotes, they will afterward deliver them to the Romans that they may
buffet them, as the old Romans did handle Christ when they buffeted him,
having the white cote upon him which they put on against his will.

What other thing goes the deuell about, with all his thousand crafts and
subtelties, but to confirm the wicked in their wickedness, and to give them
occasion to triumph over the true chirch, and over Christ him self, and to
blaspheme the holy name of the lord, and of the contrary part to discourage
and make sand the holy ghost in godly men, and to make them faint in
godliness, and at length, also to doubt of the whole doctrine of the true
chirch, what thing can more make afraid, and make faynte soldiers, then to se
their captains quake and tremble for fear? Caesar said that he had leiuer
fight with an host of Lions, that had a heart for their Captain, then with an
host of hearts whose Captain were a Lion.

If any man should speak thus to another, and say thou have stolen from me an
hundred crowns, I require of the that thou restore me them again quietly,
lest I be compelled to use against the some more violent remedies: and if this
man accused of theft, should first pay him x, crowns in part of payment, and
afterward xx. crow nes, should not he make him self guilty of theft and
thereby be bound in pain of ha^ging to pay the hole some of money that is
requited of him, and should not he show him self as ready to pay the rest as
these ij. portiones, of what soever purpose or intent he should do so? I
suppose so in deed: Even so, when we are accused of the corruption, and marring
of the whole Religion of Christ, and ar commanded to restore it to the old
estate again and we begin to restore it in such things as seem most co^monlie
before men's eyes (as ar out ward rites and ceremonies) do not we seem to
condemn our own selves: may not we be thought to deny our own religion? how
soever bewteous dreams we feyne in our thoughts.

It was an indifferent thing, for Christ to wash his hands, yea it had a
civil and a natural cause, for it is good manners and civility to come to
the table rather with washed hands then with foul hands, besides that, after
the doctrine of the phisitiones of Salerne, it is holsom for the eyes, to wash
the hands often, yet not withstanding all these, Christ would not wash his
hands with the Pharisees, because he would overthrow their traditiones, and
would not seem by his washing to confirm and allow their traditiones.

It is not the poinct of a good christian, and as little the office of a good
divine, to believe that, by angring of God and by swaging of man's wrath, that
we shall come to any perfect peace. For tyrants ar only as it were certain
rods in gods hand, as God witnesses him self, in Esaias the Prophit,
wherefore the hand should rather be pacified and swaged from wrath, then the
rod but if it were possible to pacific and please the rod, that it should not
beat us against the will of the hand: then were it to be feared that the hand
should cast the rod away and take a Betell or a Maule and break us all as
small as Powlder.

Luther did truly name wicked wisdom to be the feire hoar of the Devil.

The Apostelles had leyuer that their scoles should be broken up then in any
part to give place unto the ungodly, or to confirm or allow their
traditiones.

What boldness is this, that men dare give unto goddis enemies any part of the
treasures of the chirch, which the son of God has given unto it.

It belongs not to any one man, neither to a fevv men to ordeyne such
ceremonies or rites as ar above named, (to wete) such as neither promote the
glory of God, nor profit his church, but have only a vain show of holiness or
semelynes, and do no other good, and that without the consent of the chirch or
congregation, much less ought any ma to make such, quite contrary to the mind
and will of the Chirch, or of the assembly of gods people. For all things
belong unto the Chirch, and the Ministers ar teachers of it, and not Lords,
as Saint Paul Says, and they are given to the Church of Christ. Therefore
all they offend greuouslye, videlicet papa cum suis, whether that they are
Bishops or other men, which without the consent of the Church, or against
the consent of the Church, with an intolerable licentious usurping liberty,
dare ordeyne any thing in the Chirch of Christ yea although it be not ungodly.

As they that put on the Crown of thorn upon Christ's head to mock him, gave
him no honor, (although they seemed to make him a King) but grieved him very
sore and put him to much pain. Even so they that vvillbevvtifie and honor the
Sacraments and Chirch of Christ with the ceremonies of his adversary
Antichrist, do not honor truly Christ and his sacraments but dishonor them
and deface them.

The teachers of the gospel in Saxony, could scarcely drive away the abuses,
no not after that the foundation of the abuses were taken away, neither at this
hour can our Auditores be delivered from those abhominationes and
superstitiones, which they were brought up with all from their tender years
until the time of the preachinge of the gospel: wherefore with a lyttel
preaching of those old rites and ceremonies that they were brought up with
all, they will easily run again to the whole sink and abomination of the
whole popedorne. Few young persons excepted, that were borne sense the
preaching of the gosspell, that never heard neither saw any such abhomynation.

The spouse of Christ is dishonored and put to shame, when sheis clothed with
the garments of the Hoar of Babylon.

What conformity is this, when as the Spouse of Christ is made like the Hoar
of Babylon in ceremonies? God who is gelous, will not suffer that the Chirch his
Spouse should be clothed with the garments apoincted by a wicked man.

1 Thesear the incommodities that rise and spring of the receuing of some of
the Popes ceremonies. They bring home the popedom again.

2 They open the wyndowes to all the superstitiones of Antichrist.

3 They darken the gospel, an hinder the light of it so throwghtly to shine as
it did before.

4 They receive again wolves into the^ Shepefold, and drive away true
Shepherdes.

5 They make faint and discorage all godly men, and confirm and strength the^
all stubborn and wicked Papists in their papistrie, etc.

Melanthon writing upon the xiij chap. of Saint Paul to the Romames.
THere may be also reasones gathered, of the difference of powers, If there be
difference of powers, the^ ar they in diverse persons.
God has given chardge unto the Magistrates or Rulers, that they should. make
just laws, therefore he will also that we should be obeydient unto those
laws: But he delivered unto the Shepherdes or Pastors, the sure word, neither
will he that we thaibe law makers any further, or to put thereunto any other
laws: Therefore he requires that we should be obeydie^t unto that word and
not unto new laws which men shall further add unto the word. Laws made
beside and beyond the word are not to be obcied.
And so the difference between one power and a another bringth more light unto
this question. Yet for all that hit is more safe to lean unto an other reason,
(to were,) that the learning of the Apostles does require that we should think
that hit is deadly sin, No deadly sin to break chirch laws: if hit may be
don withowte offense, or contumacy.
and on the contrary part that the breakinge of the ecclesiastical traditiones
or Chirch ordinances, without the case of offense and contumacie, is no deadly
sin.

Melanthon upon the.xiiij. chapter to the Romans.
THe error in ceremonies bredeth many great disprofites and hurtes: the first
is. The doctrine of the gospel of faith, and of the benefit of Christ, is
darckned, when the opinion creapeth in, Discommodities by Error in Ce remonies.
that such obseruances deserve forgeuenes of sins, or that by them we are
maderyghteous, as the Jews did ymagen of their rytes. This opinion does
naturally occupy me^nes minds, except they be taught rightly by the gospel.
The second incommodety is, that the doctrine of difference of works is
destroyed, when ceremonies are preferred before the politic life, but now
they are more set by then the inward spiritual exercises are, Man naturally,
endined to ill by ceremonies.
as are patiens and calling upon the name of God.

As Monckes called their traditiones more perfect then others. The third
discommodety is, that the opinion of necessity crepeth in which is a very
perilous crucifieng of the conscience. The fowrth is, that the opinion of
necessity (that is) that ceremonies can not be missed in the Chrich, bredeth
vncu^eable discord and contention, as in time past there was dissension for
keaping of the feast of Easter. Long use brin geth this opi mon in
The fifte is, that there is fallely given to the Bishops authority, of
making new vvorshippinges. when as the true use of ceremonies is not known:
And so is the doctrine of the new Testament darckned, and ungodliness is
confirmed, and the Tirannye of the Bishops increased. And a little after, when
as the opinion of worshipping, Contention is bred, ince remonies. and. B. beco^
tyraunts.
or of necessity comes unto things indifferent, then such traditiones,
darcken the doctrine of the Gospel and the opinion that comes thereto makes
the traditiones, made of things indifferent to be ungodly: Therefore hit is
well don to break such, and to put them away that, that false opinion may,
How indifferent things ar made ill.
be corrected for it is very necessary and nedfull that the errors concerning
worshipping, merits, and necessity, should be cast away.

Phillip Melanthon upon the xxvij. of Math.
CHrist is accused, that he has sturred up Sedition thoughout all Iewrye, from
Galelye to Jerusalem, and that he for bade tribute to be given unto the
Emperor. These are great trespasses, and accusationes, and this kind, often
times greueth before hand the Doctors or Teachers, we are called Seditious,
because we do not obey the Emperor, commanding us, that we should receive
wicked doctrine. And a little after. Christ aunsvvereth not unto all the lies
that are made against him, but leaves them that are openly known: But he
answers unto the question of the kingdom, and grants that he is a King,
Differenc of Christ, king dome.
and makes an open difference between the Kingdom of the world, and his own
Kyngedome, whereof he being the Son of God, is the King: So the Church
ought clearly to purge her self of the crime of Sedition, and to say, that she
would give all law full obedience in all politic matters unto the Magistrate:
but concerning doctrine that she would obey god (as it is commanded) rather
then man. And here let all godly men consider the difference between the
politic Kingdom, and the everlasting, wherein the Son of God calls us
unto everlasting Rytches and gives forgeuenes of sins unto us, and life
everlasting.

And these Kingdoms ought not to be confounded, Co^founding of authority.
and myngled one with an other, as the Pope under the pretense of the
mynisterye wylbe the King of the world, Wickedness of Pope.
and Lord over Kings. And after another manner the powers are myngled
togoyther vvhyleste the Emperor and Princes will set out a new doctrine rnto
the Chirches, For they have made the Interim and will stablish in the Chirch
the Mass, How lay Princes ar made Popes.
and Invocation of Saints, and such other like things, and they wylbe
Docters and Pastors: when as they do not understand the doctrine but are open
enemies against it, this is not to be allowed, but let there be difference made
between one office and another and let every man labor faithfully in his office.

Pylate commands Christ, to be scourged, and to be crowned with a Crown of
thorns. Pylate grants that Jesus is innocent and faultles, and yet for all
that he vexes him with reproaches and punishment, even as some now a days do,
which kill not Jesus, and utterly take not away the^ that preach ryghtly
because they cannot, yet by many signs they declare their hatred against
them, for they despise the poor Preachers, and suffer them many ways to be
trowbled: the Pope and all his Byshopes do scorge Christ, when as they set up
their Kingdom, they crown Christ with thorns and put a purple garme^te upon
him that is to say they do work much sorrow to Christ and to his true Chrich
by that false and wicked lordship which they arrogantly take unto them selves
against the will of God and the health of the Chirch.

Afterward Pylate, is persuaded even to kill Christ, when he heard once these
words said unto him, thou art not the Emperors friend if thou do not
crucify him. Even such men are they which play with the wicked, for although
in the beginning, they are not most cruel of all other, Yet by little and little
they wax worsse and worsse. Therefore men had need to take heed at the beginning
according unto the sayng of the scripture, what fellow ship has Christ with
Beliall, etc.

LET US THINK OF THESE HORRIBLE EXAMPLES, AND LET us flee, such tryfling
playeng, and hearing with out Enemies And let us openly confess that we do
differ from them in doctrine, And let us not consent and agree with them when
at they make their compositions.
IHon Alasco (a Baron of Poleland by birth) in King Edwardes days was called
into England by the Prince, at Master Cranmers the Archbishop of Ca^terburies
co^mendatio^ and council, unknown to the most part of his contymen: unto
whom was committed by the King the chardg of the strangers Churches here, which
the forenamed worthy King Edward by his letters patentes in the fowrth year
of his reign crected in London, making this Ihon Alasco superintendet thereof,
and appoinctyng thereto such other ministers as the said Ihon Alasco (who was an
earnest suter on the behalf of the strangers) thought mete for that rome, he
taking this chardge upon him so used him self therein until the death of King
Edward that all the godly strangers and sondrye others had much joy and
comfort of him, the whole realm had a singular treasure of him, and the enemy
had nothiug that he could justly chardge him with all. Briefelye to say, his
singular travail in the Lords harvest in preaching and writing both here and
a broad, his profound and deep knowledge of things, his sincere judgment in
all poynctes of religion, and hartye affection to the maintenance of Christ's
Kingdom against open enemies, and counterfeit gospelers corruptyng the
simplicity of chrystian religion, besides his vprightnes of life, godly
conversation and other qualeties mete for such a personage: causes much
lamentation for the lack of him, in the Church of Christ through out
christendom, at these days: And will procure a continual remembrance of him
with honor amongst the godly unto the worlds end. This restimonye has King
Edward of famous memory under the great seal of England given of him which
is in print at this day extant in laten to be seen of all the world.

IHON ALASCO BORNE in Poleland a very famous and notable man, both for his
honest vpryghtnes and innoce^cie of life and behavior and also for his rare
and singular knowledge in learning, etc.

The judgment of Master Ihon Alasco of removing the use of singular apparel
in the Chirch ministry vvrytten the 20. day of September in the 5 year of
the raygne of King Edward the sixth: which was as follovveth.
First of all I affirm that in the Chirch of Christ, there are some things to
be observed continually, some things are indifferent and free: other some
things are by no means tolerable. Such things as ought continually to
remain in the Church, are the pure doctrine of the Prophets, and Aposteles,
which for the sustenaunce of the soul are to be diligently proponed to the
sheep of Christ by the Ministers of God, where unto are adjoined the
sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper ministered according to the
Apostolik order, set forth in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles to
the which may very fytlie be annexed Ecclesiastical discipline.

I call those things ffree whatsoever they be that serve profitablye and
commodiouslye to the ministerye of the word and Sacraments, so they have
their original ground in the Scriptures, have no commandment against them,
co^taine a manifest commodity to the Chirch and be void of tyranny byndynge
men's consciences. Of this fort are these, to assemble to geither in the Church
this hour or that hour this day or that day, to use in the administration
of the Sacraments this kind of prayer or that kind, the several times in the
year to celebrate the supper of the Lord, but ones or oftenar.

These things that are vttarly to be removed from the church, are of two
sorts, some have so manifest impiety annexed to them, that they cannot
disceyue those that are but meanelye instructed in gods word as are
worshipping of Images, worshipping of bread and wine, prophanacio of the
Lords Supper, through the Mass, praying to Saints, prayng for the dead, and
infinite such other mo^sters, which Antechrist has brought into the church of
Christ, there are other things brought in by the same Antechrist, which are
much contrary to christian liberty obscure Christ increase hypocrisy and
bring in pride, and swellyng into the church, and yet in the mean while have
a certain show of profit and comlines, of this sort are the appointed fasting
days, choice of meats, much singynge in the church and such as is not
understood, organe playing, and use of church apparel, in administracion of
the Sacraments.

Now what great incommodities and hurt have crept into the church by means of
every one of these, and yet may more crepe in, except they be removed I
cannot at this present particularlye declare. I have here only to entreat of
the use of apparel, and to show cause why by no means, it ought any lo^gar
to be borne with of a godly Magistrate in a reformed church of Christ,
allthough many devises muented by wyttie heddes may be alleged, for some
deffence thereof, but we regard not wyttie heads, but the Testimony of gods
will. Math. 15.


First of all I conclude that even these garments are vttarlye to be removed
from the church as a devise of man by that ground and reason which Christ and
the Prophets and Apostles use in excluding or thrusting forth of the church as
a pernicious thing, Colo. 2.
all men's doctrines traditions or devises. Polidore virgil, Li. 6. de invent.
bears wytnes thereof, it is a manner taken from the Hebrews that preistly
apparel with covering of Altars, with other things necessary for the use of
the Temple, should be consecrated, and the garments appoyncted ouar to the
Preistes, and others within orders, who should put them on when they occupied
them selves about holy things, which Pope Steven the first did first apoinct
should be done, amongst our Chirch men: for he says, that in the beginning
when religion begane to spring, Preistes were wont to put nothing more upon
them, when they went to divine service, standing raither to deck them selves
in wardlye with verteus of the mind, and to cast away affections and vices of
the body, then to take on them new attire. Now thus reason I, and gather. If
they changed not their garment or apparel when they went to gods service then
they used none for them that were admitted into the Mynisterie of the gospel.

Paul and Barnabas were contented with laying on hands, Fasting and prayer,
Paul diligently prescribing to Timothy, and Titus all the offices of A
Bishop, makith no mention of peculiar garments and other ceremonies. and that
the use of apparel did not by and by go over all Churchis, it is evident
enough by the decre of Celestine the first Bishop of Rome: whose words are
these against such peculiar vesture of Bishopes. We are to be discerned (says
he) from the common people or other, in doctrine not apparel, in conversation
not in habit, in purity of mind not in attire: For if we begine to give our
selves to novelties, we shall contemn and cast away the order that the
Fathers have delivered, and left us and shall make a place for superfluous
supersticions: we must not therefore draw the simple minds of the faithful
to such things, for they must rayther be instructed, then begiled, and mocked,
neither must we deceive their bodylie eyes, but pour in precepts into their
minds. Thus far he, yet can we not deny, but as men bend, and inclyne to
supersticion of them selves: so some kind of garments although very simple
and plain had crepte into many Churchis before this man's days. For Syluester
no doubt gave the occasion. But Carolus (called the great) finished the matter
as stories bear wittnes. Now it is made manifest that the use of peculiar
apparel in the church or ecclesiastical persons, is a mere devise and
invention of men, and therefore to be rejected for this cause if there were no
more.

They which would keep thuse of this apparel in the Church as a thing
instituted of God, refer the same to Aarons preysthoode, but they little for see
what they say. For we know by the scriptures, that Christ is not a Priest
after the order of Aaron, but of Melchisedech, and that Aaro^s pristhood was
extinguished, and took end in Christ with all the parts thereof, among the
which we reckon also the apparel. Therefore Christ the veric wisdom of the
father used no new, or peculiar kind of apparel in holy ministerye, neither
appoincted any other to be used. For that the figurative priesthod as a shadow
was perfited, and ended in Christ the one and only Priest. All they therefore
that call again Aarons apparel into the Chirch, dishonor Christ's priesthod,
as though being the light it self, he nedid shadows, neither will that excuse
serve, to say that all Aarons priesthod is not called into use again, but some
part thereof only: but he that receyuith a part, does not reject the
wholle. But all Aarons priesthode being a figure and shadow is no doubt to be
rejected, for that it is abrogated, and as many as do restore again those
things that the auctorytie of gods word has destroyed and abrogated, are
transgressers of gods law. Paul therefore well teachith, that the bond maid
is to be cast forth and her Son, singnifiyng that all the bondage of the law
is to be rejected, after the light of the gospel is spronge forth and risen,
and he wyllith us not to suffer our selves to be removed from our liberty in
Christ, now it is to plain that the doctrine and commaandementes of whatsoever
kind of apparel peculiar, in gods mynisterye is a tra^sgression of gods laws:
For because Aaro^s priesthode is called in to use again.

If any man by occasion of the first argument deny that the garments are a
portion of Aarons priesthood, and say that they were by a certain liberty
brought in of the Byshopes of Rome, to adorn and set forth priestlye ordar,
yet says he not enough why they may be law fully retained, we know that the
Pope of Rome is very Antechriste him self, wherefore his priesthode also is
Antichristian, whereby Christ's priesthod wholly is foiled and utterly trodden
vndar foot. But forasmuch as the chiefest part of the priesthod of the Pope
consistith in Ceremonies, Anointing shauing, Miters, and garments, for with
out these they accoumpt no man Bishop, and they coumpthym Bishop whatsoeuar
he be otherwise, that is set out with these things, yt followith that if we
condemn the popish priesthod, for that it is Antchristian, we ought to avoid
all the parts and notes thereof also. For how can A godly and Christian heart,
love the mark of the blasphemus popish priesthode?

Where with Christ's pristhood is so greatly contaminate and defiled. he
therefore that hates Antechrist pristhod must hate also all the notes and
marks thereof. Again he that loves parts thereof can not hate the whole.

Moreouar if we know that the Popes priesthood, with all the notes and signs
thereof be Antechristes priesthod, and every work of Antechrist be Satan's
work, we must not promote and help it forward, but overthrow and destroy it,
if so be we wylbe workers together with Christ, who came to destroy the works
of the Devil, as the scriptures bear record.

And let us not think that it is lawfell for any man to institute, reduce or
keep in use by his authority these garments, for all power is given to edific
and not to destroy, (as Paul says) who in the same place says, we can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. And edefiyng is to build the
faithful upon Christ, in faith, hope charytie, and innoce^cie of lyffe,
co^tendyng alw ayes to more perfection: but the garments promote or help
forth none of these things: but rayther obscure Christ's face, bring in a
certain agreement with Antechristes pristhod, or rayther a backesliding to the
shadows of Aaron from the body of Christ.

The truth is it for the which Apostolic men and christian Magistrates ought
to travel, and Christ is content with the ordinance which he him self has
left, neither does he any longar require shadows: wherefore they must and will
labor for it, not against it, by reuokynge those things which Christ has
destroyed and abolished.

Furthermore Paul simply admittith nothing into the Church but that which may
edefie, (that is to say) increase godliness peculiar garments in the ministry
edify not, therefore are they not to be borne. those things that minister a
certain counterfeit, or fantastical occasion to godliness, do not by and by
edefie: but they must needs give Christians a necessary provocation unto
godliness. But garments contrary wise partly increase hautines, and pride in
them, that use them: partly hypocrisy: partlye both twain: And to minister
occasion to hypocrisy, it is very ready for them, yea it must needs be. For
if that vertew be in thee, which thou imaginest to be signified by the
apparel, why by showing of it do thou take the reward of men? but if it be
not, art not thou a plain Hypocrite? being indeed an other manner of man then
thou pretendest to be? And thou canste not escape by saying these private
garments signify no vertew in us, but admonish us as it were of our duty and
office. what then I pray you admonished the Apostles of their duty and office?
attire or the spirit of the Lord? the love of the Chirch and Christ? do they
then forget their duty, as often as they put these garments of? why rather
meditate they not in the word of the Lord day and night, and thereby mend their
ways, for that it pearceth the ground of the heart? when apparel, can move
only the owtward man. What thing does Christ three several times require of
Peter, to be admonished of his office, in feading his sheeppe? suarly nothing
but love.

Again it is to be feared, lest it bread an opinion of merit, or some such
other follye, that the dignity of the Minister or Sacraments, or preachinge
the word is diminished, unless these unprofitable, and pernicious garments be
used. this fear of man's merit alone should move us that vestimentes ought to
be shutt out of the Temple with other ceremonies devised by men. It is ungodly
to give such occasion of offense, or falling to the weak for whom Christ dyed.
How easy a matter it is to put confidence in these things, experience has
taught us so, that he that wayeth these things, and has no consideration
thereof, may seem not to be free from the suspicion of ungodliness, neither can
they excuse them selves, that it is known to all men, that there lies no good,
nor hurt, in the garments, for though we grant this, this knowledge was in
these days, when they were first brought in of the Bishops: we are borne, not
for our selves only, but we serve the Chirch, and our posterity also: to
who^ to leave Christ's religion very pure, can not but be very acceptable
unto god. No more when he dies, wyllynglie leauith his children a Testament or
will, unless it be thoroughly perfect, that all occasion of strive may be cut
of. why show we not like diligence, and fidelity in gods Testament?

I know that some men bragg that the holy ministry is adorned and bewtyfied
bye garments, but it is indede much obscured and darckned therbye. For the
apparel affecting and occupie^g men's eyes, do stay and hinder their minds
from the consideration of such spiritual things as are don in the
sacraments, and draw the^ to delyghtes and pleasures of the Senses. Holy
simplicitye commends and sets forth gods ordenaunces. Examples make of our
side, both of Christ, and the Apostles, and also the primitive Church: which,
it is more safe, more holy, and more profitable to follow, then to alter and
change, or bye doing otherwise to condemn christ. Here farther add I that
which Paul has noted of men's doctrines, that outwardly, they have a spice
and show of wisdom through supersticion, and hnmblenes of the mind, and
hurtinge of the body, Collo. 2.
and not by any honor thereof to the satisfieng or filling of the flesh. At
the length tyranny is brought in, and the garment is put upon men, will they
nill they. And this tyranny suerly makith that if a thing be of his own
nature free and indifferent, it now cease to be indifferent. Paulle in flat
and plain words forbids Christians to submit them selves to such
superstitious tyranny. Collo. 2. 1. Cor. 7.
If therefore ye be dead from the ordenaunces of the wo^lde etc. and again
become not the servants of men. Is it not a very hard bondage, and mere
slauerye, to be driven to a certain kind of garment in the Church that
sauoreth either gentilitye, or heathnishnes or Araons priesthode, or else
Antechrit stianisme and popery that is so many ways hurfull and no way
profitable?

But what makes us, to delyght so to defyle our selves with popish filthiness?
why give we not that honor to Jesus Christ's priesthode? which popish Priests
give to Antechristes priest hode? There is nothing so small or light by him
prescribed, although it dissent or vary from Christ, which his observe not
very superstitiously and precisely to the uttermost. Why do not we again
likewise in all things obey Christ, contenting our selves with his naked and
simple truth?

To conclude, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
seeing that Paul judges it mere to abstain from all show and aperaunce of
evil, and we have showed that to prescribe garments in the administracion of
holy things is in deed evil: for that it is a deuyse of men, they be parts
or members of the Aaronicall or popysh priesthode, they edify no thing at all,
they bread hautines and pride, hypocrisy, and opinion of merit or descruynge,
what christian is he that will not judge them mete to be eschewed and shounnid?

There are objected sum things of the fautors and patrons of these
garments, which it shall suffice breiflie and in fevv words to note and
touch, for that they overthrow not our reasones before Alleged.
IN indifferent things we must have regard to the weakness of our brethren,
First object
after the example of the Apostles.

A man may deny those things to be indifferent, Answer
which obscure Christ's pristhode, and of them selves enge^dre, stire up, and
cause nothing else but hypocrisy, sects, and pride, in the Chirch, having no
otiginall or ground in the scriptures and yet are commanded with tyranny
unseemly for Christianes. The Apostles are neuar readde to have done such
things as these are, that we falselye pretend not, or vainelye cloak our
selves with the godly industry of the Apostles to plant the Church of Christ.
Again seeing that they them selves think mete to have respect to the weak
herin, why grant they not free use hereof to the strong and those that are
stayed? And when shall the weak more better learn that those things are
vain, foolysh and hurtful: then when they see them abrogated? How can the
simple and ignorant think other wise with them selves, then that some
godliness co^sistith in those things that yet remain, when they see so many
other things which were used in times past done away: wherefore weakness is
not releued and helped, but hindered and hurt if garments and such like
ceremonies be retained and kept, because they be kept in the opinion of the
mind, and by them me^ measure the dignity and worthynes of the Sacraments.

Again, Second objection.
they object the Magistrates law and decree in retanynge garments. But I know
our Magistrates godliness, wisdom and forwardnes to be such, that when he
shall depelye way, and well co^sidar the danger and inco^uenyence of these
ceremonies, he will rejoice that there be some that desire to run before in
the law of the Lord, and to prepare and make the way radye for other, that he
may revoke and bring all things to the sinceritye and perfection of the
Apostles order. they know that power and auctoritye is given them in the Church
to edisication, not to destruction, to stand on the tiuthes side to defend it,
not to oppress it. Seeing this godlynes in our Magistrate is known to be
willing and ready, I wotnot wheather he can be blameles, whatsocuar he be that
will vndar cloak of his defense, tiranniouslye defend men's traditiones, or
thrust them on other men against their wylls, contrary to the Lords
commandment. But those things comonlye delyght and please much bettar, which
we our selves have chosen, then those which gods laws prescribe. Neither
again have we here to fear any tumult, if men's precepts and rules
especially being superstitious be removed out of the chirch, where bye we
kyndle and provoke the wrath of God. But rayther the nerar we shall come to
Christ's institution and orders, and the farthar we shall depart or go from
Antechrystes institutions and orders, the more quiet peace and rest of the
Rcalme have we to look for.

That policy and wysdom of man's reason (which seeks and promises it self
peace by unlaw full means) is ficle sliperie and deceptfull. Saul seeking gods
favor by the sacrisices of the Amalachites which were forbidden, cast away him
self unadvisedly. There is one way. and means to attain sastie and health
by. If we altogether turn to repentance, believe the gosspell, walk in
innocence of life, and retain nothing into the church, which either has not
the express word of god for it, or else draw and take thence as out of a
fountain, his infallable and sure grownd of beginynge. And then that true
Pastors, and such as be paynfull and diligent in teaching, be placed and set
over churches, dome, and enill Shepeherdes being excluded, and thrust forth: so
shall the King and his people florrishe according to the promises of God,
often repeted in the Prophets.

Bullengerus Decade quinta sermon none.
IT is open'y known, that our Lord in his first supper, and that the Apostles
also in the celebratio^ of the supper, used A common and honest garment,
therefore hit is not contrary to the first institution: if the Minister go to
the Lords table arrayed with his own garment, so that it be comely and honest.
sucrlyc they that are communicantes use no other garments, then their common
garments: here had men need to take heed that supersticion creape not in, it
seems that the old Fathers used A cloak or an ouermost garmet above their
common garment. But they did not that by any example they had of Christ or his
Apostles, but after the tradition of man. At the length this stuff that we see
at this time, was gathered by following of the Sacerdotall aparell of the old
law, and was cast upon the Ministers that would minister the communion, And
Innocentius the third of that name does not conceal that, But we have learned
a great while a go, that the leuiticall rites and ceremonies are not only
abrogated, But that they ought not to be brought again into the Church by any
man. Therefore when as we live in the light of the Gospel and not in the
shadevv of the law, by good right we cast away that Massely, and leuiticall
apparel.

Bullengerus in the vi. Chapter of the beginning of Errors.
THe Fathers of old time, had used a plain garment, and nor greatly costly,
which they used in celebrating of the sacraments and other gods service, for
the most part they were covered with an ouermost garment: whiles the Minister
went about to serve the Chirch at the table of the Lord. For of old time the
Priest was covered with that garment, which seemed to every country most
honest, whilst he did consecrate and divide the body and blood of the Lord.
But the stuff that is used now a days, was fet from the Jewish priesthode, as
Rabanus is the witness, which in the first book of his institutions and the
xiiii. chapter, and in those that follow does diligently declare, how that
this attire in all poinctes is like unto the apparel of Aaron. And Innocentius
the Pope (for this atryre utterly vvomanishe and like unto maide^s plays,)
was so bold as openly to pronounce and give sentence, that not all the customs
of the law are not abolished or put down. And these does he wright in the
iiii. book and iiii. chapter, of the mystical sacrament of the Altar.

Musculus upon the second Chapter of the Epistell of Saint Paul to the
Ephesianes.
IN this our age, there are some that earnestlye go about, that the parts that
are at debate should be brought unto unity, Blind sekers of unity.
but they err in that whereas they go about to seek it not in Christ which
makes, them one that at at debate. But think not that unity may be gotten
after this manner, that we should go back over unto the^, and return, and be
made Papists again, but by this way true unity can not be gotten, which can
not consist but in him that makes of both one.

The same Musiulus upon the second Chapter of the second epistell of Saint
Paul to the Corinthians.
IS it not the office of a Shepherd, to bring home again into the way shope
that stray abroad, whether they will or no, lest they should perish? I answer
that we do nottwitch or speak against the law full office of true Pastores,
whose office is to bring again into the way, but against lordshippe which
first Christ, him self spoke against and reproved: the 22. of Luke. And
afterward the Apostell Peter in the 5. chapter of his former epistell, and god
him self in the old testament reproved in false Shepherdes which played the
Lords, to cruelly over his slocke. A true Shepherd seeks his sheep that
strayeth away, when he has found it, he layth it upon his shoulders least it
should perish. But a false Shepherd kylleth and destroys: so our Lords of
chirches do not instruct and teach those that they judge to err in the
Church, because they can not, may because they care not, but with
commandment constreyne them to deny the truth that with their violence they
may bring to pass what they will and with torments compel them to recant and
cruelly kill them that will not. Is not this to be Lords over our faith in
the Church of Christ? For what other thyage is it to play the Lords then
not by the law, and lavvfull power, Have Iord ship in spiri tual matters is.
not for the profit of the Subjects, to commandthose things that are right and
lavvfull but eue^ at their commandment, for their own lust and pleasure, to
exercise lordshippe over their Subjects, and to show the preminence of their
superiority to a poinct whatsoever they list, to be believed, and done, and
that with high looks, and great pride and with cruel threaninges, to exhort
in all things obeydience of all men eue^ most servile and fullest of slauerye,
and require the same to be performed against the consciences of the faithful
people. If the Lords of the Chirches be free from this kind of lord ship let
the^ restore the free consciences of faith full me^ again from the yoke of
man's authority and let them abide in the christen liberty whereby they are not
the bond men of me^, but his, of whom they were bought again with a great
price or ransom.

Musculus upon the xxij. chapter of Saint Matthew.
WE see here how men should obey Magistrates, and what difference they ought to
put between God and the Emperor for all though he be the officer of God, there
is one thing that is dew unto him, and an other that is dew unto GOD: Therefore
we are taught hete ij things. The first is, that the servants of God not only
may, but ought to obey the Magistrate. the Apostles did teach this Roma. 13:
and, VVhatdew to God, what to Princes.
1. Pet. 3. The second thing is, that there is one thing dew to the Emperor
and an other dew to God. It that is erthlye is dew to the Emperor, and it that
helongeth unto religion is dew unto God. In earth ly things we have the Image
of the Emperor in A coin, which teaches what we owe unto the Emperor. Again,
we bear in our soul by the sealinge of Christ and his holy spirit being
signed or coined through baptism and have therebye the inscription of the name
of Christ whereby we are taught what woowe unto God. God forbids not us to
give unto the Emperor it that is dew unto him. The^ were it not great wickedness
and ungodliness if that the Emperor would not suffer it that is dew unto God to
be given unto him but will take it unto his own self?

Musculus in his comune places in the Chapter of Magistrates.
BY considering of these things it appears plainly, The civil Magistrate can
do nothing without the word of God.
although the care and chardge of christen religion belong unto Christien,
Magistrates, yet for all that, it belongs not unto them without the word of
God to ordeine any thing.

Musculus in his comune places in the title of the Ministers of the word.
IT is therefore out of all doubt, that it was ordained by the Apostles in the
first and apostolic Church that the elders of the Church, Episiopountes, (that
is to say, they that have the chardge of the Lords flock) should exercise the
ministry of teaching and governing by their comune labor, and that they should
be as a man would say, akephaloi (that is to say subject to no head and
President) of which sort even at this time some Ministers of the word ar found
in some Chirches, amongst whom none is found superiot or higher then ar other
in office, and in power: although one be more excelent then an other, in
learning, in the gift of eloquence, or wisdom. But after the times of the
Apostelles (as Saint Ierom says) when there rose amongst the elders of the
chirch dissentiones and schisms or sects and as I do judge when as that
temptation of superiority or higher authority entered into the minds of the
elders: Shepherdes and Teachers little by little, some one of the number of the
elders began to be chosen, which was made president above the rest and he
being set in a higher degree was named a Bishop, and so he alone took that
name unto him, which before, other had comune with him. But wheather that
cowncell did profit the Church of Christ, or no, that such Bishops should be
made, which rather by the coustome, the^ by the truth of gods ordinance,
should be brought in and be of greater authority then Elders: it was better
declared in times folowinge, How Bishops rise up.
then it was sithence when this custom at the first was brought in, for we
may blame that custom, for all the high pride, riches, tyranny, and
corruption of all Chirches of Christ, which these princely and knightly
Bushoppes have, and do now exercise. Which thing if Jeremy had seen,
doubtless he would have knovvledged this council to have been, not of the holy
ghost, to take away division as was pretended, but Satan's council, to
destroy and to waste the old Ministers of feading of Christ's flock, whereby
it might be also brought to pass that the Chirch should not have true Pastors,
Docters, Elders, and Bishops, but underneath the visers of those names, idle
bellies, and myghtie Princes, which not only will not preach the^ selves, and
feade the people of the Lord with holsom doctrine, but will not suffer the
flock to be fed by any other, which thing they do by great violence.

Musculus also in the same place upon the same matter intreatinge of the power
of Mynisters.
THis matter has been wonderfully tossed with a continual conte^tion through
them which has more aspired for preeminence, and gaped for the supreme power,
then have gone about the law full exercisinge of the ministry, for they
desired rather to be Lords in the chirch then to serve it. And at this present
time, the most part of them which castinge away the tyranny of the Bishop of
Rome, will seem to have brought the Chirches ageine into the liberty which was
purchassed by Christ, ar assaulted with this temptation. These, being
otherwise good men, O postillick, B. that would be woth proud Iordes and
bumble. Apolie.
and exercisinge faithfully and diligently the office of teachinge: Suppose
that by this means, they shall profit the Churches, if they deliver the
Ministry of the word from contempt and despicinge (which hit suffers now in
all places) and would restore it to the old honor again. But on the other
side, there are other not evil men, but also well learned and workers in the
word of God, that stand up against these, Some men mark, and some try the
Lorship, what it is.
being afraid least through the study and zeal of these men, not being
sufficiently circumspect, and ware, the dooreshold be opened by little and
little to bring into the Chirch again the old Lord ship (that is) least
they by their authority which they have of the Ministry of the word might
open the way to false and unfaithful Ministers to abuse the power that is
defended and brought in again by them to the contrary. And they suppose that
this fear is not in vaync, whilse they consideringe the beginning of the
popish Lord ship, call to remembrance under how bewteous a pretense, and by
the zeal of great and holy men, by and by after the time of the Apostelles it
was brought into the Chirches. And a little after he says. It is plainly to be
granted at the beginning that some power was given unto the ministry of the
word and to the dispe^sation of the mysteris of God which is profitable and
mighty to edification, yea and necessary for our salvation, which is through
Christ, and that is meant by the way of a similitude of Christ him self when
as in the xxiiij. of Matthew he says who think thou is a faithful servant
and a wise. Whom the Lord has made Ruler over his household to give them
meat in time? he means that he would give unto his Disciples such power over
his Chirch as they have to whom the whole housho de is committed of the good
man of the house, that they should give the^ sufficient meat. and Mark r3. Even
as a man that goes into a far country leaves his House and has given power
unto his servants and has apoincted every man his office and has given
chardge unto the Porter that he should watch Watch ye therefore, etc. VVheather
was this co^ missoon committed unto Princes only, or only to the Disciples of
Christ and their successors or no.
Doubtless he spoke these things unto his Disciples, to show what should be
their condition, in the House of God, after that he had departed from them to
Heaven

And a little after amongst 3. powers there is one that is called potestas
iuris, that is the power of right, whereby a man has lordshippe over his own
substance, which is not subject unto an other man's right: This power of right
is given of God the Father unto his son Christ, for he says all power is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. S. Petertaketh away all dominion and
lordshippe from the elders of the Church, therefore he gra^teth none neither to
the P. neither to any B of his making. VVhoare injurious to the majesty of
Christ ard to the liberty of the Chireq. who perteyne unto the kingdom of
Antethrist.
Peter takes away this power from the Ministers of Christ when he says,
exercisinge lordshippe 1. Pet. 5. and the Apostell Paul refuses it, saing we are no Lords of yowre faith and he exhorts faithful men that they submit not
them selves unto them which will exercise lordshippe over them, when he says
be ye not made the servants, or bondmen, of men, wherefore they that challenge
unto them selves this power in the house of God for that end that they shall
not be servants of Christ but Lords of the Church, ar eniuryous and do vvrong
to the majesty of Christ and also to the liberty of the Church.

As many as do this utterly perteyne unto the Kingdom of Antechriste, which
occupienge the place of Christ in the Church and chalenging all his aucthorytie
not only for this cause that he is contrary to Christ but also for that he
thrust him self into the Church instead of Christ is justly called
Antechrist that is the adversary and also the vycar of Christ for even as he
is called Antistrategos not only that is against the chief Captain but he
also that thrust him self by usurpation unto the souldiees to be their chief
Captain and braggeth of his office.

Rodolphus upon the 22. Chapter of Mark. No greater hinderaunc to salvation
to faith the^ the countersit aucthori tie of false Prelates.


THere is no stronger or greater hynderaunce unto salvation, and to faith, then
is the counterfeit authority of false Prelates, confirmed by the prescriptio^
of long time, for by the reverence that men have unto them hit is brought to
pass, that men dare not depart from them, Loug tune is the maintainer of
errors the word is the bewraer of them.
even for the errors that all men spy in them, because that the commune people
does know, that so many hundred Years, amongst all men, of every order and
place, have had them in such honor, and so greatly regarded.

A little after in the same Chapter.
THe Papists do say that they are not rashly to be provoked to anger which
are defended by the public authority of Kings, Such as are made defen dors
of the public health of the Chirch must not fear kings
whose anger to stir up against any man is very ieopardous, but I answer
that such men ought not to be afraid of any perels whom God has appoincted
for to be Kepers and Defenders of the public health or salvation. And we do
know that the false Prophets have ever had this good Luck, that they have
had Kings and Princes to be their Defendors and protectors. And yet for all
that, neither the Prophets, False Prophets are ever defended trev v Prophets
but syldom.
nor the Apostles gave any place unto them, because the commandment of God
drove them unto this, that they should with ieopardye of their lives stoughtly
both wythstand them, and their Patrones, or Defendors. And these words of God
which he spoke unto Jeremy are well known. Be not thou afraid when thou see
them, least I destroy the, whylest they look upon thee, for behold, I make this
day, a well defended city, a Pyiler of iron, and a brazen wall, against the
Kings of Judah, against the Princes and the Priests of the same: Therefore
there is no cause why they that are gods officers should fear the tyrnnnie of
the world.

The same Rodolphus a little after in the same chapter.
CAuete a Scribis inquit. Beware says he of the Scribis in deed it is but A
short sentence, but such a one as many men doubtless thought vntollerab e. For
he speaks of them, which for the space of many hundred years occupied the
chief place in the Church. To whom God, had con mitted his law and the key of
knowledge (as it is said in another place which also sitting in the preachinge
Stool of Moses, gloried much, that they did succeed the old Priests and
Prophets, The people must depart and not acknowledge the Phareso for Paslors.
and occupied their places, yet for all that Christ moves his Disciples, that
they should beware of them, that is to say, that they should not knowledge them
to be their Pastors, but rather that they should depart from them, for so Saint
Peter the Apostle seems, afterward to expound these words, when as he
says to them of Jerusalem that axed counsel of him separemini a generatione
ista praua. Loter might some auctor of scisme.
Separate or depart your selves from this crooked and frow ard generation. But
what other thing was this then to make A Scisme or sedition unto them, When
concord is evil and Vhen dissentiou is good.
which until that time seemed to be knit together by A greable consent amongst
them selves, but as every concord and agreement is not good, so every deuisio^,
or dissent is not evil, and as they offend which agree together in it that is
evil, so they deserve no small praise which disturb and break up such
concord and agreement, that they may learn to consent unto the truth, which
before did conspire and agree together in lies.

The same Rodolphus vvritynge also upon the same Chapter says.
THe Pope calls home again from banishment not only the Jewish ceremonies,
but also the ceremonies of the Gentiles, and he puts them to death that
desiar, to enjoy the christian liberty: And a little after he says,
Euangelio omnis in religione imaginum vsus prohibetur, quem simul in lege and
Propheris damnari certum est. In religion all use of Images is forbidden by the
gospel: whose use also is condemned without all doubt, in the law and the
Prophets.

The same Rodolphus upon the first Chap. of the Apostoles Acts.
THere ought nothing to be preached, Reformers of religion must uot bring in
superfluous rites abolished.
or taught in the Church, saving only such doctrine as was delivered by the
holy Ghost: for the Chirch or congregation is the house of God, in the which
the voice of the good man of the house ought only to be heard, and all things
ought to be ordered according to his appoinctment. And a little after he
says we do gather that the Kingdom of GOD ought to be set a broad and
defended, neither with carnal weapons, neither by the strength of the
Princes of this world. But with the preachinge of the word wherewith the
spitit of Christ, uses for to work strongly in meus minds. The same
Gualterus upon the xiiij. Chap. of the Acts, if that the Apostles durst not
take upon them such authority as to go away from Christ's commandment, and
to thrust new traditions unto the Churches, doubtless their rashness and
presumption, can not in any wise be accused, who at this time, under their name
and pretense dare so unshamefastly do it.

The same Rodolphus upon the 2. of Saint Marcke.
THis is also to be marked, that man's traditiones can neither be joined, Who
are Destroyers of religion.
neither he made to agree with the gospel. And they that go about that
purpose, do nothing else, but by little, endeavor to overthrow all religion:
for amongst these there is great discord, but where as Christ is allowed, who
is made unto us of God, the right wisdom all the wisdom of man must needs
give place with all his traditions And a little further, he says.

As in husbandry hit is convenient, A little popish leaven mareth all religion.
that the thorns and brambles, shall be first plucked up by the roots, if thou
wilt have any sede to grow and to bring forth fruit, so except, all things
be taken away cuen at once, it can never bring forth worthy fruits. For of
small remnauntes that abide behind we shall see great heaps of errors to
spring up, wherefore those commandments that were given for the pulling
down of Altars, and breaking of Idols in pieces appear yet still. Which GOD
would so earnestly to be kept, that he would, that the very gold, which was
sometime consecrated unto Idols, should be cast away and be burnt. And in
diverse places certain Kings are reproved and blamed, which have bestowed no
evil or small labor, in reforminge of doctrine and religion because they
leafte vnput down, or not destroyed, the high places which some called
Chapells, which before their times, were the Shoppes or work howses of false
worshippinge. And would to God there were not now exaples in this our time
which sufficiently teach us how ieperdous a thing hit is that there do
remain some remnauntes of instruments of old supersticion, for they fetch
from hence occasion to sin, which under pretense of the gospel seek their
own profit. Keapinge of old rites makes Boner and the wicked hope well.
Furthermore there is given hope to men, that are supersticious that their
supersticion shall be restored again. Which with stand the reformation of the
Church. Therefore, all Ministers and Magistrates ought diligently to take
heed, and mark this sentence of Chry^st, that we go not about to sewe the n.
we or raw cloth of thee gospel to supersticions, which in deed are an old
and a rent garment, but let us use great diligencie and vnceaseable zeal to
overthrow them.

The same Gualterus vvrytynge upon the 7. chap. of the Acts of the Apostles.
THe primitive church, as we see here, had her diseases, neither are they light
trespasses neither small faults, which are here rehearsed, but horrible
faults, they put difference between Nation and Nation, they are divided with
factions, they occupy contention and that not preuely, they bewray the
bytternes of their minds most wyckedly by their murmuryng. Therefore we see
that the primative Church was infected with that sin, for the which many
thowsandes under Moses were overthrown in the Wyldernes.

The same Gualterus upon the first chap. of the Acts of the Aposties.

THerefore it is an ungodly, and a tirannicall rashues of them, which, think
that they may make new Articles of the faith, and to thrust into the Church
traditions by the advice of man's reason.

FINIS.

