The effect of a Bill exhibited in Parliament by Sir Francis Englefield
Barronet.
ANthony the now Visconte Montague purposing irrecouerably to settle his
estate, does in the year 1611. covenant with the Lord Dormer his uncle, Sir
Francis Englefield his brother in law, and Sir John Dormer Knight, to stand
seized of the greatest part of his lands to himself for life, the remainder to
his only son Fran. Brown, with diverse remainders over to the next heir
male of his house; and for the residue of his lands he does by bargain, sale,
deed enrouled, and recovery, absolutely convey them to the said Couenantees and
their heirs, upon trust nevertheless expressed in the said deed that they
would therewith within 10 years pay all his then debts contained in a shedule
annexed, amounting near to 7000 l: and within 20 years raise the sum of
20000 l. payable in marriage portions for all his six daughters, of which he
appoints to Marie 10000 l. to Katherine 4000 l. to Frances 2000 l. to Jane
2000 l. and 1000 l a piece to his other two daughters; and upon further trust
(these debts and marriage portions paid) that these Feoffees would with the
remain of the lands unsold provide for all his younger sons, and for want of
younger sons to reassure the same remain on the next heir male of. (...)
house; The Visconte thereby likewise lastly couenanteth not to stir, alter nor
incumber this his estate so firmly settled, and gives to these three Feoffees a
recognisance of 20000 l. defeazanced for his performance of the said covenant,
which cancelled he acknowledges to them a statute of 20000 l. intended to have
been defeazanced as the said recognisance was.

The lands so conveyed to these Feoffees, they do quietly enjoy 4 years, in
which time (with the sale of very little part) they do pay most of these debts
and Katherines 4000 l marriage portion. Then by Mary's marriage with William Lord
St. John son to the Marquis of Winton. her 10000 l portion did likewise grow
due, the whole interest of which is by the joint deed of the Visconte, the Lord
St. John and his Lady, made over to the Marquis, who by articles agreed before
marriage was to receive the same, and in liew thereof to make his said sons
wife a ioyncture of 1200 l a year; of this assignement made, the Lord St. John
and his Lady do by their joint letters written the 28. Nouemb. 1613. to these
Feoffees, give them notice, who accordingly do make agreement with the Marquis
to pay the same at 3 equal payments in the 3 Easter terms 1615, 1616, and
1617.

The Lady St. John who hitherto had lived in good amity with her husband,
through ill counsel now leaves his house and company, and being put in hope
to obtain both this 10000 l marriage portion and this ioynture of 1200 l a
year, she first by a petition to his Majesty procures these paiments to the
Marquis to be inhibited, and then viz. 12. Febr. 1616. exhibiteth a Bill in
Chancery against Sir Francis Englefield in the name of her self and her
husband, pretending that the interest of this 10000 l marriage portion did then
rest in her husband, with whom she says she had made an agreement to receive
9000 l thereof for her sustentation and maintenance, which with damages for
detaining the same from her, she requires of the defendant. In Easter Term
1617. the Lo. St. John having notice of this his wifes fraudulent bill
exhibited in his name without his priuitie; and conceiving the same to be done
purposely to wrong his father and himself, he therefore 12. May. 1617. by his
counsel in the open Court of Chancery disclaimeth this his wifes bill, and
denies to have made with her any agreement whereby she might challenge any
part of this marriage portion; notwithstanding which disclaim resting upon
record, she procures this 9000 l for her sustentation and maintenance,
together with 2500 l more 5. Iun. 1617. to be decreed unto her, which Sir Fra.
Englefield knowing not to be warranted by the trust, refused to pay, and was
for the same committed to the prison of the Fleet, from whence he could not be
discharged until after nine months imprisonment he had paid to the said Lady
St. John all the moneys then in his hands, by reason of this trust being 10000
l.

Upon this fraudulent and disclaimed Bill many orders have been made, amongst
which 11. Iun. 1618. it was upon this Ladies motion ordered, that if Sir Fra.
Englefield should not forthwith account for these trust moneys, and assign
over the said trusts to Sir George Moore, Sir John Walter, and M. Tho.
Spencer, he should again be committed, and a Fine of 500 l is set on his head;
which Sir Fra. Englefield conceiving to be no breach of the trust, he therefore
by his petition resting upon Record, proffered the same, and tendered
performance thereof accordingly, as shall appear testified under the hands of
the Lord Chancellor himself and two of the Masters of the Court; yet as if he
had refused to assign or account, is he again upon this order (without any
warrant for his commitment) violently drawn to the prison of the Fleet, where
he continued full 21 months more; and the said Lady St John having by means of
false suggestions made to his Majesty, procured a grant of this 500 l pound
fine, judgment is given against Sir Francis Englefield contrary to law for
this 500 l, which forthwith is levied out of his goods and paid unto her.

The lands subject to this trust being by the strongest assurance of the Law so
conveyed to these three Feoffees, and no power thereby left in the Viscount to
stir or alter the same, nevertheless in May 1615. he exhibiteth a bill in
Chancery against the said Feoffees, pretending thereby that they had broken
this trust, as also that they desired to be disburdened from the same, and
therefore praid that by the authority of the Court they might be enjoined to
assign this trust to such other new Feoffees as he should nominate* In answer
to which bill, the Defendants do on their oath deny to have broken or
neglected this trust, or that ever they desired to be freed from the same; it
was nevertheless 16. July. 1617. upon the Viscounts motion (without proof of
witness or hearing the Defendants counsel) ordered, that the possession of
these lands shall be taken from the Defendants and delivered to Sir Geo. Moore,
Sir Io. Walter, and M. Tho. Spencer, whom the Viscount did then nominate as
new Feoffees to execute this trust, unto whom likewise he procures by a writ
dated the 18 of July, and directed to the Shiriffe of Sussex the possession of
the said lands trusted to be delivered, and the said new Feoffees by virtue
thereof have ever since taken the whole profit^ of the said lands, and thereby
raised at least 16000 l.

The Lady St. John fearing now the lands trusted were taken from the first
Feoffees to lose the benefit of her aforesaid decree, by which she was to
receive out of the same the sum of 11500 l. procures by four several
orders made in the months of December 1617, and April, May and June follow^^^,
the Viscount and his said new Feoffees to be enjoined with the whole mean
profits of these lands, first to make her satisfaction, then the residue of the
Viscounts daughters their marriage portions unpaid, and lastly to employ the
remain according to the direction of the said trust, in contempt of which
orders the Lady St. John perceiving her father and his aforesaid new Feoffees
to convert the whole profits of the lands trusted to their own private, she
threatens to complain of the wrong done her; her father therefore to give her
satisfaction proffereth her 600 l a year out of the same until her money were
paid, which she the better to be assured of to receive, procures to be ordered
unto her by the Court.

But this 600 l a year not long contenting the Lady St. John, she requires
her money decreed unto her, in liew of which the Viscount is well pleased that
she have the Manor of Northey and diverse houses in Saint Marie Oueries being
both better worth to be sold then 20 000 l, yet this to be unto her but in part
of her satisfaction; so he and his new Feoffees might enjoy the residue and not
be questioned for the mean profits of the said lands which so unjustly they
had detained, and this trust might be destroyed: which proffer the Lady St
John's accepting, it is resolved a decree must be gotten to enforce Sir Francis
Englefield and Sir John Dormer thereunto, in whom the sole interest of the said
lands after the death of the Lord Dormer did rest; but how to procure this
decree to destroy this trust (which the Vicount by his bill seemed desirous
should subsist) and to cross not only the Viscounts bill upon which it was
made, but the aforesaid decree made upon the Lady St John's bill and all former
orders and proceedings in Court upon these bills, was holden a matter impossible
to procure; nevertheless by the means of great bribes given and more promised
by the Viscount (which bribes are confessed in Parliament) this Decree is made,
bearing date the 23 of June 1618.

The Lord Chancellor who made this Decree, well knowing the same by the ancient
practice of the Court (as having no ground) to be void in it self, would
therefore (notwithstanding the aforesaid bribes) so long as he sat (which was
near three years after) never suffer any execution of this Decree, yet to
give the Vicount some content, it was upon his motion made the 20 of May 1620.
ordered, that if Sir Francis Englefield did not by the second Return of the
next Term give unto the Viscount an account of these trust moneys, a Fine of
1000 l was imposed on him: which account (though never demanded by the
Viscount) Sir Francis Englefield in the Viscounts absence again proffereth to
his chief Counselor and only Solicitor of this cause; yet nevertheless, as
if he had disobeyed this order, he is by means of the Viscounts bribes yet
fresh in memory by an order of the 5. of July 1620. censured to have forfeited
this Fine, and a Scire facias is accordingly awarded against him, to show cause
why this 1000 l Fine should not be levied out of his goods, to which writ, by
reason of the uncertainty, the Defendant could not plead, and therefore did
demurre to the insufficiency of the said writ.


