MORIEMINI.

A VERY PROFITABLE SERMON PREACHED before her Majesty at the Court, about
xiij. years since: By H. B.



LONDON, Printed by John Wolf.

1593.

(...) even great envy toward such as are godly and well affected; he will
in that respect bear the more with me, neither take it indignantly at my
hands, that his godly labors are rather thus preserved for the use of men,
then reserved (as before) to be consumed of mothes. The argument of this sermon
may appear unto thee by this one word in the forehead of it ( Moriemini.) And
thus not doubting, but that after thou shall once advisedly have perused it,
thou vvilt allow both of him that first did pen it, and of my poor self
also, who thus did print it for thy behoof and benefit. I bid thee farevvell.

A VERY PROFITABLE SERMON PREACHED BEFORE her Majesty at the Court, about
xiij. years since, by H. B.
Psalm. 82. 6. 7. 6 I have said, ye are Gods, and ye are all the children of the
highest: 7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.
I have said, ye are Gods: But ye shall die like men.
THe princely Prophet David, being himself advanced by the goodness of God,
to be king over Israel, by daily experience plainly saw, how common a thing it
is, that the great and mighty, the rich and wealthy men of this world, do
many times forget both them selves, what they be, and their God, from whom they
be. And glorying in nobility, and swelling in authority, and swimming in
worldly wealth, do trust in their treasures, and seek their own pleasures,
and think them selves Gods.

Therefore, that the great personages of this world should not be deceived with
their great estates in this world, and think them selves Gods to work their
own wills, and neglect the will and ways of the everliving God. The Prophet
here does plainly tell them, that though they be Gods, that is, Gods in
majesty, Gods in authority, Gods in wealth and glory, and in all the things
of this world live like Gods among men: yet are they but Gods on earth, and
Gods of earth, that is, earthy and mortal Gods, and must die like other men,
and part from all their pomp, and render account to the God of heaven for
their earthy Godhead. And this (me think) is the purpose of the Prophet in
these words, I have said, ye are Gods: But ye shall die like men.

Wherein the Prophet sets down two special points of Princes and great
personages

1. The Majesty and 2. The mortality
1. Their Majesty, in these words, I have said, ye are Gods, therein giving to
note

1. The duty done unto them. and 2. The duty required of them, for that they
be Gods.
2. Their mortality, in these words, But ye shall die like men: therein also
noting death. For that they shall die, like men.

1. The certainty of their death and 2. Their rising again from
I have said, ye are Gods.
As the Prophet David by the spirit of God in this place, even so the same
spirit in sundry places of the holy Scriptures does call the Princes and great
personages of this world, Gods.

1 So the Lord God himself said unto Moses, I will Exodus 12. 12.
be avenged of all the Gods in Egypt: meaning Pharao, and all the men of might
in Egypt.

2 And Moses the man of God amongst other, gave this law to the people of God;
Thou shall not speak Exodus 22. 28.
evil of the Gods: meaning the heads and rulers of the people.

3 And our savior Christ in the gospel says; Is it Ioh. 10. 34.
not written in the law, I have said, ye are gods? Ratifying and confirming,
that the men of this world are well called Gods in the word of God.

And the reason why they be called Gods, the queen of Saba renders, when she
says to king Solomon; Blessed 2. Para. 9. 8.
be the Lord thy God, which had a love to thee, to set thee king on his seat,
that thou may be king, for the Lord thy God. Plainly testifying that the
Princes and great personages in this world, do sit on Gods seat, by Gods
appointment, in stead of God, therefore called gods.

I have said, ye are Gods, that is, Ye sit on Gods seat by Gods appointment, in
stead of God, ye represent Gods majesty, and bear Gods authority, therefore
ye are Gods.

And for that ye are gods, that is, set on Gods seat, by Gods appointment, in
stead of God, therefore this duty is due unto you by all, that are under you,
to honor and obey you even for the Lord.

1 For so the Lord God himself in the first commandment of the second table
commands, To honor Father Exodus 20. 12.
and mother, that is, to honor and obey all superiors, rulers, and governors,
and promises long life for fulfilling the same.

2 And our savior Christ coming not to break the law, but to fulfill the
law, in token of his obedience, according to the law paid tribute to Caesar,
commanding Peter to take a hook, and cast into the sea, and in the Mat. 17. 27.
mouth of the first fish he gat, he should find a piece of twenty pence, that
take (says he) and give them for tribute for thee and me.

3 And when the Jews came unto him, and asked him, whether they should pay
tribute to Caesar, or not, he Mat. 22. 21.
said unto them, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: teaching all
subjects obedience to their Caesar's, that is, their Princes, heads, and
governors.

4 S. Paul in the 13. to the Romans, sets down Romans 13. 1.
sundry reasons to prove, that every soul ought to be subject to the higher
powers, as to the ordinance of God.

5 And S. Peter is plain: Submit your selves to every 1. Pet. 2. 13.
ordinance of man, (...) that is, even for the Lord: whether it be to the king,
as having the pre-eminence: or to the rulers appointed by him, for the
punishment of evil doers, but for the praise of them, that do well.

Thus the Spirit of God does teach the people of God in the word of God, that
the Princes and great personages of this world are gods, that is, set on Gods
seat, by Gods appointment, in stead of God: they represent Gods majesty, and
bear Gods authority: and therefore this duty is due unto them by all, that
are subject to them, to honor and obey them even for the Lord.

Whence then is that spirit, and whence is that doctrine, that sets on
subjects to conspiracies, rebellions, and treasons? and teaches them by
gunshot, by witchcraft, by coniuring, by sorcerie, by dealings with the devil
him self, to work mischief against their natural Prince, and their native
country? and yet tells them, that therein they do God service, and promise
them pardons, and hight them heaven for their disobedience?

Surely, surely, spiritus mendax in ore Prophetarum, that 3. Reg. 22. 2^
is, a lying spirit, the spirit of the devil and Antichrist is in the mouths
of such teachers, and the hearts of such dealers.

For the Spirit of God by the wiseman says: Wish no Eccles. 10. 20
evil to the king in thy thought, and speak no evil against great men in thy
secret chamber: for the fowls of the air will bewray thee. The fowls of the
air, that is, the devil (for so our Savior Christ in the parable of the
sower Matt. 13. 15.
expounds the fowls of the air to signify the devil.) The devil, that
sets traitors on work, he will pay them their hire, that is, he will
bewray their wicked practices against their Princes, to their shame and
confusion.

For ye are Gods, that is, set on Gods seat, by Gods appointment, in stead of
God, ye represent Gods majesty, and bear Gods authority: therefore this
duty is due unto you by all that are under you, to honor and obey you, even
for the Lord.

Yet some think them selves set free from this duty of obedience to their
natural Prince, by betaking the^ selves to the protection of the holy father,
and by reconciling them selves to his subjection. As for their natural Prince,
the present state, and Religion, they are in doubt of the goodness of them,
that they be not of God, nor agreeable to the word and will of God.

Yet have they seen, and full well do know, how wonderfully God has blessed,
prospered, and preserved us by this Prince, in this state, and for this
Religion by the space of these two and twenty years and vpwardes. And in all
this time, neither Balac his treachery, nor Balam Number. 23.
his curse for money has prevailed against us. For how could they curse whom
God does bless? how could they hurt whom God does defend? And yet too well
they know, that Balac has bragged, and Balam has banned, that is, the Pope
has cursed, and the popish have co^spired: Papists have devised, and Atheists
have practiced cunning conspiracies, treacherous treasons, pestilent practices,
and devilish devises against the Prince, against the state, and against the
religion; only God his holy hand has still from time to time preserved and
maintained the Prince, the state, and the Religion: whereby they might see
(were they not too too blind, and will not see) that God does love and like,
prosper and bless, the Prince, the state, and the Religion.

But these busy rebellious Frogs, that cannot yet like the blessed block of
so peaceable a prince, must needs at length have a devouring Storke.

God for his mercies sake turn their hearts, or ouerturne all that take their
parts.

Amen.
I have said, ye are Gods.
And for that ye are Gods, set on Gods seat by Gods appointment, in stead of
God, therefore this duty is also due unto you by them that are under you, to
pray continually to the living God for you.

So S. Paul teaches saying; I exhort you, 1 That 1. Tim. 2. 1.
prayers, supplications, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all
men, especially for kings, and all that are in authority.

2 And the reason why, the wise man renders, where he says, The heart of the
king is in the hand of the Lord: Pro. 21. 1.
Therefore the people are to pray to the Lord to dispose the heart of the king
and all that are in authority, to his good will and pleasure.

3 So David prayed for the king and said; Give the king Psalm. 72. 1.
thy judgments, O Lord, and thy righteousness to the kings son: then shall
he judge the people according unto right, and defend the poor.

4 And when our savior Christ came to Jerusalem riding like a king, the
people that went before him, Matt. 21. 9.
and they that came after him, cried unto him Hosanna, i. Hoschianna, i. Lord
save the king, Lord save the king. Which action allowed by our savior Christ,
teaches the Christians to cry Hosanna, that is, to pray continually for the
peace, wealth and safety of the Prince, and all that are in authority.

Ye are Gods to be praid for to the superior God, yet not to be prated of by
inferior men: by the wise to be advised, yet not to be chatted of by every
unadvised.

The law of God by Moses, Thou shall not speak evil Exodus 22. 28.
of the Gods, was given to bridle the licentious liberty of men's tongues, in
prattling of Princes and other great personages.

For, that every prentise should prate of Princes, and every Cobbler seem a
Counselor, and every Jack Straw devise a new law, and every meddling mate
mislike the whole state, is neither commendable by the word of God, not
tolerable in a Christian commonwealth: ye are Gods to be prayed for, not to
be prated of.

And thus much breefly of the duty due unto you, for that ye are Gods.

The God of heaven grant, that all duty due unto you, may of all parts be
faithfully performed unto you, to honor and obey you, and pray to God for you.

Amen.
I have said, ye are Gods.
And for that ye are Gods, that is, set on Gods seat, by Gods appointment, in
stead of God: therefore there is a duty also required of you toward that God,
that has made you gods.

For you are gods, not the gods of the heathen, silver and gold, the works of
men's hands, which have eyes and Psalm. 115. 3.
see not, ears and hear not, mouths and speak not, hands and handle not,
feet and walk not, neither is there any breath in their nosthrils: but ye are
gods, lively gods, and have eyes to see, and ears to hear, mouths to speak,
and hands to work the things, that are good and pleasing to the everliving God.

Therefore the Prophet David says unto you: Bring Psalm. 29. 1.
unto the Lord, o ye mighty, bring young rams unto the Lord, ascribe unto the
Lord your worship, and your strength: give the Lord the honor due unto his
name, and worship the Lord with an holy worship. By which words the prophet
teaches plainly, that there is a duty required of you that are mighty,
toward that God, that has made you gods.

But it becomes not me, perhaps, to tell you gods your duty, yet thus much
without offense, I hope, I may say, saying it truly: that the God of heaven is
angry with the gods on earth for want of duty.

Reuelatur enim ira Dei, etc. Romans 1. 28.
For the wrath of God in heaven is revealed, and made manifest against the gods
on earth by sundry signs and tokens of Gods wrath, both in the heavens above,
and in the earth beneath. For even of late days amongst us the often eclypses
of the Sun and the Moon, the diverse Cometes and blazing stars, the
sundry sights and lights in the air, the rise resemblances of fire and blood
in the clouds, the maine monstrous and strange birthes (though some seem to
render some natural reasons for them) yet are they unnatural, and the wrath
of God is revealed by them. As for the late earthquake amongst us, that was
soon forgotten of us, because it passed away so soon, and did so little hurt
amongst us. Yet the prophet David says, Psalm. 18. 7.
The earth trembled and quaked, the very foundations of the hills shook, and
were moved, because God is wroth. The prophet tells plainly, that the
trembling and quaking of the earth, is a sure sign and token of the wrath of
God in heaven. And that the late earthquake amongst us, did pass so soon away
from us, and with so little hurt among us, is an argument, that the wrath of God
against us, is yet mixed with much mercy toward us, threatening us so
terribly, and yet sparing us so mercifully.

Thus then by sundry signs and tokens it is evident and plain, that the God
of heaven is angry with the gods on earth for want of duty.

For some being advanced by God to be gods, do live without God, that is,
without the knowledge and fear of God, and become David's fools, and say in
their Psalm. 14. 1.
hearts, There is no God. But set up their horns on high, Psalm. 75. 6.
and say with a stiff neck, That promotion comes from the East and from the
West, that is, They say, their honor and authority, their lands and great
livings, their credit and their countenance comes to them by heritage, by
birth and parentage, or by the worthiness of their wit and policy, or by the
deserts of their labors and industry.

Therefore they offer sacrifice to their nets (says the Habac. 1. 16.
Lord by the Prophet) and burn incense to their yarne, because by the^ their
portion is made fat, that is, they boast of their birth, they vaunt of their
value, their wisdom, and their worth, because by them they think they have
whatsoever they have. And so set their whole delight Luc. 16. 19.
with the rich glutton to be finely fed and trimly clad, and having wealth
enough in store for many years, they say Luc. 12. 19.
to their souls, Soul take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry; and grow
to be like to that wicked judge, Nec Luc. 18. 4.
Deum timere, nec hominem reuereri, that is, neither to fear God nor care for
man.

For these godless Gods have commonly, if not continually about them,
bewitching Elimasses, that is, besotting Act. 13. 8.
epicures, Machiuilists, and Atheists, which feed the^ with the follies of
their own fancies, and pervert them from all care and fear of God, from
reading, hearing, or believing the word of God.

But when God had given his people rest in the days of Asa king of Judah, the
king and all the people made a 2. Pat. 15. 12.
covenant with the Lord to seek and serve the Lord their God with all their
hearts, and with all their souls: And they made a law, that whosoever would not
serve the Lord God, should die for it, were he small or great.

Oh if we would well consider the peace and rest, the prosperity and plenty,
where with the Lord has blessed us in the days of our Asa, that is, our
gracious queen Elizabeth, we have great cause to make a covenant with the
Lord, to seek and serve the Lord our God with all our hearts, and with all our
souls. But if Asa his law were in England, That whosoever would not serve the
Lord God should die for it, were he small or great, then surely God should be a
great deal better served both of small and great. For our peace and rest, our
prosperity and plenty, has bred a godless security both in small and
great: and the God of heaven is angry with the gods on earth for want of duty.

For some being advanced by God to be gods, do yet with Achab mislike good
Elias, and maintain Baals 3. Reg. 16. 32.
priests, that is, they cannot like of the preaching and preachers of the word
of God, but maintain bald priests to nusle them in Idolatry and superstition
still: such must be their chaplens, their schoolemaisters, stewards of their
houses, clearks of their kitchins, and bear all the sway. By sufferance
whereof it is come to pass, that not only themselves are hardened in their
superstition, past hope to be won, but also their children, a great number
that have been borne since your Majesty's reign, are so taught in their trade,
that they are become more obstinate enemies to the state and religion, then
their fathers are. And this is one great cause, why after so long preaching of
Gods truth, the enemies of truth are so smallie decreased, nay so mightily
increased amongst us.

O what a happy thing had it been for this land, if the children of such as
are known to be superstitious, had been taken from their parents at the years
of discretion, and committed to the education of such, as are known to love
the state and religion. But better late then never, they say, Nunquam sera est
ad bonos mores via.

Christ and his Gospel has a long time, two and twenty years been on foot
in England, and feign would ride, as he did sometime in Jerusalem, with some
glory. And ^. 1. 2.
for this purpose he has sent forth his two Disciples to bring both the old
Ass and the young Colt unto him. The two disciples are Doctrine and
Discipline, the word and the sword, ministers and magistrates: both which are
sent out, that is, appointed and commanded by Christ, to bring both the old
stubborn asses, and the young wild colts to Christ, that is, to the preaching
and teaching of the gospel of Christ. These two disciples have a long time
been in bringing, and have not yet brought neither the old asles nor the young
colts to Christ, because they do not go together to bring them; disciple
Doctrine feign would bring them, but disciple Discipline is very slack to go
with him: the one seeks means by counsel to bring them to Christ, the other
makes means many times by countenance to stay them from Christ. And the one
without the other cannot bring them to Christ.

Surely, Dominus his opus habet, that is, The Lord has Matt. 21. 3.
need of them.

Now therefore I most humbly beseech your Majesty even for Christ his sake,
and on Christ's behalf, to give a new and a straight charge to these two
disciples, to go together speedily, and to join together effectually, to
bring both the old stubborn asses, and the young wild colts to Christ, that
is, to the preaching and teaching of the gospel of Christ, to the salvation of
their souls through faith in Christ. Let Christ now no longer stay on foot
amongst us, least at last he be trodden under foot of us: for whilst we be
still careless of their conversion, they seek and work our utter subversion.
And the God of heaven is already angry with the gods on earth, for want of
this duty.

For some being advanced of God to be gods, do countenance such as seek to
discountenaunce the preaching and preachers of the word of God: both the
carpers at their lives, and the catchers at their livings. Every accuser has
too too many hearers, and too many bearers against Gods ministers, to abate
their credit and their countenance: and every shifter now becomes a suter, to
pill and pull away their livings and their maintenance. But when these
dallying Dalilaes, have curtold Sampsons Iudic. 16. 21.
locks, and robbed him of his strength, that is, when they have curtold the
clergies countenance, and robbed them of their maintenance, Sampson shall
become a blind Sampson, that is, the Clergy shall become a blind Clergy, and
pull down the house of Gods wrath and vengeance both upon themselves, and upon
those pilling Philistines that sought their decay.

To be short and plain, Gods word and religion is contemned by Atheists,
condemned by Papists, slaundered by schismatikes, hindered by too many, not
faithfully furthered by any. And because the love of Gods word and religion
thus in England is decreased, therefore the wrath of God against England is
increased.

For as the Oracle told the men of Athens, that the strongest state and best
defense of their city, was (...) i. Their rotten wood; meaning their good laws
that were graued in wood, and by antiquity were waxen rotten. Even so the
heavenly oracles of the living God tell us, that the strongest stay, and best
defense of a christian common wealth, is the preaching and teaching of the word
of God, the true religion and service of God.

So says the Prophet David; There is no king that Psalm. 33. 16.
can be saved by the multitude of an host, neither is any mighty man
delivered by his much strength: a horse is Psalm. 118. 16.
accounted but a vain thing to save a man, but the hand of the Lord has the
pre-eminence: the hand of the Lord is mighty in operation, the hand of the
Lord brings mighty things to pass.

1 Nymrod and his confederates thought themselves Genesis 11. 1.
safe, when they builded their Babell up to the heavens: but all their high
Babell was but a babble, that is, a very vain devise, and came soon to
confusion.

2 Arphaxad trusted in his strong and well fenced city Judith 1. 1.
Ecbatanis, but Ecbatanis could not hold him when the hand of the Lord was
against him.

Pharao trusted in the multitude of his chariots and Exodus 14. 28.
horsemen, and how soon were they all overwhelmed in the red sea.

So, not Nymrods high Babels, that is, not high castles and towers: not
Arphaxads Ecbatanis, that is, not strong towns and well fenced cities: not
Pharaos chariots and horsemen, that is, not the multitude of men and munition,
but the holy hand of the Lord, for his word, and by his word is the strength
and stay of the people of God.

Not the walls of Bethulia, but the hand of the Lord Judith 13. 4.
held out Holophernes, and strengthened weak Judith to hacke off his head.

Therefore that we in England have been so long, so mightily, and so
miraculously saved and delivered from the hands of them that hate us, (which
are so many, so mighty, and so maliciously bent against us) that their
trecheries and conspiracies, their counsels and confederacies, have been so
many times revealed, and so many ways prevented, that they have not taken from
us our most gracious Queen Elizabeth by their gunshot, their witchcraft, their
coniuring, their sorcerie, and their dealings with the Devil himself, to the
utter overthrow of the present state and Religion. All this, and all else has
not been so much by the wisdom of man, by the counsel or careful
circumspection of man, but by the merciful goodness of the Lord our God
toward us, and by the holy hand of the Lord our God over us, only for his
word and religion amongst us.

For so the prophet Elyzeus, when he saw Elias taken 4. Reg. 2. 12.
up from him, he cried after him: O my father, o my father, the chariots and
the horsemen, the chariots and the horsemen of Israel. Plainly testifying,
that Elias the Prophet of the Lord, who had plentifully preached the word of
the Lord in Israel, he was the chariots and the horsemen, that is, the
strength and stay of Israel. And even so doubtless Elias, that is, the
preaching and teaching of the word of God, the true religion and service of God
in England, is the chariots and horsemen, that is, the strength and the stay of
England.

Make much then of Elias, O make much of Elias. 3. Reg. 17. 3.
Let not Achab his accusations make you believe, that Elias troubles all
England: not Elias, but Achab, that is, not the religion, but the enemies of
the religion, their trecheries and conspiracies, their counsels and
confederacies, their crackings, and their privy packings, trouble all England.

Make much of Elias, O make much of Elias. Let not 3. Reg. 18. 10
the godless Iezabels drive Elias out of house and home, and make him to live
in the wilderness and be fed of the ravens, or else to live upon the poor
pittance of the widow at Sareptha, that is, Let not the godless greedy sort
take away the preachers lands and livings, and put them to live upon small
pensions, or little devotions.

Make much of Elias, O make much of Elias, yet make not a cloak of Elias to
cast about you in foul weather, and cast from you in fair weather. Think it
not enough 3. Reg. 18. 10.
to seek for Elias in the time of drought and dearth, and care not for him in
the time of plenty and rest, that is, Think it not enough when any trouble or
adversity comes, then to cry Religion, Religion, the Gospel, the Gospel,
and when all is quiet and well, then to have no care of Religion and the
Gospel. O make much of religion both in weal and woe, Religion is your
strength and stay both in weal and woe. And the more the love of Gods word and
religion in you decreaseth, the more the wrath of God against you increases.
For the Lord is 2. Par. 15. 2.
with you whilst you are with the Lord, and when you seek him, he will be
found of you, and when you forsake him, he will also forsake you.

The God of all mercies grant, that you gods on earth may carefully perform
your duty to the God of heaven, that al want of duty being speedily amended,
Gods wrath for the same may in time be prevented, that God may continue a good
God toward England still,

Amen.
But ye shall dye.
1 When God made man first, he made him after the Genesis 1. 27.
image and likeness of God, but his bodily substance he Genesis 2. 7.
made of the dust and slime of the earth, that man should not boast himself of
the image of God, whereunto he was made, considering the earthly substance
whereof he was made.

2 And when God had given him the Lordship over Genesis 3. 19.
all the things of the earth, that man should not swell with his great
authority, God put man in mind of his mortality, saying; Thou shall turn
again to the earth, from whence thou came.

3 And when good father Abraham found favor with Genesis 18. 27.
God to talk with God, least in talking with God he should forget himself
toward his God, he still abated himself with the consideration of his
mortality, saying; Puluis and cinis, quid loquar ad Dominum? that is, O dust
and ashes that I am, why should I presume to speak unto the Lord?

Even so the spirit of God in this place to abate the glory, to bridle the
vanity, and daunt the delights of men that are mighty, does put them in mind
of their mortality: telling princes and all great personages, that though they
be gods, that is, gods in majesty, gods in authority, gods in wealth and
glory, and in all things of this world live like gods among men: yet all your
godhead, that is, all your honor and authority, all your pleasures and your
treasures, all your beauty and your bravery, all is but earthie, fickle, and
transitory, and all shall leave you, or you shall leave all, for you shall die.

1 For so the voice of the Lord commanded the Prophet to cry, That all flesh
is grass, and all the godliness Esa. 40. 6.
thereof is but a flower of the field: man is but grass, to day fresh and
green, to morrow cut down and withered away: man is but a flower of the
field, to day sweet and goodly, to morrow faded and fallen away.

2 And S. James says, What is our life but a vapor Iac. 4. 14.
or a smoke, which for a while appears, and suddenly vanishes away?

3 And the Poet says; Puluis and vmbra sumus, i. We be but dust, we be but a
shadow. The wind blows, the dust is soon puffed away: the sun shines, and
the shadow is suddenly carried away: Man is but dust soon puffed away, man is
but a shadow suddenly carried away.

And it is a common proverb: Homo bulla, i. Man is but a bubble of the water,
soon up, soon down. Man is but grass, soon withered away: but a flower
soon faded away: but a smoke soon vanishing away: but dust soon puffed away:
but a shadow suddenly carried away: but a bubble of the water soon sunk away:
And though ye be gods then, yet must ye die.

And as the Prophet says; Your pomp and your Esa. 14. 11.
pride shall be laid into the grave: worms shall lie under you, and worms
shall be your covering.

For all your goodly estate in this world, is but like the great glorious image
that Nabuchodonosor saw in a Dan. 2. 3^.
dream, whose head was of gold, the shoulders of silver, the belly of brass,
the legs of iron, but the feet of clay: and a little stone was cast against
the great glorious image, and hit him upon the earthie feet, and down it fell,
and brake all in pieces.

Euch so all your golden heads, that is, al your honors and great glory: all
your silver shoulders, that is, all your beauty and your bravery: all your
brassie bellies, that is, all your pleasures and worldly treasures: all your
iron legs, that is, all your strength, youth, and health, all stands upon
earthie, clayie fickle feet, and a little stroke of death shall hit upon their
earth and clay, and footing fails, and down falls all.

For all is but like unto Jonas his guord, which for a day, Ion. 4. 7.
for a time, for a while, makes a goodly shadow (and yet but a shadow) over
Jonas his head, and suddenly, even in one night, the worm of Gods wrath
pierces the root, and all your goodly guords wither clean away. And then your
pomp and your pride is laid into the grave: worms lie under you, and worms
be your covering.

Though Ezechias for a while boast of his treasures, Esa. 39. 2.
his gold, his silver, and all his goodly jewels, yet he hears this message
from the Lord: Man set thine house in Esa. 38. 1.
an order for thou shall die.

Though Balthazar for a while seems to bath in bliss, Dan. 5. 25.
feasting and banqueting with his nobles and his concubines, yet suddenly he
sees the fingers write upon his wall; Mean, mean, Thecell, Vpharsin, that is,
Thy days are numbered and come to an end.

Though man for a while seem never so honorable and mighty, never so rich
and welthie, never so young, and lusty, never so beautiful and comely, never
so fortunate and happy, yet must he in time set his things in an order, for he
shall die, and the finger of God shall suddenly write upon his painted wall,
Mean, mean, that is, Thy days are numbered and come to an end: and thy pomp
and thy pride shall be laid into the grave, worms shall lie under thee, and
worms shall be thy covering.

1 Abraham was rich, 2 Solomon was wise, 3 Sampson was strong:
Yet are they all dead.

1 Joshua was fortunate, 2 Ionathas was amiable, 3 Absolon was beautiful:
Yet are they all dead.

1 Moses Gods servant, 2 Aaron Gods Priest, 3 David Gods darling:
Are all dead.

1 The proud Herod, 2 The rich Glutton, 3 And the poor Lazar:
Are all dead.

And you that be gods, must also die. Veniet enim hora, etc. (says S.
Chrysostom) Doubtless the hour will come, when thou must needs part from all
thy worldly wealth, and shall carry naught away thereof: (for naught thou
broughtest into this world, naught shall thou carry out.) Then what shall
become of thy beautiful face, thy glistering eyes, thy pampered body, so
finely fed, so trimly clad? Nonne omnia puluis? omnia cinis? omnia putredo and
foetor? that is, Shall not then all be dust? all ashes? all rottenness and
filthiness? Haec est via vniuersa carnis, that is, This is the way that all
flesh must go.

I have said: Ye are gods, But ye shall dye.

Like men.
And as it is certain that ye shall die, so is it, that ye shall die like men:
and if you shall die like men, then shall you rise again from death.

So says S. Paul, As by a man death came to men: even 1. Cor. 15. 21.
so by a man came the rising again from death to men. For as by Adam all men
shall die, even so by Christ, all men shall rise again from death.

Christ is the resurrection and the life, whosoever believes Ioh. 11. 26.
in him shall never die.

Therefore the Prophet David said of himself: I shall Psalm. 117. 17. Psalm. 26.
13.
not die but live: and shall see the goodness of God in the land of the living.

And good Job said of himself: I know that my Redeemer Job. 19. 25.
lives, and that I shall rise again in the last day, and shall be covered
again with my skin, and shall see God in my flesh, and I my self shall behold
him, not with other, but with these same eyes.

And our savior Christ says of the dead Damsel: Matt. 9. 24.
She is not dead, but sleeps.

And the scriptures of God do often testify of the dead, that they sleep: for
that even as they that sleep, do wake John 11. 11. 1. Cor. 15. 18. 1. These. 4.
3.
and rise again, even so the dead shall rise again. As many as die in Christ,
shall be partakers of the resurrection unto salvation: and as many as die
without Christ, shall rise again to condemnation.

But what need I stand to prove the resurrection of the dead?

The sect of the Sadduces, that believe no resurrection Act. 23. 23.
of the dead, neither angel, nor spirit, is sufficiently confuted by our
savior Christ in the gospel.

And that godless sort that say: Our life is but a breath Sap. 2. 2.
in our nosthrils, and our bodies shall return to dust and ashes, and our
souls shall vanish into the softaire, are already condemned by the wise man.

To spend speech then in that point, it needs not, or it boots not.

Therefore to conclude, I have said, Ye are gods, but ye shall die like men,
and your bodies shall return to the earth from whence they came, and your
souls shall return to God that gave them, there to render an account to the
God of heaven for your earthy godhead, and to receive the judgment, either to
the joy that never shall have end, or else to the pain that never shall have
end.

So says S. Paul, All must appear before the judgment Romans 14. 10.
seat of Christ, that every one may yield unto God an account of himself.

For all in this life are but the Lord his stewards, and Luc. 16. 1.
when Death the Lord his bailiffe, shall arrest you with his writ, Non amplius
villicabere, then must you appear before the great judge, and render an
account every one of his stewardship.

Then, then (O man, whatsoever thou art) then shall thou see upon thy right
hand, thine own sins accusing thee: upon thy left hand infinite leagions of
devils pleading against thee: above thee, the terrible countinance of the just
judge against thee: underneath thee, the gaping gulf of hell fire to devour
thee: within thee, thine own conscience condemning thee. Miser homo, quid tum
facies? i. O miserable man, what will thou then do? Latere impossible,
apparere intollerabile, i. To hide thee then it is not possible, to show thy
self then is a thing intolerable.

For then the Lord shall try out thy works, and search Sap. 6. 3.
out thine imaginations, and all thy secret thoughts, shall be laid open before
thee, And the heavens shall bewraie Job. 20. 27.
thine iniquities, and the earth shall rise up against thee, and all thy sins
shall lie at thy door, and all thy misdeeds Genesis 4. 3.
shall be rife in thy remembrance.

Then they, that now account it but a sport to sin, and take great pleasure
in the works of wickedness, shall then houle and cry in the anguish of their
own souls, and say: O we have sinned, we have dealt wickedly, we have
forsaken the ways of the Lord, and have followed the paths of perdition in
sin. Woe therefore unto us: for the Lord shall heap sorrow upon sorrow unto
our souls, and we shall never find rest.

Then shall they cry to the hills, fall upon us, and to Apoc. 6. 16.
the mountains, Cover us from the face of the Lamb. Nay, they shall creep
into the holes and caves of the Esa. 2. 19.
earth, to hide themselves from the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of
his Majesty: yet shall they not escape the judgments of the Lord, and they
that bear rule, shall Sap. 6. 6, 7.
have the sorer trial: and the mighty shall be mightily tormented.

Hear therefore, hear every one the good counsel of that good father to
every one: Cogita, vnde sis, and erubesce: ^ern. in sermon. quodam.
vbisis, and ingemisce: quo sis iturus, and contremisce, that is, Think still,
O man, whence thou art, vz. of the dust and slime of the earth, be not high
minded, but humble thy self.

Think still, O man, where thou art: vz. In a world of woe and wickedness:
delight not in it, but mourn and lament it.

Think still, O man, whither thou shall, vz. to the judgment seat of God:
forget it not, but tremble at it.

So that whither thou catest or drinkest, or whatsoever Hierom. super Matthew.
thou do, thou still think, thou hear the trumpet sound, Arise ye dead,
and come to judgment.

And this continual cogitation of death, will be a great Aug. lib. exhortat.
moderation to the actions of this life, to make preparation in time for death.

Knowing, that though ye be gods, that is, set on Gods seat, by Gods
appointment, in stead of God: though ye represent Gods majesty, and bear Gods
authority, and in all the things of this world, live like gods among men, yet
are you but gods on earth, and gods of earth, that is, earthie and mortal
gods, and must die like other men, and part from all your pomp, and render
account to the God of heaven for your earthie godhead.

And thus I have said, Ye are gods, but ye shall die like men.

God be merciful therefore unto us, and bless us, and grant us his heavenly
spirit and grace, that we that be under you; may honor and obey you, and pray
to God for you, as our duty is to you, for that ye are gods: and that you gods
on earth may carefully perform your duty to the God of heaven, that when you
shall die like men, and part from your earthie godhead, you may return to the
God of heaven, and have the fruition of the eternal godhead, by the death and
merits of Christ Jesus the son of God, To whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, and glory* for ever and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

