The effect of the Viscount Montagues bill exhibited in Parliament.
THe Viscount on the behalf of himself and his daughters complains, showing
that whereas in April 1611. he conveyed diverse lands to Sir Robert Dormer,
since Lord Dormer, Sir John Dormer Knight, and Francis Englefield then Esquire,
now Barronet, upon trust for the payment of his debts being near 8000 l, and
for raising of a sum not exceeding 20000 l for the marriage portions of his
daughters, the remain to be reassured on the next heir male of his house.

And whereas likewise he the said Viscount did convey unto the said persons the
Manor of Wanbarow and diverse houses in St Mary Oueries for the raising of 6000
l more owing by him to his Majesty, which debt of 6000 l was satisfied by the
sale of Wanborow only, and for the profits of the lands trusted, Sir Francis
Englefield did take the same, and by four years profits thereof and the sale
of some part has raised great sums.

And whereas he the said Viscount by his deed dated the 25 of June 1613. did
assign as parcel of the said 20000 l the sum of 10000 l to his daughter Mary
now the Lady St John, to Katherine 4000 l, to Mary now wife to Robert Peter
Esquire the sum of 2000 l, of which deed the Feoffees having notice did not
make payment accordingly; neither are his the said Vicounts debts by them paid,
but the Vicount enforced to pay part thereof himself; whereupon a bill was
exhibited in Chancerie by the Lord St John and his Lady for this marriage
portion of 10000 l, which afterward was decreed to be paid with damages after 6
l for the 100 l.

And whereas there was in the said assurances diverse errors, the said Viscount
therefore exhibited his bill in Chancery against his three Feoffees aforesaid,
desiring that he might name new Feoffees to whom the estate of these lands
might be conveyed; for which purpose Sir George Moore, Sir John Walter and M.
Thomas Spencer were by him nominated, who he desires may hold the same to the
aforesaid uses, upon which bill it was the 23 of June 1618 decreed, that Sir
Francis Englefield and Sir John Dormer should convey the said lands to the
aforesaid new Feoffees for the raising of money to satisfy the Lady St John
and to discharge the residue of the trust, by which decree Sir Francis
Englefield is enjoined to make his account, and to pay all moneys due on the
same to the Viscount Montague with damages.

In obedience of which decree, Sir John Dormer has conveyed his interest in
the lands trusted to the said new Feoffees, but Sir Francis Englefield denies
upon pretense that neither the Vicounts request nor the Decree of the Court can
secure him.

For that the performance of this trust does much concern the Viscounts estate
and his children, he desires to have it enacted that Sir George Moore, Sir
John Walter and M. Thomas Spencer shall have to them and their heirs such of
the lands trusted as are yet unsold, together with the houses in S. Marie
Oueries, upon trust and confidence that they shall by the sale of the lands
unsold, or any part thereof, levy the remain of the Lady St John's portion
unpaid, with the damages awarded, and the marriage portions of his other
daughters unsatisfied, and the 1000 l parcel of the said 10000 l payable to
the Marquis.

It is further enacted in respect of the Lord Dormer deceased and Sir John
Dormer have not received any rents or profits, nor intermedled with the trust
that they shall be discharged from the same; and that Sir Francis Englefield
paying to the Viscount the moneys by him raised by sale or main profits of the
said lands and now in his hands, shall likewise be discharged of the said
trusts. And if Sir Francis Englefield do not before Whitsontide next following
make a just and perfect account and pay the arrerages with damages, that then
the Viscount may have his action of account, and this act to be a sufficient
ground of this action.

And be it further enacted that all bonds entered into by the said Viscount unto
Sir Robert Dormer, Sir John Dormer and Sir Francis Englefield, or any of them
concerning the said lands and trust, shall be utterly void.

And be it further enacted, when the said debts, portions, and damages shall be
paid, that then the lands unsold shall be assured on Francis Brown Esquire,
eldest son of the said Viscount, and the heirs males of his body: and if he
die without issue male, then to the Viscount for life, and after to the heirs
males of his body, and for want of such issue, then to his next heir male in
blood, and to such further uses as are expressed in the book of trust: and the
overplus of money arising by the profits or sail, shall be to the Viscount and
his heirs.

And it is further enacted, that the 1000 l. payable to the Marquis of Winton.
parcel of the 10000 l marriage portion, being before the Annuntiatio^ 1622
discharged by Sir George Moore, Sir John Walter, and M. Thomas Spencer, the
Lord Marquisses lands shall be discharged of the Lady St John's ioynture and
dowry, and that the Lord St John's and his heirs shall be acquitted and
discharged from the Lady St John debts, charges and maintenance; and after
payment made to the Marquis of the 1000 l aforesaid, all leases and assurances
made by the Vicount unto Sir Rich. Weston, Sir Rich. Farmer and Sir Ant. Maynie
for the payment of the said 10000 l portion to the Marquis, shall be void.

The several Answers to the said points.
BY the trust as the same is laid down in the Viscounts bill, it appears
that the persons trusted are Feoffees to the use of such next heir male of the
Viscounts house as first after his death shall accomplish the age of 21 years,
and not to the use of the Viscount, who by his deed under his hand and seal
has wholly deprived himself of all power to revoke or alter the same if he had
any.

The houses in St Marie Oueries are no part of the lands subject to this trust,
yet by a Tacit trust to be assured on the next heir male of the Viscounts
house, as by the Feoffees answer made upon oath to the Viscounts bill is set
forth.

The first Feoffees of this trust have by the same trust ten years time to pay
the Viscounts debts, and 20 years to raise 20000 l payable in marriage portions
for the Viscounts daughters, most of which debts and Katherines 4000 l marriage
portion they paid with the four years profits while they held the lands,
since which time the Viscount himself and his new Feoffees have by the power of
the Court of Chancery taken the same from them, and are now in full possession
thereof, and have thereby raised near 16000 l, which contrary to diverse orders
made in Chancery they paid not to the Lady St John nor toward the performance
of the trust, but convert the same to their own use; the non payment therefore
of the Lady St John's 10000 l not through the first Feoffees default but the
Vicounts; no cause of this the Lady St John's suite, which she fraudulently
exhibited in the Lord St John her husbands name, without his priuitie, and he
therefore has disclaimed the same, as appears upon record.

There are no errors in these assurances, no cause therefore of this the
Vicounts bill which he exhibited under pretense only to change the Feoffees of
this trust, but with intent utterly to destroy the same. This Decree which is
the ground of this bill in Parliament, was by the Vicount procured by bribes,
and these bribes confessed in Parliament.

By the trust this account is not to be made to the Vicount but to the next
heir male of his house, yet has Sir Francis Englefield always proffered the
same, and to pay the arrerages if any be to the new Feoffees, so he may be
secured from the heir male of the Viscounts house, to whom by the trust the
same is payable.

The Viscounts request nor a decree in Chancery can secure Sir Francis
Englefield against such next heir male of the Viscounts house, who being an
infant or a person unknown, cannot be made party to any bill, and therefore
not to be bound by any Decree.

The Vicount by this his bill pretends the performance of this trust, yet
does he utterly destroy the same by assigning the houses in St Mary Oueries
(which are no part of the lands trusted) for ye payment of ye La. St John's
portion.

It is willingly granted yt these new Feoffees shall be invested in the lands
trusted, so as the same be from July 1617. ever since which time they have
quietly held the lands without any interruption of the first Feoffees.

The trust will allow no damages to be paid, the sum of 10000 l for a marriage
portion and not otherwise being only due, and the Marquis having the interest
of this marriage portion at the time when this bill was exhibited, this Lady
could receive no damage, and therefore could expect no recompense.

The Lord Dormer, and Sir John Dormer have intermedled in this trust as far
as Sir Francis Englefield has, only Sir Francis Englefield confesses to have
received and disbursed all the moneys by reason of this trust, and proffereth
his account for the same, and for this purpose desires that indifferent
Auditors may be appointed.

It is meant by this, to make void the statute of 20000 l, acknowledged by the
Vicount to the first Feoffees, for the performance of his covenants contained
in the said book of trust: this therefore being parcel of the assurances, may
not without destroying the trust be made void.

The surplusage of the lands unsold, are by the trust appointed to raise
portions for all the Vicounts younger sons, and for want of younger sons to
be reassured on such next heir male of the Viscounts house as first after his
death shall accomplish 21 years, the transferring therefore of these lands on
the Vicounts son Francis Brown in the Viscounts life, is contrary to the
direction of the said trust: the overplus of money likewise is by the trust
appointed to the said next heir male of the Vicounts house; the Vicount
therefore by requiring the payment of this overplus to himself, does utterly
destroy this trust.

It appears by Articles before the Lady St John's marriage, and by a deed
executed under the hands and seals of the Vicount, the Lord St John and his
Lady made after marriage, that the Marquis of Winton, was to receive the whole
10000 l marriage portion; but it appears not how the Lord Marquis should have
only 1000 l thereof, and to be discharged of the Lady St John's ioynture.


