ARTICLES TO BE ENQUIRED OF Within the Diocese of LONDON.

In the third Trienniall Visitation Of the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend
Father in GOD, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of LONDON, Lord High Treasurer of ENGLAND.
Holden in the Year of our LORD GOD, 1640

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD BADGER. M.DC.XL

The Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sworn-men.
YOu shall swear that you and every of you shall diligently enquire of the
Articles given you in charge; and without any affection, favor, (...), hope of
reward and gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice of any person, you shall
present all and every such person and persons that now is, or ^f late was
within your Parish, as has committed any incest, adultery, fornication, or
simony, and any misdemeanour or disturbances committed or made in any Church or
Ch^ppell, in time of Common Prayer, Preaching, or Divine Service there used, to
the disturbance thereof: and also that have committed or done any other
offense, fault or default, presentable in the E^clesiasticall Court, according
to the Articles now delivered to you. Wherein you shall deal uprightly and
according to truth, neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor of
corrupt affection sparing to present any, and ^o conceal the truth: having in
this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain the truth,
and suppress vice. So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

Articles to be enquired of within the Diocese of LONDON, in the Visitation to
be holden in the Year of our LORD, 1640.
Concerning Religion, and the true worship of God* In This Realm established.
IS there any who does affirm and teach that the 39* Articles agreed upon by
the Archbishops and Bishops in b^th Provinces, Can. 5.
and the whole Clergy, in the Convocation h^lden at London, Anno* 1562. are in
any part superstitions or (...), or such as he may not with a good conscience
subscribe unto? Who is that so teaches or affirms, and what is his name?

2 Is there any who does affirm and ^ea^h* that the form of Gods worship in
the Church of ^^gland, Can. 4.
established by the Law, and contai^^d in the book of Common ^rayer and
administration of Sacraments, is a corrupt, superstitions, (...) unlawful
worship of God, or contains any thing in it that is rep^g^^nt, to the
Scriptures, Who is it that so teaches, etc.?

3 Is there any who does affirm or teach, Can. 6.
that the Rites and Ceremo^ies of the Church of England by Law established, are
wicked, antichristian, or superstitious, or such as being commanded by lawful
Authority, ^ay not with good cons^ience ^ee approved, used, or subscribed
unto, by men who are zealously and godly affected, who is it, etc?

4 Is there any that separateth himself from the Communion of Saints, Can. 9.
as it is approved by the Apostles Rules in the Church of England, and c^mbine
themselves together in a new brotherhood, accounting the Christians who are
conformable to the Doctrine, Government, ^ites, and Ceremonies of the Church
of England, to be profane or unmeet for him to join within Christian
profession, who are they that so separa^e ^^mselves, and what are their names?

Concerning the Church, the Government, Authority, and Discipline thereof.
1 IS there any who does affirm or teach, Can. 3.
that the Church of England by Law established under the Kings Majesty, is not
a true and Apostolical Church, teaching and maintaining the Doctrine of the
Apostles. Who is it that does so affirm and teach, etc?

2 Is there any who does affirm and teach, Can. 7.
that the Government of ^he Church of England under his Majesty by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear office in
the same, is antichristian and repugnant to the Word of God. Who is it that
does, etc.

3 Is there any who does affirm or teach, Can. 8.
that the forms or manner of making and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, contains any thing in it, that is repugnant to the Word of God: or
that they who are made Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in that form, are not
lawfully made, nor ought to be accounted either by themselves or others, to be
truly either Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, until they have some other calling
unto those Divine Offices. Who is it, etc.

4 Is there any who does affirm or teach, Art. 20. 34.
that the Church has no power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, nor any
authority in Controversies of Faith, or in the changing and abolishing of
Ceremonies and R^tes of the Church, ordained only by man's authority, contrary
to the 20. and 34. Articles of the Church of England. Who is it, etc.

5 Is there any who does affirm or teach, Can. 2. and 1.
that the Kings Majesty has not the same Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had among the Jews, and Christian
Emperors in the Primitive Church. Or that the Kings Majesty within his
Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and all other his Dominions and
Countries, is not the highest Power under God, to whom all men, as well
Inhabitants as bor^e within the same, do by Gods law owe most loyalty and
obedience. Or that impeach any part his Royal Supremacy in the said causes
restored to the Crown, and by the Laws of the Realm therein established. Who
is it, etc?

6 Is there any who does affirm or teach, ^an. ^ 4
that no manner of person eith^r of the Clergy or Laity, are to be subject to
the Decrees and Constitutions of the Church in causes Ecclesiastical, made and
ratified by the Kings Majesty's Supreme authority, other then such as are
particularly assembled in the sacred Synods of the Church for the making of the
said Decrees, and Constitutions, and have given their voices, to the same. Who
is it, etc?

7 Is there any that does affirm or teach, Can. 12.
that it is lawful for any sort of Ministers and lay persons, or either of
them to join together, and make rules, orders, and Constitutions in Causes
Ecclesiastical without the Kings Authority, or any that submit themselves to
be ruled and Governed by the same. Who is it, etc?

8 Is there any who does affirm, Can. 10.
teach* maintain or publish, that such Ministers who refuse to subscribe to
the form and manner of Gods worship in the Church of England, Can. 11.
and their adherents may truly take unto them the name of another Church: or
that there are within this Realm, other meetings, assemblies, or congregations
of the Kings borne Subjects, then such as by the laws of this Land are held
and allowed, which may rightly challenge to themselves the name of true and
lawful Churches. Who is it that does so affirm, etc?

9 Does any Minister or Ministers, Can. 72.
without the License and direction of the Bishop of the Diocese first
obtained, appoint or keep any solemn Fasts publicly, or in any private
houses, other then such as are or shall be appointed by lawful authority, or
not being Licensed as before is said, presumes to appoint or hold any meeting
for Sermons, Sermon Lectures, Prophecies, or exercises in Market Towns or
other places, or does attempt without such License upon any pretense
whatsoever, either of possession or obsession, to cast out any Devil or
Devils. Who is it that offends in the premises, etc.

10 Do any Priests or Ministers of the Word of God, Can. 73.
or any other persons meet together in any private hou^e or el^ewhere, to
consult upon any matter or course to be taken by them or by any other, upon
their motion and direction, which may any way tend to the impeaching or
depraving of the Church of E^gland, or of the book of Common Prayer, or of any
part of the Government or Discipline in the Church of England now established,
and who are they?

Concerning Churches, the Ornaments, Vtensils, and other necessaries to the
same belonging.
1 IS your Parish Church or Chapel well and sufficiently repaired, Can. 85.
and so from time to time maintained and kept? Are the windows well glazed,
the floare kept paved plain and even, and all things there in such ^n orderly
and decent sort, without dust, or any thing that may be either noisome or
un^eemely, as best becomes the house of God?

2 Are the ten Commandments set upon the East end of your Church or Chapel,
Can. 82.
where the people may best see and read the same, and other chosen sen^ences
written upon the walls of your said Church or Chapel, in convenient places?

3 Do the Cha^cels remain as they have d^ne in times past, Rubr. before
Morning Prayer.
that i^ to say, in the convenient situation of the Seats, and in the ascent
or (...) unto the place appointed anciently for the standing of the holy Tab^^?
Is the Chancell of your Church or Chapel clean kept, Orders of Queen
Elizabe^^, An. 1561. Ib. Order ^.
and repaire^ within and without, in the windows and otherwhere as
appertains* And is there a comely partition betwixt your Chancell and the
body of the Church or Chapel, as is required by the Law?

4 Is the Churchyard of your Church or Chapel well and sufficiently sensed,
Can, 85.
maintained and kept with walls, ^ailes or poles, as has been heretofore
accustomed: And if not, then by whose neglige^^e or default is it, that the
fenses of the same are grown into decay*

5 Are there any Plays, Can. 88.
Foasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church-Ales, Drinkings, Temporal Courts or Le^tes,
Lay-iuries or Musters: or is there any other profane usage, kept in your
Church, Chapel, o^ Churchyards, of what sort soever* By whom ^re your said
Church or Chapel, or Churchyard so profaned as before is said, and by whose
permission.

6 Have you in the Chancell of your Church or Chapel a decent and convenient
Table for the celebration of the Holy Comm^^ion? Is i^ so set as is directed in
the Queens Injunctions, Injunct. of Q* Eliz. Orders of Q* Eli^.
and appointed by the Canon made in the Synod held at London, Can. 82.
Anno 1640. Have you a Carpet of silk or other decent stuff, appointed by the
Ordinary, to lay upon the Table in the time of Divine Service, and a fair
linen cloth to lay upon the same in time of the Communion? And is the said
Carpet and linen cloth laid constantly upon the Table, at the times aforesaid?

7 Have you a fair Communion Cup, Com. Book.
or Chalice of silver, with a cover of the same, Can. 20.
and a decent standing pot or Flagon of pewter, if not of purer metal, in
which the wine for the Communion is to be brought unto the holy Table? Is the
said Table, Carpet, Linen cloth* Cup, or Flagon, or either of them any ways
profaned, or otherwise employed, then to their own proper and right holy uses?

8 Have you in your Church or Chapel a Font of stone, Can. 81.
where Baptism is to be administered, decently made, and kept as it ought to
be? Is the same set in the Ancient usual place appointed for it, and does your
Minister publicly baptize, in the same Font only?

9 Have you in your Church or Chapel, Can. 82. 83.
a convenient Seat made (...) the Minister to read Service in, as also a
comely and decent Pulpit set in a convenient place within the same for the
preaching of Gods Word, and there seemly kept?

10 Have you in your Church or Chapel a strong Chest with an hole in the
upper part thereof, Can. 84
(...) the Alms of the poor? Has the same chest three several keys, and is
the one of them in the castodie of the Parson, Uicar, or Curat? Is the same so
set and fastened in the most convenient (...), to the intent the parishioners
may put into it their Alms, for their poor neighbors?

11 Have you a true note and Terrar, Can. ^7
of all the Glebes, Lands, Meadows, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, stocks,
implements, Tenements and portions of tithes lying out of your Parish, which
belong unto your Parsonage, or Uicarage? And is the same, or a true Coppie of
the same laid up in the Bishops Registry for a perpetual Memory thereof?

12 Have you a comely decent Surplisse with sleeves for the use of your
Minister in saying the public prayers, Can. 58.
or ministering the Sacraments, and other rites of the Church: together with an
Universitie hood, according to the degree of your said Minister? And does the
Parson, Uicar, or Cu^^te use the same, as often as he officiates Gods public
Service, administreth the Sacraments, or discharges any public duty in the
Congregation?

13 Have you a Bible of the largest volume, Can. 80.
allowed by Authority, the book of Common Prayer, and the book of Homilies,
all very well, and fairly bound? As also a book of the Canons And
Constitutions, made in the Synod held at London, Anno 1603. and ratified by the
Kings Authority? A book of prayers for the 5. of November, and for the 27. of
March being the day of his Majesty's most happy Inauguration?

Have you a parchment Register book wherein to keep upon record, Can. 70*
the several Christenings, Weddings, and Burials, which happen weekly,
quarterly, Can. 52
or yearly, in your Parish? Have you also a Register book wherein to write the
names of all Preachers, which come and Preach in your Church from other places?
Can. 70
And have you one sure Co^er with three locks and keys, for keeping of the
books aforesaid. And does one of your keys remain always in the hands of
your Minister?

Whether is your Parsonage-house or Vicarage-house, Barnes, Stables, and other
outhouses thereto belonging, in good and sufficient repair.

Whether has any person in^roached upon the ground of your Churchyard, or
other consecrated ground, if any has, then you shall present him, and set out
what quantity of ground is so incroached upon, and whether any new door or
window has be^ne lately made into your Church or Churchyard* and by what
authority?

Concerning the Celebration of Divine Service, the Administration of the
Sacraments. etc.
Does your Minister or Curate that ministers in your Parish Church or
Chapel, Rubric after the Pre^ace.
say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer, in the same Parish Church or
Chapel where he ministers, unless he be lawfully hindered? And does he
cause a Bell to be tolled thereunto, a convenient time before he begin, that
such as be disposed may come to hear Gods Word, and to pray with him?
Especially,

Is the Common Prayer said or sung distinctly and rev^rently upon such days as
are appointed to be kept holy, Can. 14*
and upon their E^es? Is the same said or sung at convenient and usu^ll times
of those days, and in such pl^ce of every Church, as the people may be most
edified thereby? And does the Pars^n U^car or Curate* observe the Orders Rites
and Ceremonies prescribed in the book of Common Prayer, as well in reading the
holy Scripture, and saying of prayers, a^ in administration of the Sacraments:
without either diminishing in regard of Preaching, or in any other respect, or
adding any thing, in the matter and form thereof?

2 Does the Minister read the Psalms, Rub^i^k of the Common P^ayer book*
and Lessons appointed in the Calendar for Morning and Evening Prayer? And at
the end of every Psalm throughout the year, and likewise at the end of the
Benedictus, Benedicite, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, does he repeat, Glory
be to the Father, etc. And at the reading of the Lessons, does he stand and
turn him so, as he may best be heard of all such as be present? And is the
Creed called Athanasius Creed, beginning with ( Whosoever will be saved) said
by your Minister constantly at the times appointed in the Common Prayer book,
and does your Minister sing or say any other Psalms or Hymns other then
aforesaid in the place of those, contrary to Law?

3 Does your Parson, Can. 15.
Uicar, or Curate, say the Letanie on every Sunday duly throughout the year*
as also upon all Wednesdayes and Fridaies weekly, though they be not
holy days? In what convenient place of your Church or Chapel does he say
the same, and by whom was that place appointed? Does he say the same at the
accustomed hours of Service, and is there warning given to the people by the
tolling of a Bell? And does every house-holder dwelling within half a mile of
the Church, come, or send one at the least of his household to join with the
Minister?

4 Does your Minister read the Communion Service, Rubr. f^^r the Communion.
or the second Service on every Sunday and Holyday throughout the year,
though^ there be no Communion, according as it is appointed in the Book of
Common Prayer?

5 Does your Parson re^ide upon his Bene^^ce or not, Can. 4^
If yea, then, being a licensed Preacher, does he preach one Sermon every
Sunday in the year in his own Cure, Can. 4^ 46*
or in some Church or Chapel near adjoining, having no lawful impediment?
And being not a licensed Preacher, does he offer at any time to preach or
expound the Scriptures, or rather does he procure Sermons to be Preache^ in
his Cure once every month at the least by Preachers which be lawfully
licensed? Can. 47
If he be licensed by the Laws of this Realm not to reside upon his Benef^ce,
then in that Case does he supply his cure by one that is a sufficient and
Licensed Preacher? And is your Curate allowed to serve there by the Bishop of
the Diocese, Can. 48
or by the Ordinary of the place having Episcopal jurisdiction, and by no
other?

6 Does your Parson, Rubr*
Uicar, or Curate upon every Sunday and holyday throughout the year when there
is no Sermon, read one of the Homilies set forth by public Authority? Does he
use to read the same in the Pulpit only, according as he is required in the
Canons of the year 1571. Cap. 4.
And does your Minister as well before the Homily as before his Sermon move
and exhort the people ^o join with him in Prayer according to the form laid
down in the book of Canons, Can. 55
and does he use any other form then is there prescribed?

7 Have you in your Parish, Can. 55*
besides your Parson, Uicar, and Curate, any Lecturer or Lecturers not having
cure of souls therein? Can. 56
Does your Lecturer use before his Lectures, the form of prayer before
remembered, and no other form? And does he twice at the least every year read
the Divine Service on two several Sundaies both in the fore-noone and
afternoon, publicly and at the usual times, and does he as often in every
year administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, in such
manner and form, and with the observation of such Rites and Ceremonies as are
prescribed in the book of Common Prayer?

8 Do your Lecturer or Lecturers preach in their Gowns and not in their
Cloaks, according to his Majesty's Instructions, An. 1629. Does he profess his
willingness to take upon him a Living with cure of souls, in that place or
Parish, in the which he Lectures or elsewhere. And does he actually take such
Cure or Benef^ce if any has been offered to him?

9 Is your Lecturer licensed by the Bishop of the Diocese? Can. 5^
And does your Lecturer or any other Preacher that Lectureth or preaches in
your Church or Chapel, impugn or confute any Doctrine formerly delivered in
the same, or in any Church near adjoining, before he has acquainted the
Bishop of the Diocese therewith, and received order from him what to do in
that case for the avoiding of dissension?

10 Does your Lecturer conform himself to the Laws, can. 5^
Ordinances, and Rites Ecclesiastical established in the Church of England? If
not, you are to certify the same unto the Bishop of the Diocese, or other
Ordinary of the place, to the end that if the said Lecturer do not conform
himself after admonition, his License may be voided, and himself removed?

11 Does your Parson, Can. 21*
Uicar, or Curate, administer the Communion in your Church or Chapel so
often, and at such times, as every parishioner may communicate at least thrice
in the year, whereof the Feast of Easter to be one? Can. 2^*
And does he give warning to his parishioners publicly in the Church at
Morning prayer the Sunday before, for the better preparation of themselves? And
do such as purpose to communicat^ signify their minds unto the ^urate over
night or the morning early?

12 Does your Minister admit to the receiving of the holy Communion, Can. 26*
such of his Cure which be openly known to live in sin notorious without
repentance, or any who have openly or maliciously contended with their
neighbors, and will not be induced by him to a reconcilement? Or any
Churchwardens or Sidemen, who having taken oath to present to their Ordinaries
every such public offense, as they are particularly charged to enquire of in
their several parishes, shall wittingly incur the horrible crime of perjury?

13 Does he wittingly administer the same to any but to such as kneel, Can. 27.
or to any that refuse to be present at the public prayers, or to any that
be common and notorious depravers of the book of Common Prayer, or of any
thing contained in the Book of Articles agreed upon in the Convocation, Anno
1562. Or in the book of Ordering Priests and Bishops, or to any that has
spoken against, and depraved his Majesty's Sovereign Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, except such persons do first acknowledge to the Minister
before you the Churchwardens that he is sorry for the same, and promise
either by word of mouth, or under his hand to do so no more?

14 Is the bread provided for the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, ^ubr.
of the best and purest white-bread that may conveniently be gotten? Does the
Minister take the same into his hands to bless and consecrate it to that holy
use as often as he administreth the Communion? Does he so likewise with the wine
provided? And if any bread or wine be newly brought, does he first use the
words of the Institution before it be distributed to the Communicants? ^an. ^1.


15 Does your Minister as often as he celebrateth the Communion, ^ubr.
receive the Sacrament first in both kinds himself, ^an. 21.
and having so received the same, does he severally deliver the bread and wine
to every Communicant in their hands kneeling? And at his delivery of the same,
does he rehearse the whole form mentioned in the Communion Book saying ( The
body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.) or does he only use some part thereof, as
he list himself?

16 Does your Parson Uicar or Curate administer the Communion at any time
publicly in the congregation except there be four or three (at the least) to
communicate with him? Rubr. and
Does he administer the same to any strangers, which come often and commonly
from their own Parish Churches? And do you the Churchwardens give notice to
your Minister of such strangers, Can. 28. 57.
that so he may remit them home to their own Parish Churches, there to
Communicate with their own Minister and neighbors?

17 Does your Minister, Can. 71*
except it be in times and cases of necessity, Preach or administer the holy
Communion in any private house in which there is no Chapel dedicated and
allowed by the Ecclesiastical laws of this Kingdom? Does any Chaplain
living within your parish, preach or administer the Communion in any other
place then in the Chapel of the said houses? Does the Lords and Masters of
such Chaplains, or houses, at other times resort to their own Parish
Churches, Instructions.
and there receive the holy Communion, at least once in the year? And do any
under Noble men, and men qualified by law keep any private Chaplain in their
house or houses?

18 Does your Minister refuse or delay to Christen any child that is brought to
him to the Church on Sundays or Holy Days, Can. 6^*
knowledge thereof being given to him over night or in the morning before
Morning prayer? Rubr* o^ Bap.
Does he proceed therein in all things according to the form of public
Baptism in the Common prayer Book, Can. 30.
does he neglect, refuse, or pretermit at any time to sign the child baptized
with the sign of the cross, or does he admit the parent of a child to
answer as a Godfather to his own child, Can. 29.
or any other person to be a Godfather or Godmother, before the said pers^n so
undertaking has received the holy Communion?

19 Does your Minister being duly informed of the weakness and danger of death
of any infant unbaptized in his Parish, and being thereupon desired to go unto
the place and baptize the same, either wilfully refuse to d^e it, Can* 69
or negligently delay the time, so that the child departs without Baptism
through his def^ult: if the child so baptized do recover afterward, is it
brought into the Church by the Godfathers and Godmothers, to the intent the
congregation may be certified of the Baptizing thereof, according to the ^orme
prescribed in the Common prayer Book?

20 Does your Minister having Cure and charge of ^oules, Can. 61
do his best endeavor to prepare children, Can* 59.
and make them ready for confirmation? And to that end, Rubr. of Con^ir.
does he on every Sunday and Holyday before Evening prayer for the space of
half an hour or more instruct the youth and ignorant* persons of the parish,
according (...) the Catechism set forth in the Common prayer book? And are
the afternoon Sermons in your^ parish (if you had any formerly) turned into
Catechizing by way of questions and answers according to the Kings
Instructions? Inst^ucti^ns*


21 Does your Minister either bring, Rub. of Confirm.
or send in writing to the Bishop of the Diocese the names of all those
Children of his parish which can answer to the questions contained in the
Catechism, that by the imposition of hands and prayer, they may receive
strength and defense against temptation? And does he admit any person or
persons to y^ holy Comm^nion, until such time as he or they can orderly say
the catechism and be confirmed?

22 Does your Parson, Can. 62.
Uicar, or Curate celebrate Matrimony betwixt any persons, without a faculty
or License granted by authority Lawful, or without the Banes of Matrimony
first published, on three several Sundays or Holidays, in the parish Church
or Chapel where the said parties dwell, or at the times by Law prohibited
without special License: Or does he celebrate the same in any other place than
in the Church, or in the Church at any other time than between the hours of
eight and twelve in the forenoone, and at that time betwixt such persons as are
under the age of twenty one years, without the consent of their parents
signifie^ unto him* or a License granted to him so to do?

23 Does your Minister in the solemnizing of holy Matrimony keep himself to
the form and Ceremonies prescribed in the Common Prayer book, Rubr* of
Matrimo^ie.
does he at any time marry any without a King, or without going to the Lords
Table, as it is appointed: Does he in case there be no Sermon read those Texts
of Scripture, wherein the offices of man and wife, are declared, according as
it is prescribed? And do the new married persons the same day of their
marriage receive the holy Communion, as by Law they ought?

24 Does your Minister or Curate resort to such of your parish as are
dangerously sick (if the disease be not probably suspected to be infectious) to
instruct and comfort them in that distress, Can. 87.
does he exhort the sick party to be in charity with all the world, Rubr. of
^isitation.
and to dispose of his goods, and declare his debts, and does he move him and
that most earnestly to liberality toward the poor, and to unburden his
conscience?

25 If any sick person find his conscience troubled with anyweighty matter,
Rubr. of Visitation.
and does unburden the same to his Priest or Minister, does the said Priest or
Minister give him absolution according to the form prescribed: Can. 130
And have you ever heard that the said Priest or Minister has revealed and
made known at any time to any person whatsoever, any crime or ^ffence
committed to his trust and secrecy, either in case of such extremity, or any
other case whatsoever (except they be such crimes as by the laws of this
Realm, the life of the sai^ Priest or Minister man ^e called in questi^n for
concealing of it) declare the name of the offender, when and by whom you hear
the ^ame?

26 Does the Curate that ministers in your parish, Rubric of Com.
upon convenient notice given him, administer the Communion unto such as be
dangerously sick, and not able to come unto the Church, and yet are desirous
to receive the same in their houses, and are unquiet for he lack thereof: Or
does he obstinately and wilfully refuse so to do being thereunto required,
and finding all things necessary for the doing of it?

27 Does your minister refuse or delay to bury any corpse that is brought into
the Church or Churchyard, Can. 68.
convenient warning being given him before, except the party deceased were
denounced excommunicate for some grievous crime, Majori Excommunicatione, and
no man able to testify of his repentance: And does he do it decently and
gravely, not swerving from the form prescribed by the Church in the Common
prayer book?

28 Does any woman in your parish after her delivery from the pains and peril
of Childbirth refuse to come into the Church to render thanks to God for so
great a mercy: Does she go thither covered with a decent veil according to the
laudable and ancient custom: And being come does she go* n^ere unto the place
where the Table stands, Rubr.
and offers her accustomed offerings: And does your Minister do his duty in
churching the said women according to the form prescribed: And does the woman
that comes to give her thanks* receive the holy Communion if there by any?

29 Does your Minister at and upon seasonable times, especially on the first
day of Lent, cause the people, to be called together and assembled in the
Church by the ringing of a Bell: And being drawn together does he read unto
them the commination against sinners, with the other prayers appointed?

Concerning the Clergy, their Duty, Carriage* etc.
Does your Parson, Can. 1.
Uicar, Curate, or Lecturer, (if you have any) purely and syncerely teach,
manifest and declare four times every year at the least in his Sermons and
other Collations and Lectures that all usurped and foreign power is for most
just cau^es taken away and abolished, and that therefore no obedience or
subjection within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, is due unto any such
foreign power. And does he preach the Doctrine of obedience, and the Kings
authority according to the Canons published, and set out by the late holy
Synod, Can. 64.
Anno 1640. Rub. of Com.


2 Does your Minister declare to the parishioners, every Sunday at the time
appointed in the Communion book whether there be any Holidays or
fasting-dayes in the following week: And does he call upon them to observe
the same, according to the Laws of the Land, and of holy Church?

3 Does your Minister or Curate in the Rogation days go in perambulation
about your parish saying and using the Psalms and suffrages by Law appointed,
Injunctions and Adver^isements of Q Eliz^b.
as viz. Psalm 103. and 104. the Letany and suffrages, together with the
Homily set out for that end and purpose: Does he admonish the people to give
thanks to God, if they see any likely hopes of plenty, and to call upon him
for his mercy, if there be any fear of scarcity: And do you the
Churchwardens assist him in it?

4 Does your Curate serve more then one Church or Chapel upon one day, Can.
48.
except the said Chapel be a member of the parish Church or united thereto:
Can An. 1571. Cap. ult.
How far distant are the said Churches or Chapels which he serves from one
another? What wages has he for his pains?

5 Does your Minister if he be commanded by the Ordinary, Can. 65.
openly on some Sunday denounce and declare for excommunicate, all those, who
either for refusing to frequent the divine service of the Church, or for
notorious contumacie, or other notable crimes stand lawfully excommunicated by
the laws of the Church, that others thereby may be admonished to refrain
their Companies: And does your Minister himself refrain the company of
persons excommunicated and so denounced?

6 Does your Parson, Can. 74.
Uicar, or Curate usually wear such apparel as is prescribed by the Canon,
that is to say, a gown with standing colla^ and wide sleeves strait at the
hands, and a square cap: Or does he go^ at any time abroad in his dublet and
ho^e without coat or cassock, or does he use to wear any light colored
stockings, does he wear any ^oi^e, and wrought nightcaps, or only plain
night-caps of silk, satin, or velvet: And in his iourneying, does he usually
wear a cloak with sleeves, commonly called the Priests cloak, without guards,
we^ts, long buttons or cuts?

7 Does your Parson, Can. 75.
Uicar, or Curate resort at any time, other then for his honest necessities to
any Tavernes, or Ale^ouses, or does your Curate lodge or board, in any such
places: Do they or either of them give themselves to any base or servile
labor, or to drinking or Riot, or to playing at di^e, cards or tables, or to
an^ other unlawful game, or games: or do they otherwise spend their time idly
by day or by night?

8 Is there any in your Parish, Can. 76.
who having been a Deacon or Minister has voluntaryly relinquished his
calling, and does u^e himself in the course of his li^e as a lay man, what are
their names that have forsaken their said calling?

9 Does your Minister (if he be a Preacher, Can. 66*
and thought fit by your Bishop) having any popish Recusant, or Recusants in
his parish, labor diligently with them from time to time, Can. 66.
thereby to reclaim them from their errors: And if he be n^ Preacher, or not
such a Preacher, does he procure some that are Preachers so qualified, to take
pains with them to that purpose?

10 Does your Parson, Can. 114
Uicar, or Curate, carefully inform himself every year, how many popish
Recusants, men, women, and children above the age of thirteen years, or
being otherwise popishly given, are inhabitants within their parish or
parishes, or make their abode there, either as soiourners or common guests?

11 Does your Minister every Sunday weekly (if there be occasion) in the
presence of you the Churchwardens, Can. 70.
write and record in the* Register-booke the names of all persons christened,
together with the names and surnames of their parents, as also, the names and
surnames of all persons married and buried in that parish the week before, and
the day and ^eare of every such Christening, Marriage, and Burial, and unto
every page thereof when it is filled, do you and your said Minister subscribe your
names: And is a true coppie of the said Christnings, Marriages, and Burials,
subscribed with the names of your Minister and you the Churchwardens,
transmit^ed yearly within one month after the 25 of March, unto the Bishop of
the Dio^esse to be preserved in his Registry?

12 Does your Minister in the parish Church or Chapel, where ^ee has charge,
read the Canons, Orders, and Constitutions, (agreed on in the Synod held at
London, Anno 1603.) once every year upon some Sundays or Holidays in the
afternoon before Divine Service: and does he so divide the same, as the one
half may be read one day* and the other half the other day?

Whether has your Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, presented unto the
Lord Bishop of London, or his Chancellor, within forty days after ^aster,
the names of all the Parishioners, as well men as women, which being ^bove 16.
years of age, received not the Communion, at or about Easter before according
to the 112. Canon; If not, you shall present, whether that ^resentment should
have been brought in by your selves or your predecessors, and specify the
names of every one that should have made such presentment at ^aster last past?

Concerning Schoolemasters, Parish Clerks, and Sextens.
Does any man in your Parish ^each either in public Schoo^ or ^^iva^e house,
Can. 77.
but such as ^e allowed by the Bishop of the Diocese or other Ordinary of the
place under his hand and Seal: Can. 78.
And if there (...) no public Grammer-schoole founded in your parish, does any
other teac^ School in your parish, than your Cura^e only, if he be willing so
to do?

2 Does your Schoolmaster teach in English or Latin, Can. 79.
as the chil^dren are able to bear, the shorter or longer Catechism set forth
by Autho^rity and no other: does he on Sundays and Holidays when there is^
Sermon cause his S^hollers to ^ome unto the Church, and there see the^ quietly
and orderly behave themselves* And does he train them up at (...) in sentences
of holy Scripture* And does he teach them any o^ther Grammar than that which
was set forth by King. Henry VIII. an^ has since conti^ued*

3 Have you belonging to your Church or Chapel a Parish Clark^ aged: Can. 91.
21. years at the least? As he of (...) convers^tion, sufficient (...) his
reading, writing: and also for his (...) said Clarke chosen by any your Parson,
Uicar, o^ other Minister. An^ does your Clarke so chosen as before is said,
receiv^ his (...), without any fraud or diminution, as h^th been a^ (...) who
is it that denies to pay that wages?

4 Does your Se^ten or your Parish Clarke (if there be no Se^ton) when, Can. 67.
and as often as any person in passing out of this life, cause (...) Bell (...)
be tolled, that so his neighbors may be warned to recommend his soul (...)
the grace of God? And after the said parties death (if it so ^all out) does
(...) ring or cause one short peale to be ^orthwith run^, that so his neighbor
may have notice that he is departed:

Whether do you the Churchwardens of every Parish within the Ci^ie an^ Suburbs
of London (according to the Kings Majesty's Letters Patents, under the great
Seal of England in that behalf granted) suffer your Parish Clar^^ to gather
his wages himself, in as full and ample manner, as the fame ha^^ formerly
been gathered, in or by color of his name, without dimin^tio^ upon pre^ence
of pewage, or the like, and without any manner of disturban^^ or interruption
or forbidding any one so to pay the same unto him, and wh^^ther do you assist
your Clarke in collecting his wages (if need be) accordin^ to his Majesty's
said Letters Patent: and whether do you duly present a^ such persons of your
Parish as refuse to pay the said Clerks accustomed wage^ as by his Majesty's
said grant, you are required and commanded?

Concerning Parishioners.
IS there any in your Parish either Mas^er or servant, Can 109
Soiour^er or Inhabiter, that has offended either by Adultery, Whoredom,
Incest, or drun^ennesse, or by swearing, ribaldry, (or filthy speaking) usury,
or any other uncleanness, or wickedness of life? you shall faithfully present
all and every the said offenders.

2 Do you know of any in your Parish, Can. 110
or elsewhere, that is an hinderer of the word of God to be read, or syncerely
preached, or of the execution of any Ecclesiastical Canons, now by law in
force? or a fa^^our of any usurped or foreign power, by the laws of this
Realm ^ustly rejected and taken away, or a defendour of any popish and
erroneous doctrine? you shall de^ect, and faithfully present. etc.

3 Have you in your parish any popish Recusants, Can. 114.
men, women* or children, above the age of 13. years, whether inhabitants, or
sojourners, and common guests, that refuse to come to Church, or coming to the
Church, refuse to receive the Communion? you shall set down their names in
writing, if you know their names, or otherwise* those names by which they are
called, and who they are that entertain such guests or sojourners.

4 Have you any that dissuade any of his Majes^ies subjects, Q Eliz. ^. ^
from coming to the Divine Service in this Church established, or that have or
do practice with any of them to dissuade them from taking the oath of
Allegiance* or that have any ways offended against the Canon lately made, for
the suppressing of popish superstition:

5 Do all and every person or persons inhabiting or so^ourning within your
Parish, 1 E^z. c. ^
diligen^ly and faithfully resort unto your parish Church, or Chapel
accustomed, upon every Sunday, and other days appointed to be u^ed and kept as
Holidays, do they then and there abide orderly and soberly, (...) the time of
common prayer, preaching, or other service of God there to be used, or
m^nistred? Or, (which is contrary thereunto) have you any that come unto the
preachings only, Can. Ann^ 157 1. c^. 5
and not unto the common prayer, or coming to the common prayer, neither use
to come at the beginning, Can. 111
nor ^arry out unto the end? Or that being there do rudely and disorderly
behave themselves, or which by walking, talking, or any other noise do hinder
the Minister or Preacher?

6 Have you any that upon the Sundays or Holydaies, employ themselves in their
bodily and ordinary labor, or that permit their servants so to do? Or that
keep open Shops in time of divine Service? Or any Uintners, Can: An^ 1571.
Innkeepers, or other Uictuallers, that permit any to lie tippling in their
houses, or that do tipple, dice* or play at cards, or any other game in time
of divine Service on the aforesaid days? Or that use any plowing, carting, or
works of husbandry, on any of those Sundays or holidays, throughout the
year, unless according to Law, or otherwise dispose themselves then according
^o Gods holy will and pleasure, and the orders of the Church of England
pres^ribed in that behal^e, and by Law in force?

7 Does any manner of person cover his head in your Church or Chapel in time
of divine Service or Sermon, Can. 18.
or any part thereof, except he have some infirmity, and in case of such
infirmity, does he wear a co^^ or nightcap only, and not his hat? do all and
every person of your parish reverently kneel upon their knees, when the
general Confession, the Letany, the ten Commandments and other prayers are
read, and also at the receiving the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper, do
they all say the Creed, and Lords prayer, next immediately following in a loud
voice together with the Minister? Can. 18.
do they stand up at the saying of the Belief, and such other parts of divine
Service as former^y they have been used to stand up at, according to the Rules
and ancient custom of this Church? And when and as often as in the time of
divine Service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, is due and lowly reverence
done by all persons present? have you any that offend in the neglect of these
particulars* and what are there names?

8 Have you any parishioner that being 16. Can. 114
years of age does not receive the Communion, Rubr.
at the least thrice in the year, of which Easter to be one, or that does not
receive the Sacraments, and other rites according to the order of the common
prayer book? Can. 122
Or that does not reckon with his Parson Uicar or Curate, or his or their
deputies at Easter, yearly paying such Ecclesiastical du^ies as are
accustomably due then, and at that time to be paid?

9 The Minister standing as he is appointed at the North side, Rubr.
or end of the Table, when he prepares to celebrate the holy Communion, and
calling on those who do intend to communicate, to draw near and take that
holy Sacrament to their comfort, ^nvi^ation
as it is in the words of the common prayer book, have you any in your parish
that keep their seats, and sit still in their places, not drawing near as is
commanded by the Church, but looking that the Minister should forsake the place
of his station, by the Church appointed, to bring it to them?

10 Is there any of your parish, ^an. 58.
who does forsake his own Church or Chapel to receive the Communion at the
hands of any other than their own Minister, or any strangers that usually
repair to your Church or Ch^^^ell to the same intent, or any that refuse to
receive the holy Communion at ^^e hands of their own Minister, because he is
no Preacher or to have their children baptized by him in the same respect, or
that in the same respects communicate, or cause their children to be baptized
in other Parishes abroad? Or does your Minister baptize any children presented
unto him out of other Parishes? you shall present the names of all offenders in
these particulars.

11 Have you any that procure their children to be baptized at home in their
houses without great cause and necessity, Rubr of B^^
or by any other than their own lawful Minister if he may be had? Or after any
other form and manner than is pr^scribed by the Liturgy of the Church of
England, or any that procure themselves to be married privately, or after any
other manner than the Church prescribes?

12 Do all and every householder of your Parish, Can. 59
Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, cause their children, servants, and
apprentises, which have not learned their catechism, come unto the Church on
Sundays and Holidays in the afternoon, obediently to hear and to be ordered
by the Minister till they have learnt the same.

13 Have you any in your Parish that refuse to contribute, Can. 91
and pay the rate ass^ssed upon him, Can. 8
for the repair of your Church or Chapp^ll, or the providing of any books,
utensils or necessary ornaments to the same belonging? present the names of
those which do so refuse.

14 Have you any that keep company and hold society with suc^ as are denounced
and declared Excommunicate? Can. 6^


15 Have you any living in your Parish, Can. 10
which have been legally separated and divorced, have afterward been married
unto others, either men or women, during the life of each other, or that being
so divorced as before is said, keep company with each other at bed and at
board? Or any that being lawfully married, do yet live asunder, without a
separation in due course of law?

16 Have you any persons in your Parish* Can. 9
which are and have been married within the d^grees prohibited by the Laws of
God, and expressed in a Table set forth by authority? And is the said Table
publicly set up and fix^d in your Church or Chapel at the Charge of the
Parish?

17 Are there in your Parish any Wills unproved, Can. ^
or any goods unadministred by lawful Authority? Did any dying in your Parish
give any legacy unto your Church or Chapel, or to the use of the* poor and
needy? (...) how have the said legacies so given been disposed of by whom and
by whose Authority? And have they otherwise been disposed of, then to the said
pious and charitable uses?

Whether is there in your parish, a common fame and report of any which have
committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest, or any Baudes, harbourers, or
receivers of such persons, or vehemently suspected thereof, if yea, then
specify their names; Whether have you any in your Parish, which are by common
fame and report and vehement suspicion, reputed and taken to be common
Drunkards, blasphemers of Gods holy Name, common and usual swearers, filthy
speakers, railers, sowers of discord among their neighbors, or speakers
against Ministers Marriages; or Usurers, contrary to the Sta^ute made in the
37. year of King Henry the eighth? you shall not fail to present their names.

Whether have any in your Parish, received or harbored any women with child,
suspected to be of a^ incontinent life, or have had any such woman delivered of
child in his or her house, or have suffered such women to depart without
penance first inflicted upon them by the Ordinary, if yea, you shall present as
well the party harboring, as harbored, and all that help to conveigh them
away, and the parties suspected to have committed adultery or fornication with
them.

Whether do you know, or have heard of any Patron, or any having an Advowson
in your Parish, that have made gain by any color, deceit, or Symoniacall pact
in bestowing his Be^efice and presenting to the same for gain, for or
receiving money, or promise of the Lease of the whole or part* or by reserving
his own tithes, or any pension to himself, or any other?

What Almes-houses, Hospitals, Free-schooles have you in your Parish, that are
not of the Foundation or Patronage of the King, and who was the Patron or
Founder thereof, and whether the said Almes-houses, Hospitals, or Free-schooles
in your Parish, being under the Rule and Government of the Lord Bishop of
London, be well and godly used, according to the ancient Foundations and
Ordinances of the same.

Whether any Persons within your Parish, either for the offenses aforesaid, or
for any other contumacy or crime, do remain excommunicated, what be their
names, and for what cause, and how long have they stood excommunicated?

Concerning Churchwardens and Sidemen.
ARe you the Churchwardens chosen by the joint consent of your Minister and
Parishioners, ^^n. 89
or one of you by the Minister, and the other by the Parishioners: Have the
last Churchwardens given up their accounts, delivering up to the Parishioners
the money remaining in their hands, and other things of right belonging to your
Church or Chapel, and is the same delivered to you by bill indented?

2 Do you the Churchwardens and Sidemen diligently see that all your
parishioners resort duly to your Church or Chapel, Can. 90*
upon Sundays and Holidays, and there continue the whole time of Divine
Service? do you suf^er any to walk or stand idle or talk in the Church or in
the Churchyard, Can. 19. 90
or Church^porch, during that time, to the disturbance of the Minister and
scandal of the congregation? You must present the names of such as offend
herein?

3 Do you against the time of every Communion, Can. 20.
at the charge of the Parish provide a sufficient quantity of fine white
bread, and of good and wholesome wine, for the number of the Communicants? And
do you do the same with the advice and direction of your Minister? And the
wine so provided, do you bring to the Communion Table in a clean and sweet
standing pot or flaggon?

4 Do you the Churchwardens and Sidemen see, Can. 52.
that the names of all Preachers which come to your Church from other places,
be noted in a book provided for that purpose? And does every such Preacher
subscribe his name in the said book, the day when he preached, and the name of
the Bishop of whom he had license to preach?

5 If there be any public dissension and contradicting in your Pulpit, Can. 53.
between the Minister of your Church or Chapel, and any other Preacher or
Preachers, whereby disq^ietnesse and offense may grow among the people, do you
forthwith signify the same unto the Bishop, and not suffer the party to enjoy
the place so by him abused, until the Bishop has taken further order in it?

6 Do any person or persons, Can. 115^
trouble or molest you the Churchwardens, for presenting all or any of those
persons, which do off^nd in any of the premises, who are they that do so
molest or trouble you, and before whom, and in what Court do they so molest
you?

7 Do you the Churchwardens levy by way of distress, 1. Eliz. ^.^^
on the goods Lands and Te^ements of every person in your Parish, that does not
re^ort unto your Parish Church or Chapel on every Sunday and Holyday
throughout the year, Ca^. 1571*
(having no reasonable excuse to be absent) the ^umme of xii. pence, for every
Sunday or Holydaie that he is so absent? And do you dist^ibute the several
sums so levied as before is said, among the poor of the parish, according to
the Law in that case provided?

8 Have you had time sufficient for drawing up of your presentiments? Can. 119
^ow long is it since this book of Articles was sent unto you? have you
^erused and considered as well the Oath you are to take, as the Articles
^hereon to ground your presentiments, and ^very branch and clause thereof, and
have you framed your presentiments punctually, according to the ^everall
branches and clauses of those Articles? For know assuredly that as well the
discharging of your Office, Can. ^6.
is the chie^e me^^es whereby public sins and offenses may be reformed and
punished, so if you wil^^lly omit to present such crimes as either you know to
be commi^^ed, or otherwise have heard by public fame, C^n. 117
that in such cases your Ord^naries are to proceed against you, as in causes of
wilful perjurie, in their Ecclesiastical Courts?

Concerning Chancellors, Registers, Proctors, Apparators, and other
Ecclesiastical Officers.
IS the Chancellor, Can. Art. 1571. p. 11.
Commissarie, or Official, that exercises Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
according as you know or have heard in holy Orders of the Ministry, Can. An.
1603. c. 127.
or if he be not, is he well affected and zealously bent toward Religion, and
such a man touching whose life no evil example is had?

2 Do they or any of them substitute any in their absence to keep Court for
them, Can. 178
that is not either a grave Minister, and a Graduate, o^ a licensed public
Preacher, and a Benificed man near the place where the Courts are kept, or a
Batchellour of Law, or a Master of Ar^s at the least, who has some skill in
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws? Is he or they so substituted, a favourer
of true Religion, and a man of modest and honest conversation? Declare the
truth according to your knowledge or best information in these particulars.

3 Do they or any of them (not being themselves in holy Orders) pronounce the
sentence of Excommunication, Can An. 1571.
or leave it only to the Bishop, and is the same pronounced only by the Bishop,
or by some grave man o^ his appointment, which is in the Ministry? Or do they
or any of them absolve any that are Excommunicated at his or their own house
or houses, or otherwise in private houses, or only openly and in the
Consistorie^ declare your knowledge in this point.

4 Does your Chancellor, Can. An. 1571. and 1597.
Archdeacon, Commi^sarie or Official take upon him, or them to after any
penanc^ enjoined without leave o^ the Bishop? Have they or either or any of
them, comm^ted any penan^^ with any dwelling in your Parish? What sum of
money has been taken for the said commutation? Is the said sum made known
unt^ you in the congregation either by the penitent himself, or by the
Ministe^ of your Parish, As by the Canons of the year 1597. it ought to be ^
An^ being so made known, has the same sum or sums of money, bee^
distributed on the poor of your Parish* or otherwise bestowed upon pio^^ uses?
And on what pious uses, as you have been credibly informed, wa^ the
samebestowed?

5 Does your Chancellor, Can. 120*
Archdeacon, Of^iciall, or other Ecclesiastical Judge, suffer any general
Process of Quo^um Nomina* to be sent out of the Court, except the names of all
such as be cited* are first expres^^e entered by the hand of the Register or
his Deputy, and the said proc^sses and names be subscribed by the Judge or his
Deputy, and his seal of Office thereto affixed?

6 Does the Chancellor, Can. 12^.
or any Commissarie within your Diocese, cite any of your Parish for any crime
into his court, that has been formerly detected or presented to the
Archdeacon? Or does your Archdeacon cite any dwelling in your Parish, to
appear before him for any ^rime presented to the Chancellor in his Uisitation?
by which of the two aforesaid Iuris^ictions was the party offending cited last?

7 Does your Chancellor, Can. 123*
Commissarie* Archdeacon, Official, or any other using Ecclesiastical
Iuris^iction, speed any Judicial* Act except he have the Ordinary* Register
of the court, or his lawful Deputy, or else such persons to write and speed
the same, as are by ^aw allowed in that behalf? Or have they, or either, or
any of them, without the Bishops consent any more seals then one, for the
sealing of all matters incident to his or their Office? And does the said Seal
remain in the custody of the Judge himself, or of the lawful substitute by
him appointed? And is the same kept in the City or principal Town in the
^ountie, as the Law requires?

8 Does your Chancellor, Can. 125.
Commissarie, Archdeacon, Official or others exercising any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, or eith^r or any of them, appoint such place or places for the
keeping of their Courts, as are convenient for the entertainment of those that
are to make their appearance there, and most indifferent for travel? And do
they end in their Courts in such convenient time or times, as every man may
return homewards in as due season as may be?

9 Has any Register unto your knowledge, Ca^. 134
or as you have credibly been informed, received wittingly any certificate
without the knowledge of the Judge? Or willingly omitted to call any persons
cited to appear upon any Court day? Or that has unduely put off, and deferred
the Examination of witnesses to be examined by a day, set and assigned by the
Judge? Or that has set down or enacted any thing false, or conceited by
himself, as decreed by the Judge, or not as so ordered or decreed by the
Judge? Or that has received any reward in any Causes whatsoever in favor of
any party, or that is of counsel directly or indirectly with either of the
parties in suit? declare your knowledge in these particulars.

10 Does any Register or any other Minister of Ecclesiastical Courts (...)
or any of the Judges of the said Courts take or receive any other or greater
fees, then such as were ratified and approved by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Anno 1597. and contained in the Tables of fees, for that purpose made: And are
two Tables, containing the several rates and sums of the said fees, Can. 136
set up according to the Law in that case provided? That is to say, one of them
in the usual place or Consistory where the Court is kept, and the other of
them in the Registry, or Registers Office? And are they set up in such sort
that every man whom it concerns may without difficulty come to the view
thereof and take a copy of them if they so desire? Can. 137
And does any Register or other Ecclesiastical Officer take more for showing
Letters of Orders* then is appointed in the 137. Canon?

11 Does any Proctor take upon him to appear in any Cause or pretend to be
entertained in the same, Can. 1^9
unless he be constituted and appointed by the party himself either before
the Judge and in open Court, or by sufficient Proxy con^^rmed by some
authentical Seal, the parties ratification therewithal concurring? If you
know any such present him, that so he may be punished as the law provides? Or
does any Proctor ^ake the oath in Animam Domini, in any cause what ever,
contrary to the ordinance of holy Church?

12 How many Apparatours have you in your Dioc^sse or Archdeaconrie, Can. 138
as you either know or do conjecture? Do they or any of them execute their
Office by themselves or by their Deputies? And if by their Deputies, then is
the cause of such their deputation and employment made known and approved of
by the Ordinary of the place? Do they take upon them the Offfce of Promot^rs
or Informers for the Court, or exact more or greater fees then are prescribed
in the Tables before remembered? What other abuses and aggrievances can you
complain of justly in the said Apparators?

Whether any Archdeacon or Official within the Diocese of London has or does
commute or change any p^nance or corporal punishment, in whole or in part, and
what money such Archdeacon or Official has received, what (...) offense was
for which any sum of money was received, or appointed to be paid? set down
the particulars of the premises.

Whether any Archd^acon or Official, or his Surrogate, have within these three
years last past, granted any Licenses for the Marriage of any parties in your
parish Church, or elsewhere, whether has your Minister by virtue o^ the said
Licenses, so married them, and by whom the said Licenses were so granted, and
you are likewise required by virtue of your corporal oath to make diligent
search in the Register book of marriages kept within your parish, what parties
have been married by the said authority, and if you know any such, present
their names, and places where they dwell.

Whether have you in your Parish any Curats, Schoolemasters, Physicians,
Ch^^urgions, Parish Clerks, or Midwives, licensed by any other authority than
of the Lord-bishop of this Diocese, or his Chancellor, and whether any fees
have been demanded or received by any other besides the Lord Bishop of this
Diocese, or his Chancellor, in the Lord Bishops Visitation, for exhibiting the
said licenses?

Whether any Commissarie, Archdeacon, or Official, have at any time,
especially within these three years last past, intermedled in the placing or
displacing of any persons in pewes, in your Parish Churches, or have granted
any confirmation of seats, under his seal of office, or by his authority has
caused to be removed the Pulpit, or Font, or reading Deske from their ancient
and accustomed place, or given way to making of doors or windows in Churches
or Chapels, or erecting of Galleries?

Whether any Commissarie, Archdeacon or Official have proved the Wills, or
granted Administration of the goods of any beneficed man or Curat dying within
his Jurisdiction, or of any other person being in holy Orders?

The Charge of the Churchwardens and Sworn men set down for the better
performance of their duties, and discharge of their Oaths.
THey are not to bring in any Bills into the Archdeacons Court upon the
Articles to be enquired of in their Visitation, by reason of my Lords
Visitation, but only now during the said Visitation, to make their presentiments
upon these Articles. They are therefore charged, that after their Oath taken,
and their return home, they do require their Minister to read over both the
Book of Canons or Constitutions, set forth by his Majesty, in the Convocation
holden in the year of our God, 1604. and also these Articles unto them, and to
consider of every particular Article, and of the offenses by them to be
presented, as also of such persons in their Parish as shall be noted to offend
in the same: and so the Churchwardens and Sidemen assembling themselves
together within some convenient time, are to make their Bill, answering every
Article by it self, before the time hereafter appointed them, which Bill shall
be signed with the hands of all the Churchwardens and Side^men, with
conference had with their Minister upon the said Bill of presentment, who,
according to the 26. Canon* is to see that the said Churchwardens do their
duties in presenting, upon the penalty in the 26. Canon prescribed. These
Bills shall be brought by both the Churchwardens

AT the delivery of your Bill of presentment, at the time and place before set
down, you the Churchwardens are likewise in the said Bill, to set down the
names of all such as have died within your parish at any, time since the day of
July last past being Men, Maids or Widows: and what person or persons have
been married since the said time, and by what License or authority: and
likewise you the Minister, Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish, must in
the end of the said Bill of presentment, set down, the number of all
Recusants, and non-Communicants as follows Recusants men -- Recusants women.
-- Non-Communicants of both sex. -- Communicants of both sex in the whole Parish
So setting down the number of every one, you the Minister, Churchwardens and
Sidemen must put your hands to the said Note.

FINIS.

