Articles to be inquired of, in the first Metropoliticall Visitation, of the
most Reverend Father: Richard by Gods providence Arch-bushop of Canterbury, and
Primat of all ENGLAND, in, and for the Dioces of PETERBOROVGH, in the year of
our Lord God 1607. and in the third year of his Graces Translation.

printer's device of Ralph Blower, of a fleur-de-lis with two cherubs, McKerrow
298 IN DOMINO CONFIDO

At London printed by Raph Blower, ANNO DOMINI, 1607.

THE Tenor of the Oath, to be ministered to the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOU shall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain,
or fear of displeasure or malice set aside: You shall upon due consideration
of the Articles given you in charge: present all and every such person, of, or
within your Parish: as has committed any offense or fault: or made any default
mentioned in thief, or any of thief Articles: or which are vehemently
suspected and defamed of any such offense: fault or default: wherein you shall
deliver uprightly, and according to truth: neither of malice: presenting any
contrary to truth: nor of corrupt affection sparing to present any, and so
conceal the truth: Having in this action God before your Eyes: with an earnest
zeal to maintain truth, and so suppress vice: So help you God, and the
Contents of this book.

God save the King.
ARTICLES To be inquired of, by the Churchwardens and Sworne-men: in the
Visitation of the Lord Arch-bushop of Canterbury: within the Diocese of
PETERBOROVGH. Anno Dom. 1607.
INPRIMIS, Whether have you in your several Churches and Chapels, the book
of Constitutions or Cannons Ecclesiastical, ready to be read by your
Minister, according to his Majesty's pleasure, published by his Highness
Authority, under the great Seal of England, and whether has your Minister
read the same or any part thereof upon Sundaies and Holidaies, in the
afternoon before divine service accordingly, yea or no?

2 Item, Whether is there any within your parish, that has or does impugn,
the Kings Majesty's supremacy, and authority in causes Ecclesiastical: or
do any way or in any part impeach the same, being restored to the Crown by
the Laws of this Realm established in that behalf?

3 Item, Whether is there any in your parish, that denies the Church of
England, by Law established under the Kings most excellent Majesty, to be a
true and an Apostolical church, teaching and mainteyning the Doctrine of the
Apostles?

4 Item Whether is there any in your parish, that does impagne any of the
Articles of Religion, agreed upon in Anno, 1562, and established in the Church
of England.

5 Item, Whether does your minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty King
James, and for the Queens Majesty, the Prince and all their Royal Progeny,
with addition of such Style and Titles, as are due and appertaining to his
Majesty, and exhort the people to obedience, to his Highness, and other
Maiestrates being in authority under him?

6 Item, Whether is there any in your parish, that do impugn, or speak
against the Rites and Ceremonies, established in the Church of England, or the
lawful use of them, you shall present their names.

7 Item, Are there any in your parish, that do impugn the government of the
Church of England, under the Kings most excellent Majesty by Arch-bushops,
Bushops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and the rest that bear office in the same:
Affirming that the same is Ante-christian, or repugnant to the word of God.

8 Item, Is there any in your Parish, that does impugn the form of
consecrating and ordeining of Arch-bushops, Bushops, Priests or Deacons,
affirming that the same is repugnant to the word of God, or that they who are
so ordered in that form are not lawfully made.

9 Item, Is there any in your parish, that does hold or frequent any
conuenticles, or private congregations, or any that do either make or
maintain any Constitutions, agreed upon in any such private Conuenticles or
assemblies?

10. Item Whether any persons have lurked and tippled in Tauernes or
Alehouses, on sundaies or other holidaies, or used his or their manual craft
or trade, upon the said days or any of them, and especially in the time of
divine service.

11 Item Are there any in your parish, that do or have profaned (since his
Majesty's last general pardon) the Lords day called sunday, or other holidaies
contrary to the orders of the Church of England, prescribed in that behalf?

12 Item, Whether is the prescript form of divine service, used by your
Minister, upon Sundaies and Holidaies, according to the book of common prayer?
And whether does your Minister duly observe all the Orders, Rites and
Ceremonies, prescribed in the said book of common prayer, as well in reading
puplique prayers, the Letany, as also in administering the Sacraments, in such
manner and form as in the book of common prayer is enjoined?

13 Item, Whether has any person in your parish quarrelled or fricken, or used
any violence unto or with your Minister, or any other in the church or
churchyard, or used himself disorderly in the church by filthy and profane
talk, or any other rude and immodest behavior?

14 Item Whether is that due reverence, and humble submission used within your
Church or Chapel, in the time of Divine service, as by the 18. constitution
is prescribed, whether each one in the Church or Chapel do apply and order
himself there in time of divine Service, as by the latter part of the same
Constitution is most commendably enjoined?

15 Item, Whether the Churchwardens and Questmen, from time to time do their
diligence, in not suffering any idle persons or loyterers, to abide either in
the Churchyard or Church Porch in Service or Sermon time, but causing them
either to come into the Church to hear Divine service, or to depart, and not
to disturb such as are hearers there.

16 Item Whether the Churchwardens do provide against every Communion with
the advice of the Minister, a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of
good and wholesome Wine for the number of the Communicants that shall receive,
and that to be brought in a clean and sweet standing pot of pewter or of other
pure mettle.

17 Item, Whether does your Minister administer the holy Communion so often,
and at such times as that every parishioner may receive the same at least
thrice in every year, whereof once at Easter, as by the book of common prayer
is appointed? And whether does your Minister receive the same himself, on
every day that he administreth it to others, and use the words of the
Institution according to the book at every time that the Bread or Wine is
turned in such manner and form as by the Proviso of the 21. Common is
directed, or wherein is he faulty? and whether is warning given by him before
hand for the Communion, as the 22. Cannon requires?

18 Item, Whether has your Minister admitted any Notorious ^^^^dors, or
Skismatickes to the Communion: contrary to the 26. and 27. constitutions.

19 Item Whether the Minister together with the Churchwardens and Questmen, do
take diligent heed and care: not only that all and every of your own
parishioners, do receive thrice in every year as aforesaid: but also, that no
strangers of any other parish do come often, and commonly to your church from
their own parish church: and you are now to present the names of all those,
who being 16. years of age or upwards, and have not in their own parish
received the Communion, at or since Easter last?

20 Item, Have any in your parish bin Godfathers or Godmothers to their own
children: or whether your Minister, or any Godfathers or Godmothers have used,
or do use any other form, answer or speech in Baptism: then is in the book
of common prayer appointed? or whether any which have not communicated, be
admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers?

21 Item, Whether does your Minister use to sign the children with the sign
of the cross, when they are baptized: according to the book of common prayer?
and whether he has defected, or wilfully refused, to baptize any Infant in his
parish being in danger, having bin duly informed of the weakness thereof: and
whether the child has died in his default without Baptism?

22 Item, whether is your Minister continually resident with you upon his
benefice, or for how long time has he bin absent? And where is he restant for
the most part, and what other benefice has he?

23 Item, Whether does your Minister preach usually, according to the
constitutions, either in his own cure with you, or else in some other church
or chapel near adjoining, where no preacher is? or how often has he bin
negligent in that behalf?

24 Item, Whether is your Minister a preacher allowed, if yea: then by whom? if
not, whether does he procure Sermons to be preached among you once in every
month at the least, by such as are lawfully licensed?

25 Item, Whether has your minister an other benefice, and whether does he
supply his absence by a Curat that is sufficiently licensed to preach in that
cure of his, whereon he himself is not resident? or otherwise in case he does
not find a preaching minister there by reason of the smallnes thereof? whether
does he preach at both of his benefices usually himself?

26. Item, Whether is your curat licensed to serve by the Bushop of this
Dioces, or by any other, and by whom?

27 Item, Whether does your Minister or Curat serve any more cures then one? if
yea, then what other cure does he also serve?

28 Item, If your minister be not licensed to preach as aforesaid, whether does
he take upon him to expound the Scriptures either in his own cure or else
where? if yea, then you are to present him, and specify the place where he so
has preached?

29 Item Whether has any person bin admitted to preach within your church or
chapel, but such as you have well known to be sufficiently licensed? whom
have you so admitted, you shall present their names: and how often have any such
bin so admitted to preach, and by whose procurement? And whether have you
caused every strange preacher, licensed, or not licensed, to subscribe his
name together with the day when he preached: and if he were lice^sed, then by
whom was he licensed? And whether have they or any other preached in your
church not being soberly and decently apparelled?

30 Item, Whether does your Lectorer and preacher read divine service, and
administer the Sacraments in his own person, twice every year: observing all
the Ceremonies in the book of common prayer established?

31 Item, Is there any in your parish, that do refuse to have their children
baptized: or themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister,
because he is no preacher. You shall present their names. And if your minister
sithence the publishing of the said book of Canons, has received any such
persons (being not of his own cure) to the Communion, or baptized any of their
children: you shall likewise present him?

32 Item, Whether does your minister wear the surplice, whilst he is saying
the public prayers, and ministering the Sacraments? And if he be any Graduat,
whether then does he also wear upon his surplice during the times aforesaid,
such a Hood as by the orders of his University is agreeable to his degree?

33 Item, Whether does your Minister every Sunday and holliday before Evening
prayer, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of his parish, in the x. commandments, Articles of belief, and in the
Lords prayer, as also in the Catechism, set forth in the book of common
prayer? And whether do all fathers, mothers, masters and mistresses, cause
their children, servants and apprenstises, to come thither to bear and to be
instructed and taught therein, and those that do not their duties herein, you
shall present their names?

34 Item, Whether has your ministers without license from the Archbushop, the
Bushop of this Diocese or his Chancellor, solemnized marriage betwixt any
parties, the banes not being three several sundaies or hollidaies first
published, in time of divine service, in the several churches or chapels, of
their several abode according to the book of common prayer, and that also
betwixt the hours of eight and twelve in the fore-noone. And furthermore,
whether has your minister since the last Cannons published, solemnized any
marriage betwixt any persons being under the age of 21. years, although the
banes be thrice asked, before such time as the parents have made known unto
him their consent thereunto, and whether has he married any of another
Diocese, who are they? and by what authority, and when?

35 Item, Whether does your minister every sunday, bid holidaies and fasting
days, as by the book of common prayer is appointed?

36 Ite^ whether does your minister every 6 months, denounce in his parish,
all such of his parish as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication, not
seeking to be absolved, and whether has he admitted into the church any person
excommunicat, without a certificat of his absolutio^ from ye ordinary or other
competent judge?

37 Item, Whether does your minister being a preacher, endeavor and labor
dilligently, to reclaim the popish recusants, in his parish from their errors:
if there be any such abiding? and whether is he painful in visiting the sick
according to the book of common prayer?

38 Item, Whether is your parson vicar or curat, to frequent or to be
ouer-conuersant with, or a fauorer of recusants, whereby he is suspected not to
be sincere in religion.

39 Item Whether do you know or have heard of any payment, composition or
agreement, to, or with the Bushop, Chancellor, or any inferior officer
Ecclesiastical, for suppressing or concealing of excommunication, or other
Ecclesiastical censure, of, or against any recusant? what sum of money, or
other consideration has bin received or promised? by, or to any of them in ye
respect, by whom? and with whom? and for what sum or other consideration?

40 Item, Whether is there in your Church or Chapel one parchment Register
book, provided for Christnings, Marriages, and Burials, and whether is the same
duly and exactly kept according to the Constitutions in that behalf provided?

41 Item, whether has your minister or any other preacher baptized children,
solemnized Marriage, churched any woman, or ministered the holy Communion in any
private house or houses, otherwise the^ as by law is allowed yea or no? if yea,
then where? whom? when and how often has he offended in any of the Premises?

42 Item, Whether has your minister taken upon him to appoint any publicque or
private Fasts, prophecies, or exercises not approved and established by Law or
public authority, or has he attempted upon any pretense either of
possession or obsession, by fasting and prayer to cast out devils yea or no?

43 Item, Whether has your minister or any other person or persons: within
your parish used to meet in any private house or other place, there to consult
together, how to impeach or deprave the book of common prayer, or the doctrine
or discipline of the church of England, if yea, then you shall present them all?

44 Item, Whether does your minister use such decency and comlines in his
apparel, as by the 74 constitution is enjoined?

45 Item, Whether do you know any in your parish that having heretofore taken
upon him or them, the order of Priesthood or of a Deacon has since
relinquished the same, and betaken himself in the course of his life as a
layman neglecting his vocation, if yea, then you shall present his name, and
the place of his abode?

46 Item, Does any take upon him to teach School in your parish without
special license of his ordinary? and whether does your Schoolemaister bring
his Scholars to the church to hear divine service and sermons?

47 Item, Whether is your minister noted or defamed to have obtained his
benefice by symony, or reputed to be an incontinent person, a common drunkard,
a common gamster, or player at dice, or faulty in any other crime punishable by
the Ecclesiastical censures, whereby he is offensive and scandalous to his
function or ministry.

48 Item, Whether have you provided the book of common prayer lately set forth
by his Majesty's authority, and the book of Homilies, and whether have you in
your Church or chapel a Fonts of stone set up in the ancient usual place, a
convenient and decent Communion table with a carpet of silk, or some other
decents stuff, and a taire linen cloth to lay thereon at the Communion time:
and whether is the same Table then placed in such convenient sort within the
Chauncell or church, as that the minister may be best heard in his prayer and
administration, and that the greater number may communicate: And whether are
the x. commandments set upon the East end of your Church or Chapel, where
the people may best see and read them, and other sentences of holy scripture
written on the walls likewise for that purpose?

49 Item, Whether have you a convenient seat for your minister to read
service in, together with a comely Pulpit set up in a convenient place, with a
decent cloth or cushion for the same: a comely large surplice, a fair
Communion cup of gold, silver, or other pure mettle, and a cover agreeable for
the same, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the celebration of
Divine service and administration of the Sacraments?

50 Item, Whether are your church or chapels with the Chancels thereof, and
your parsonage or vickeredge house and all other housing thereto belonging in
good reparations, and decent and comely kept as well within as without, the
seats well maintained, a sure coffer with three locks and keys for the safe
keeping of your Register book, your churchyards well fenced and kept without
abuse, if not, then through whose default and what defects are?

51 Item, Whether have you or your predecessors Churchwardens there suffered
since the last pardon, any plays, feasts, banquets, churchales, drinkings, or
any other profane vsages, to be kept in your church chapels or churchyard,
or bells to be rung superstitiously upon hollidaies or days abrogated by Law?

52 Item, How many inhabitants within your parish, men or women above the age of
16 years, do refuse to frequent divine service established by public
authority of this realm, or to receive the holy Communion, what be their
names, and of what degree state or trade of life are they, you are to present
then all of both sorts?

53 Item, Whether do any of the inhabitants of your said parish entertain
within their house any soiorners, lodgers, or any common resorters and guests,
who refuse to frequent divine service, or receive the holy Communion as
aforesaid, what be their names? of what quality or condition they are?

54 Item, Whether are any of the said popish recusants of insolent behavior
not without public offense, or do boldly buisy themselves in seducing and
withdrawing others, either abroad or in their own families by instructing
their children in popish religion, or by refusing to entertain any especially
in place of greatest service or trust, but such as concur with them in
opinion of religion?

55 Item, How long the said popish Recusants have obstinately abstained, either
from divine service or from the Communion as is aforesaid: Whether of any long
time, or only since his Majesty's reign?

56 Item, Whether is your Minister a preacher sufficiently qualified and if he
be, whether does he from time to time offer quiet and temperate conference to
reclaim the said popish Recusants from their errors: and whether they or any
of them do refuse such conference with your Minister or any other Preacher,
who shall present unto them his diligence in that behalf?

57 Item, What persons aforesaid within your parish either for the offense
aforesaid, or for any other Contumacy, or crime, do remain excommunicat, what
be their names and for what cause, and how long they have so stood
excommunicate?

58 Item, Whether were you the Churchwardens and Questmen chosen by the consent
of the Minister and parishioners: and whether have the churchwardens before
you, given up a just account for their time and delivered to you their
successors whatsoever money or other things of right belonging to the Church,
which was in their hands, and whether do you and every of you diligently see
that all the Parishioners do duly resort to their church every sunday and
holiday, and there continue the whole time of divine service, and none to walk
or stand idle, or talking in church or churchportch, or churchyard during that
time: and whether do all the parishioners and their families accordingly
frequent their parish church, and there behave themselves soberly, attentively
and decently, all the time of divine service, yea or no? if no, then you shall
present their names?

59 Item, Whether do all persons above the age of 16 years, usually resort to
hear divine service upon sundays and hollidayes approved, and whether has
each one of your parishioners, (being above the age of 16. years aforesaid)
received the holy Communion thrice this last year, chiefly once at Easter in
your parish church kneeling, if no, then you shall present their names which
have not so done?

60 Item, Whether have you a fit parish Clarke aged twenty years at least of
honest conversation, and sufficent for reading and writing, and whether he be
paid his wages without frauds according to the most ancient custom of your
parish, if not, then by whom is be so defrauded and denied? and whether he be
chosen by the parson or vicar or by whom?

61 Item, Whether have any in your parish been married within the prohibited
degrees, forbidden by the Law of God, and expressed in a certain table
published by authority in Anno, 1563 if yea, then you shall present their
names, and whether have you the said Table publicly set up in your church,
and fastened to some convenient place there?

62 Item, Whether does any heretofore divorced keep company with any other at
bed and at board? what be their names? When and where were they married?

63 Item, Does your minister use the form of thanksgiving to women after
Childe-birth, and whether has he admitted any thereunto, that was begotten
with child in adultery or fornication without license of his ordinary, and
whether have any married wives refused to come to church according to the book
of common prayer, to give God thanks after childbirth, if any be faulty
herein you shall present their names?

64 Item Whether have you any in your parish which heretofore being popish
recusants or sectuaries, have since conformed themselves and come to church to
hear divine service and receive the Sacraments if yea, then who they are, and
how long si'thence have they so conformed themselves, and whether do they
still remain and abide in that conformity?

65 Item, What recusant papists are there in your parish, and whether do they
or any of them keep any Schoole-maister in their house, which comes not to
church to hear divine service and receive the Communion? what is his name, and
how long has be taught?

66 Item, Whether have you any in your parish to your knowledge or by common
fame and report, any which have committed adultery fornication or incest,
which have not bin publicly punished to your knowledge? if yea, then with
whom? Are there any which are or by common fame and report are reputed and
taken to be common drunkards, blasphemers of Gods holy name, common and usual
swearers, filthy speakers, Usurers, symoniicall persons, Fighters, Brawlers, or
Quarellers in church, or churchyard, you shall not fail to present their names?

67 Item, Whether have any in your parish received or harbored any woman gotten
with child out of Wedlock, and suffered them to depart again without
punishment first inflicted on them by their ordinary, you shall truly present
as well the party harboring as harbored, and who is suspected to be father of
her child?

68 Item, Whether has any person within your parish promised or paid any
sum of money or other reward directly or indirectly by himself or any other,
or committed his or her penance for any incest, adultery, fornication, or any
other Ecclesiastical crime, if so, then with whom? when? and for what? and how
has the same been employed?

69 Item, Whether is your Chancellor, and every other inferior Ecclesiastical
judge a master of Arts, or Bachelor of Laws at the least, and learned and
practiced in the civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, a man of good life and
conversation and zealously affected in Religion?

70 Item, Whether any person or persons suspected or detected heretofore of
incontinency, and therefore departing out of your parish for a season is now
returned again, or in what place else is he or she now abiding to your
knowledge or as you have heard? you shall not fail to present the whole truth
in that behalf?

71 Item, Whether are there in your parish any Wills not yet proved, or goods
of the dead dying intestate left vn-administred by authority of the ordinary
in that behalf? you shall not fail to present the Executors, and all other
faulty and culpable therein?

72 Item, Has any Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, official, or any other
exercising Ecclesiastical Iuris-diction within this your Diocese, or any
Register, Apparator, or Minister belonging to the same Ecclesiastical courts,
exacted extra-ordinary or greater sees then heretofore of late have been
accustomed, and whether is there a table of the rates of all fees set up in
their several Courts and Offices or whether they or any of them have taken
upon them the office of Informers or Promotors to the courts, or any other way
abused themselves in their Offices contrary to the Law and Cannons in that
case provided?

73 Item, Do any, of, or within your Parish affirm, or have any affirmed that
the sacred synod of this nation assembled by the Kings authority, is not the
true church of England by representation: or has or does any of your parish
affirm, that no persons either of the Clergy or Laity, that were not
pertinently present in the said late Synod, are subject to the decrees thereof
in causes Ecclesiastical, made and ratified by the Kings supreme authority:
because they gave not up their voices unto them, ye shall present their names?

74 Item, Is there any among you, that have or do deprave the foresaid late
Synod, saying or affirming, that the same was a company of such persons as did
conspire together against godly and religious professors of the Gospel, and
that therefore both they and their proceedings in that behalf are and ought to
be despised and contemned or words to the like effect, you shall not fail to
present their names?

75 Item, What number of Apparators has every several judge Ecclesiastical,
and wherein, and in what manner is the country ouer-burthened and grieved by
the said Apparators?

76 Item, Whether do you know of any other matter of Ecclesiastical
cognizance, worthy the presentment in your judgment above not expressed, which
you hold fit to be reformed, and if you do, you shall likewise present the
same by virtue of your Oaths?

FINIS.

