A BRIEF and plain declaration, concerning the desires of all those faithful
Ministers, that have and do seek for the Discipline and reformation of the
Church of England:

Which may serve for a just Apology, against the false accusations and
slanders of their adversaries.

GOD IS MY DEFENDER.

AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue. 1584.

A praeface to the Christian Reader.
THE holy Prophets having oftentimes, 1. Pet. 9. 10.
* but searched when and at what time the foreseeing spirit of God declared
unto them the manifold afflictions and troubles of the church to come; have
thereupon entered into great lamentations for the same: And have not only
wept and fasted them selves, Lamen. 1. 2 3. 4.
* but have compiled for the church whole books of lamentations; therein
instructing them what way to take, Joel. 2.
for appeasing the fierce wrath of God breaking out against them. Which duty
in semblable manner should now long ago have been done of us, did not the
hope we conceive in the midst of many tempests, confirm us in such
expectation of her majesty and her most honorable counsel, as that according
to their clemency toward the poor ministers and their families, but most
especially according to their holy and zealous care, which ought to abound
for the clean driving out of the Cananites, and planting, hedging, pruning,
and continual preserving of the Lord his vineyard, from Foxes, yea little
Foxes, this civil war, as a man may say, of the church wherein so much of
that blood Act. 20. 26.
* (vvherof Paul speaks) is powered to the ground, should by their holy
and just authority, fully be ended. Now, when as we at this time, are
subject almost unto all the afflictions which can come unto a church, blessed
of God with such a christian and happy regiment; as to the profane scoffing
of the * Neh. 4. 2. 3. 4
Hammonits at the buylding of the church, Neh. 4. 7.
as at a wal which a Fox should destroy; to the conspiracies of the Arrabies
and those of Ashod; to the false Neh. 6. 5. 6.
* charges of sedition, contempt of all good laws and proceedinges, like to
that of Sanballat; yea to the Neh. 10. 11. 12
* prophets them selves, undermining, nay reuiling, displacing, and
grieuouslye afflicting the Godly and learned ministry, and so consequently
plaging the Church with that plague vvherby Joel. 1. 9.
* the priests may mourn, Amos. 8. 11. 12. 13.
because there is no offering, and the people perish, even the young men with
the famine of hearing the word of God preached: when I say, we are subject to
al these, we can think of no way for reconciling the brethren at variance,
and after a most sure and holy union of both their forces, for a courageous
setting upon the common adversary, then the certain, peaceable and reasonable
way following. Which is, that whereas both by books already written, and
by treatizes latelye and now published, it may appear we seek that which
at the least in the judgment of all true Christians has no small probability
(as we judge necessity) of truth out of the scriptures: it may please her
most excellent majesty and their honors to appoint on both sides the best
learned, most Godly and moderate men to debate all differences of weight
between them and us. So that first upon sufficient consideration, the
questions to be debated be without all ambiguitie set down, the reasons of
both sides without all out-goynges shortly and plainly delivered in vvriting
each to other, that after upon sufficient examination the reasons of both be
continuallye confirmed and resolved, till either by the evidence of truth one
part yield unto the other; or the folly and madness of those which gaynesay it,
do in equal judgment become manifest, in regard of the contradictions and
absurdities vvhereto they shall be driven by the force of Gods word. Which
way though it should come naked unto us can not well be refused, but being
richly attyred with all robes and ornaments which the scripture gives unto
the Synodicall assemblyes for such conferences: as namely that there be Act.
15. 7.
* much searching of the truth by sufficient reasoning without all by
matters, quarrels, euasions and colors whatsoever, that there be much 1. Cor.
14. 13. 32.
* order, when the spirit of every prophet shall be subject unto the spirits
of the other prophets, and the judgment of al shall be sufficiently heard,
without stopping of free and sufficient answer, without Lordly carrying away
of the matter with no substance of reason, where no authority, pregnancie of
wit, plausible persuasion of man's wisdom, shall turn the truth aside, but
al shall stand in the 1. Cor. 2. 4.
* evident demonstration of Gods spirit: lastly that there be 1. Cor. 14. 33
* peace without all bitterness, reuilinges, suspicions, chargings of men dead
and alive, whereby affections are moved, judgment blinded, and men driven as
with a mighty stream from the love of the truth: when it comes thus
adorned we think, that which we labor to procure to be so honorable Act. 14.
16.
* not only before God, but also before men, that none can judge otherwise of
it then we do. For if any shall object, that the grave authority of
Archbishops and Bishops shall receive a check, whilst they are brought to
deal with those, whom they judge few, young, unlearned, and not comparable
to them selves: or that it is a challenge not much unlike the Papists: or
lastly, that it shall be prejudicial to the estate of government established:
It may please their wisdoms who are to be judges, to consider what we
have to aunsvvere unto these things: which, if they have the truth of God his
word, contain the safest and best way in such cases, tend to the full quieting
of all, and the remoouing of the plagues which are upon us, and are like
daily further to come, even from the common adversary: We may boldly yet most
humbly upon our knees require them before God and all his elect Angels no^ to
cast it away. Wherefore for the first, let us grant the great difference which
they make of years and learning, yet the speech of Elihu gives them
sufficient answer, Job. 32. 7. 8.
that this understanding is not tied to such outvvard respects but to the Job.
32. 21. 22.
* revelation of Gods spirit, and to accept in such cases the persons of men,
or to give titles, is but to provoke God to destroy us. Yea let the memorable
examples of 2. Chro. 30. 1 5. 23. ver.
* Ezechias and the priests: of Acts. 15. 23.
the Apostles in their counsels, of * Gal. 1. 1.
Paul in his Epistles, and even of * Act. 11. 1. 2. 3 4. etc.
Peter in yielding to the challenge of some not so well instructed move them,
who not only not refused the Levites and Elders; but accepted the people in
some manner to be heard to speak, and to authorize their determinations and
writings: at least let their own opinion, that, in interpreting the scriptures
and deliuerye of doctrine, D. VVhitgifts book. page. 389.
we are equal with them, persuade them, not to refuse those, who if they
could strain their consciences to subscribe to the Archbish. articles, they
would gladly receive them to be the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ. As for the
fevvnes it may be, if the ignorant ministers, the variety of other which
subscribe, some doing it with this limitation and some with that, some
holding their former judgment as not gain said by their subscription, some
lamenting their slip in that behalf were deducted, the number of the one
vvoulde not so greatly surmount the other. As for the challenge of the Papists
knit up with the consideration of the estate, the difference may be considered
in the matter and manner. Concerning the matter, they make it in the substance
of religion which has in diverse assemblies abroad and at home been disputed,
resolved, and now publikly maintained for our true and holy faith. We in
matters concerning the government of Christ of great moment indeed, yet never
thus handled, nor urging the alteration, but perfection of the estate of the
Church, and further good of the common wealth, whilst by this means amongst
many other things of great importance, the ignorant ministry, and by it
popery, and by popery rebellion should be avoided, which by the other are
most manifestly bred and nourished. Concerning the manner, they call it to a
sudden and tumultuous reasoning, where the readiest wit, the best memory,
the most filed speech, shall carry away the truth, at least maruailously
move the ungrounded harers. We require that where both sides may upon mature
and sufficient deliberation be beard without any of these shows, and the
matter delivered unto her majesty, their Hh: and vvhomsoeuer they shall choose,
to receive and examine the allegations of both sides: So that it need not be
communicated unto the people, until the manifest light of truth appear first
unto them. And if this so safe and reasonable an offer, cannot be liked in the
respect of the last objected consideration, we think it impossible, but the
persons which desire a way so sound, peaceable and dutiful, shall recover
this favor that with safety of their consciences, they shall exercise their
ministry with that liberty, which is meet for those, who shall be tied in
all things to have especial regard to the peace of the Church and public
orders. Wherefore most christian Reader, when thou shall by these sevve, take
knowledge of these things, pray unto God for us, and as thy place is, solicit
and further so just a cause, to this end only, that Christ's kingdom may be
perfectly established, the consciences of all the godly quieted, and the happy
regiment of her majesty honored, with much peace joy and quietness at home.

FINIS.
A LEARNED DISCOVRSE, OF Ecclesiastical Government, proved by the word of
God.
THE Church of God is the house of God, Tim. 3. 15.
and therefore ought to be directed in all things, The definition of the
Church.
according to the order prescribed by the Householder himself: Which order is
not to be learned elsewhere, but in his Holy word. The first of these
principles or propositions, is the very word of the holy Ghost uttered by
Paul: The second follows necessarily of the first. The third is a manifest
truth believed of all them, that acknowledge the scripture of God, to be a
perfect rule of all our life, and able to make the man of God perfect, 2. Tim.
3. 17.
prepared to all good works.

This foundation being surely laid, What ministers are appointed in the
church.
against which the gates of hell cannot prevail: we ought diligently and
reverently to search the holy scriptures, that we may find what order our
savior Christ our only householder has set forth in them, by which he
would have his house or church to be directed in all things, appertaining to
the eternal salvation of us men, his unprofitable servants. Now we find in
the scriptures, that our savior Christ ascending into Heaven, was not
unmindful of his Church on earth, Ephesians. 4. 11.
but ordained an holy ministerye of men, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
to the building up of the body of Christ in unity of faith and knowledge. We
find also, that as the offices are diverse of this ministry: so they are not
general unto all the Church, but as order and necessitye require, for
executing of their office, distributed and limited unto certain places or
particular Churches, according to the division of Regions, Cities, and Towns.
For we read that Paul and Barnabas ordained at Derbe, Lystra, Iconium,
Antiochia, etc: Elders by election in every Church, Act. 14. 23.
with Prayer and fasting, and so commended them to the Lord, in whom they
believed. Titus. 1. 5.
Also Paul left Titus in the I Will of Creta, that he should ordain Elders in
every City, as he had appointed. Concerning the diverse offices of the
Ministry, we are taught by Saint Paul. Romans 12. 6. Also 1. Cor. 12. 28. and
Ephesians. 4. 11. Romans 12. 6. 1. Cor. 12. 28 Ephesians. 4. 11.
Where we read, that God has ordained in the ministry of his Church, these
several offices: Namely, Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Doctors,
Gouernoures and Deacons: Also men indewed with the gifts of healing, of powers
or miracles, and of diverse tongues.

Of these offices, some were temporal, serving only for the first planting
and foundation of the church among the Heathen: some are perpetual,
pertaining to the nourishing and building up the Church for ever. Of the former
sort were Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, men endued with the graces of
powers, of healings, and of diverse tongues. Of the latter kind are doctors,
Pastors, Governors and Deacons. The Apostles were ordained by God, and sent
forth immediately by Christ, having a general Commission to spread the Gospel
over all the world: Which work when they had accomplished, that office
ceased. Math. 28. 19.
Such were the 12. Apostles, Mark. 16. 25.
Paul and Barnabas, etc.

And for this cause the Apostles appointed Mathias in the place of Judas, Act.
1. 15.
according to the Scriptures, permitting nevertheless, the election unto God,
by casting of Lots, that the number might be full, for the first planting of
the Church. But when Herod had slain James the brother of John with the
sword, Act. 12. 2.
they chose no man to succeed in his place, because they had no warrant of
Gods word, but the holy ghost, as he saw it was expedient for the Church,
afterward separated Paul and Barnabas which lived at Antioche, Act. 13. 2.
as Prophets and Teachers, to the work whereto he had called them.

The Prophets were such as were endued with a singular gift of Revelation in
the interpretation of the Scriptures, 1. Cor. 12.
and applying them to the present use of the Church: Ephesians. 4. 11.
of whom some also did foreshewe of things to come, Acts. 11. 28* and 21. 10.
as Agabus. Also there were in every City that Prophesied to S. Paul, as he
passed by them, that bonds and afflictions were prepared for him at Jerusalem.
Acts. 20. 23
This office being in the number of them that were ordained for beautifying the
Gospel, in the first publishing thereof, it ceased with that singular and
extraordinary gift, to be an ordinarye function of the Church.

The Evangelists were such as were stirred up of God, to assist the Apostles in
their ministerye of general charge: in planting the Gospel, and confirming
the same by their preaching, but inferior in dignity to the Apostles. Acts. 8.
5.
Such was Philip that first preached the gospel in Samaria: Whither Peter and
John were sent by the Apostles, Act. 8. 14.
to confer unto them by prayer and imposition of hands, the visible Graces of
the holy Ghost, which Philip did not. The same Philip in Act. 21. Acts. 21. 8.
verse 8. is called an Evangelist. So is Timothy, 2. Timoth. 4. 5. 2. Tim. 2.
5. 5
Such was Titus, Silus, and many other. This office also with the order of the
Apostles is expired, and has no place. Likewise, as we do plainly see, that
the gifts of healing, of powers or miracles, and of diverse tongues, have long
since ceased to be in the Church: So the offices of them which were grounded
upon these gifts, must also cease and be determined. Therefore the Papists do
vainly retain the name and office of Exorcists, when they cannot cast out
devils: and extreme unction, when they cannot cure disseases: and to speak with
strange tongues, which they have not by inspiration, and that without any
interpretation, which Saint Paul expressly forbids. 1. Corin. 14.
There remains therefore of these before rehearsed, only in the Church,
these Ecclesiastical offices instituted of God: What offices remain in the
Church.
namely, Pastors, Doctors, Governors, and Deacons: By which the church of God
may, according to his word, be directed in all matters, which are commonly
called Ecclesiastical. And therefore as it is unlawful, so it is vnneedeful
for men, following the devises of their own brain, without the warrant of
Gods word, to institute and ordain any other offices or kinds of ministerye
beside these, appointed and approved by God himself, exercised in the Primitive
and pure church, until the mystery of iniquity working a way for Antichrists
pride and presumption, changed Gods ordinance, and brought in all kind of false
doctrine and confusion: and now again, restored in all rightly reformed
Churches, with such daily increase, and glory of the kingdom of Christ, and
suppression of the tyranny of Satan, that the only experience hereof, might
be a sufficient persuasion to us to leave this disordered state of ours,
wherein we have so long labored with so little profit: and to embrace that
most beautiful order of Ecclesiastical regiment, which God so manifestlye does
bless and prosper in our neighbors hands. But while we speak of
Ecclesiastical government, it may be thought of some, that we should
entreat first of the supreme authority of Christian Princes: Whereupon it
seems that all the regiment of the church depends, which is such a mist to
dazzle the eyes of ignorant persons, that they think all things in the
Ecclesiastical state, ought to be disposed by that only high authority and
absolute power of the Civil magistrate. Others there be, with more color of
reason, that refer only indifferent matters to the disposition of Princes:
but in determining indifferent matters, they show themselves not to be
indifferent Judges. For, whatsoever it shall please the Civil Magistrate, or
themselves, to call or count indifferent, it must be so holden of all men,
without any further enquiry. But of the supreme authority of christian
princes in Ecclesiastical causes, how far it exte^deth by the word of God:
we shall have better occasion to entreat hereafter, when we have described the
Ecclesiastical state. And that it is neither needful nor agreeable to good
order of teaching, to begin first therewith, it may be plain to every man by
this reason. The Church of God was perfect in all her regiment, before there
was any Christian Prince: yea, the Church of God may stand, and does stand
at this day in most blessed estate, where the Civil Magistrates, are not the
greatest favorers. By which, it is manifest, that the regiment and government
thereof, depends not upon the authority of Princes, but upon the ordinance
of God, who has most mercifully and wisely so established the same, that as
with the comfortable aid of Christian Magistrates, it may singulerlie flourish
and prosper, so without it, it may continue, and against the adversaries thereof
preuail. For the church craves help and defense of christian Princes, to
continue and go forward more peaceably and profitably, to the setting up of the
kingdom of Christ: but al her authority she receives immediately of God. Let us
therefore return to those offices of Ecclesiastical regiment, which now remain
to be exercised in the Church of God, being instituted and ordained by Christ
himself, which before we have proved out of the scriptures to be only these,
Doctors, Pastors, Governors and Deacons, whereof some appertain to doctrine,
Doctors.
some to government and discipline. The duty of doctors and Pastors, is chiefly
to teach and instruct the people of god, in all things that God has appointed
the^ to learn. The office of Elders and Deacons, is to provide that good order
and discipline be observed in the church. These offices being rightly
established and exercised in the Church, are able to make us meet together in
the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man
acording to doctrine. Ephesians. 4. 13.
And both for doctrine and order of government, to make us one body of
Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 27.
and members one of another. Now what should be desired more then this in the
church of God? or what wisdom of man can espy better then the spirit of God,
by what means this should be brought to effect which we do desire? what man's wit
ca^ devise better, then the wisdom of god has expressed? Or when God has
established an order, for the administration of his own house: what presu^ptio^
of man dare change it? But what dare not dust and ashes presu^e to do against
his maker, and that with greatest inconvenience, when with best pretenses of
correcting and reforming that, which they do think to be imperfect in his
doings? Example thereof we have most evident. That which is alleged as the
chief defense of this disordered state, which now remains in our church:
namely, that our fathers of old time were not content with the simple order
instituted by Christ, and established by his Apostles: but for better
governing of the Church, thought good some offices to ad thereto, some to take
away: some to alter and change: and in effect to peruerte and overthrow all
Christian and Ecclesiastical policy, which was builded upon the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20.
Jesus Christ being the cheeft corner stone. But how unhappy a success this
good intent, (as they call it) of theirs deserved to have of God, who always
abhors all good intentes of men, that are contrary to the good pleasure of
his will, expressed in his holy word, the age before us (alas) has felt,
the present time does plainly see, and we pray God the posterity, warned by
examples of their auncesters, may take heed of it. For where there are
specially two things propounded in the Church of God: Doctrine and
Discipline, as if a man would say, knowledge and practice, by which the glory
of God is sought and shines therein: In steed of true Doctrine, followed all
manner of corruptions of the same, both in the whole and in every part thereof,
as ignorance, heresies, idolatry, superstition, etc. The Discipline degenerated
unto intolerable tyranny and external domination, clean contrary to the
commandment of Christ, whereof insued all unbridled license of ungodly
living. To be short, the exchange of the ordinance of God and Christ, 2.
These. 2. 1^
brought in nothing else, but the Devil and Antichriste. Wherefore if we mind
such a reformation, as shall be acceptable to God, and profitable unto his
church: We must thoroughly be resolved to set up no new kind of ministerye,
of our own invention, neither for teaching, nor for discipline in the
Ecclesiastical state, but bring all things to that most perfect and absolute
order, which God himself has established by his word. And because all
offices of the Church are so lincked together, as the members of one body,
whereof Christ is the head: we will so describe one part, as the description
of the^ al may be sufficiently comprehended therein. As if a man would set forth
the manifold office and uses of the hand, he should declare what it does alone,
and what it does with the help of the other hand, or with the arm, with the
breast, with the knee, or with the foot, etc: what it ca^ do with diverse kinds
of tools, and what without al manner of instruments. This order we thought good
to observe, in describing the ministry of the Church, as by which, both the
distinction and co^municatio^ of al offices and services in the Church, might
most plainli appear. Otherwise we force not by what method, so the same truth
be plainly set forth by any man. And as we control not other men's methods by
ours, so we would not, that other men's manner of teaching should be prejudicial to
ours. This we say because of the^, which either for lack of wit, or through too
much wilfulnes, if they see any difference in the form and order of teaching of
diverse men, though in matter and substance they all agree, they exclaim there
is no unity, and therefore no truth among the^. Let us then proceed in our
purpose. The office of teaching is the chief and principal office that is in
the church. By that we be taught to know God, and how to serve him, and what
benefits to look for at his hand, without which knowledge, there ca^ be no
felicity but only destruction looked for, according to the saying of the wise
man: Where propheciyng fails, Prou. 29. 18.
there the people perish. The ministry is divided into two functio^s: they that
exercise the first are called Pastors: The office of a Doctor.
the other are called Doctors or Teachers. The office of a Doctor is to teach,
as the very name does declare, but yet every teacher is not me^t thereby, for
it appertains to Pastors also to teach: yet this latter is distinct from the
former. Almighty God, being careful that true doctrine should continue in his
church, from time to time most wisely provided, that certain me^ should be
appointed in every congregation, (who^ he has endued with gifts meet for the
same purpose) which should employe themselves, either wholly or principally to
the study of holy scriptures, therebye to learn to auouche the principles of
true religion, and to repress and beat down al false and strange opinions,
of which satan never cease to sow the seeds, but chiefly where this office
is not set up and mayntained according to Gods ordinance. These men must not
content themselves with contemplative knowledge: but, as by the grace of God
they excel other men in understanding: so they must diligently instruct other
me^ in the same learning, and openly confute al false Doctrine and herisie: and
especially they ought to take pain in the instruction of such men, as may be
made meet to serve in the Church: as Pastoures, and to succeed in their
place as Doctors. Their institution is set forth, 1. Corin. 12. 28. Also
Ephesians. 4. 11. In the former place the Apostle teaches, that they are the
ordinance of God: Says he, God has ordained in the Church: First Apostles,
Secondly Prophets, Thirdly Doctors, or Teachers. In the latter place he
testifies, Ephesians. 4. 11.
that our Savior Christ ascended on high, led cap^iuitie captive, and has
given gifts unto ^en, amongst which gifts, he accoun^eth the function of
Teachers. Who ^^oulde then refuse to embrace the ^rdinaunce of God? Who should
de^riue us of the free gift of Christ? The office of Doctors, is briefly
ex^ressed in Romans 12. 7. Romans 12. 7.
Let him that is Teacher, attend upon teaching, where ^lso it is distinguished
from other of^ces, and namely from the office of ^astors. For it follows
immediat^e, Romans 12. 8.
Let him that exhorts, (which is a ^rincipall part of a Pastors office, not
^ecessarily required in a Teacher) Be ^ligent in his exhortation. For the
office of Doctors, is only to teach true doctrine, and to confute all
heresies. and false opinions by the word of God, concerning all Articles and
prin^^ples of Christian religion, without applying their teaching to any
particular state of time, of persons or places. The example or practice of this
office, is set forth Acts. 13. 1. Where it is recorded by S. Luke, that Paul
and Barnabas, (before the holy Ghost commanded them to be separated for the
work whereunto he called them) were in the number of prophets and Doctors,
with Symeon Niger, Lucius of Syrene, and Manahen^ in the Church of Antiochia,
where they continued in that office a whol^ year, in which City the Disciples
were first called by the name of christians. Act. 11. 26. Acts. 11. 26.
Likewise, Apollo^ which was an eloquent man and mighty in the scriptures,
first at Ephesus but afterward being more perfectly instructed in the way of
God, by Aquila and Priscilla in the church of Acha^a, exercised the office of a
Teacher, with great profit of the^ which had believed, and to the great
confusion of the stiffnecked Jews, while he proved plainly by the scriptures,
that Jesus was the Christ. Act. 18. 28. Acts. 18. 28.
Therefore if we purpose to have the church to flourish in true knowledge, we
must provide that this office be restored, both in the universities, and in as
many other places as may be, as well for the better instruction of al men,
which are desirous to learn, as especially for the information of those,
which should occupye the ^oomes of Pastors, of which sort ^here ought to be a
great number always in good towardness to take charge of so many several
flocks, as must of necessity be, in so great a Church as this is.

Besides Doctors, Pastors and their Titles.
there must be Pa^tours ordained in every congregation, which have diverse
appellations ^n the scripture, as Ephesians. 4. They are ^alled by the name of
Pastors, because they ought to feed the several ^ocks of Gods sheep
committed to their charge. As it appears Act. 20 ^8. 1. Peter. 5. 2. Acts.
20. 28. 1. Pet. 5. 2.
They are called also Elders, not always in respect of their ^ge, but of their
office and gravity. ^or Timothy was but a young man, and yet had the office
of an Elder. This name was received of an an^ient custom of the people of
Is^aell, who used so to call those that were Rulers and Officers among them,
as it appears by many places both of the old and new Testament, Number. 11. 16.
but chiefly in Numb. 11. 16. Where God ordained seventy ancientes, to assist
Moses in his government, who were also endued at the same time, with the
spirit of prophecy, from which time it became an ordinary office, and name
of Governors in Israel. Wherein we have to note against the papists, that
the ministers of the Church, are never called in the new Testament, by the name
of sacrificing Priests, which were under the law, but often are called
Elders, of the similitude of those ancientes^ that governed the people of God
Whereas, if they had been appointed of God to be sacrificers, the similitude
and name of sacrificing priests, would a great deal better have agreed unto
them. But, whereas both these names were usual amongst the Jews, Iereus and
Presbyteroi, the one signifiyng sacrificers, and the other Elders: The spirit
of God does often call the ministers Elders, but evermore preciselye auoydeth
to name them sacrificers or priests (as we use the term): yea, though they
succeed them in one principal part of their office, that is to say in
teaching, as it ^s written. Mala. 2. 7.
The lips of the priest should preserve knowledge, and men shall seek the
law at his mouth. The cause whereof is evident to be this, that the
sacrificing priesthood of Aaron, Heb. 7. 12. 24
is wholly translated unto Christ, in whom only it rests, and passes from
him to none other. But by the name of Elders, the Pastors are called Act. 14.
23 Act. 14 23.
Where Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders by election in every congregation.
And Act. 20. 17. Act. 20. 17.
Paul sent for the Elders of Ephesus to Miletu^. Also ^he affirms those
Elders especially, 1. Tim. 5. 17.
which labor in preaching and doctrine, to be worthy of double honor. Which
place also testifies of an other kind of Elders, of whom we shall ^haue
occasion to speak more hereafter, Tit. 1. 5.
whose office consists only in government, and not in public teaching.
Moreover, he shows that he appointed Titus to ordain Eldersin every City,
and afterward describes what manner of men he would have to be chosen into
the office. Iam. 5. 14.
Also Saint James in Cap. 5. 14. wills that if any be sick, they should
call for the Elders of the Church, who being indewed with the gift of
healinge at that time, should pray for the diseased, and anoint him with oil,
and he should be restored to his health. Finally, Saint Peter, Pet. 5. 2.
as a fellow Elder exhorts the Elders to employe all their diligence to the
feeding of the flock of God.

An other name they have in the scripture, which is Superintendents, or
Overseers, because they ought to be vigilant and watchful, to ouersee the
flock, and every member thereof. Which name is never used in the scripture for
such Bishops, as claim and exercise dominion, and authority over whole
regions, and all the Pastors of the same, but only for those that be Pastors
of every several congregation, having no superiority ^uer their fellow
Pastors, but be al of equal dignity and authority. So are ^hey named Act. 20.
Act. 20. 17.
where S. Luke in ^he 17. verse. calls them Elders of the Church of Ephesus.
S. Paul in the 28. ^erse, calls the same overseers: say^ng, Take heed to
your selves and to the ^hole flock, over which the holy Ghost ^ath made you
overseers, to feed or go^erne the Church of God, which he has ^^rchased with
his own blood. In this ^lace all the three appellations con^urre: namely, of
overseers plaine^e, and Pastoures inclusiuely in the ^orde flock, and in the
word Pot^ainan, which signifies to feed or govern, as a Pastor does his
sheep. Where is to be noted, that Bishops or overseers of one City were
many, which plainelye argu^th that they were none such as now a days are
commonly called bishops, which can be but one in one whole Diocese, much less
many in one city. The same thing is to be observed, in the name of Bishops,
used by S. Paul. Phillip. 1. 1, where he and Timothy send salutations unto
the Bishops and Deacons of the church, Phillip. 1. 1.
which was in the City of Philippi: which bishops, were the Elders or pastors,
else would he not have saluted in special words, the Deacons which were in
inferior office, and omitted the Elders, which were of more excellent calling.
In the same manner of speaking, 1. Tim. 3. 2. 8.
he describes the qualities of those, which were to be chosen into the office
of the bishops and Deacons. Likewise unto Titus. 1. 5. He calls them Elders,
and immediately after, discribing the qualities of such, as were meet to be
ordained Elders, he calls them bishops: saying, For this cause did I leave
thee in Creta, Tit. 1. 5. 6. 7.
that thou should continue, to redress the things that remain: and that
thou should ordain Elders in every City, if any be unreprovable: the
husband of one wife, having faithful Children which are not accused of riot,
nor are disobedient. For a Bishop or over seer must be unreprovable, as the
Steward of God, not froward, etc. Finally, S. Peter, chapter. 5. 1. the place
before alleged, comprehends all the three names of Elders, Pastors, and
Bishops. 1. Pet. 5. 1.
The Elders (says he) which are among you, I beseech. The name of Pastor, is
understood by relation of the names of feeding, and the flock which he
uses, also by the name of Archipoyme^, which signifies the chief of Pastors,
which is our Savior Christ. The name of bishops or overseers is included in
the word Episcopountes, which signifies them which do carefully exercise the
office of bishops or overseers. His exhortation is this. The Elders which are
amongst you I beseech, 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3 4.
which am also a fellow Elder and a witness of the sufferinges of Christ, and
also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed: Feed the flock of God
which is committed unto you, so much as in you lies, carefully ouerseeing, not
by constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, not
as exercising Lordshippe over the heritage, but that you may be examples to the
flock, and when the chief Pastor shall appear, you shall receive an
incorruptible Crown of glory. S. Peter in this place reprooueth three notable
vices, which do great hurt among the ministers of the Church, if they be not
taken heed of: slouthfulnes in teaching: covetousness of lucre, and ambitious
desire of exercising Lordship: exhorting them to painful diligence, because
they were Bishops or Overseers: to a ready care, because they were Pastoures,
and therefore should labor for love of the flock, and not for lucre like
hirelinges: to modest humility, because their cheef dignity in that they were
Elders, was to excel in Godliness, that they might be an ensample to the
flock, which cannot be, except they submit themselves and their lives, to the
common rule of other men: which most excellent virtues if they embrace, they
should be sure to be plentifullye rewarded by him, who only deserves to
be called the chief of all Elders, Pastors, and Bishops: to whom only these
honorable names of Archipresbyter, Archiepiscopus, Archiepoimen, and such
like, do properly agree. For as the Apostle calls our Savior Christ in this
place, the chief Pastor: So in the second Chapter the 25. verse. he calls
him both the Pastor and Bishop of our souls. Wherefore as he only is our
chief Pastor or Archiepoimen, Pet. 2. 25.
so is he also our only Archbyshoppe: And that the name of Archipresbyter or
chief of Elders, pertayneth tono mortal man, may be seen by this place,
where Saint Peter that excellent and high Apostle, who if any man could,
might as well as any, have challenged that name, durst not call him self
other then Sunpresbyteros, a fellow Elder, no not when he sought authority
to him self, by that name to be bold, to exhort the Elders of the Church. But
least any man should think we stay only in names and terms, which are
not so greatly material: let him consider, that Saint Peter expressly
forbids the Elders, to exercise Lordship over their several congregations,
how much more over their fellow Elders. Which thing also our Savior Christ
precisely forbids, when there was a contention among his Apostles, about the
prymacie. Luke 22. 25.
The kings of the nations have dominion over them, and they that bear rule
over them are called gracious Lords or beneficial, but you shall not be so.
Also Math. 20. 25. Mat. 20: 25.
and Mark. 10. 41. upon the ambitious request of the sons of Zebedy, Mark.
10. 41.
and the disdain of the other against them. The Princes of the Gentiles,
exercise Lordship over them, and they that be great, exercise authority over
them, but it shall not be so amongst you, but who so will be great amongst you,
let him be your Minister, and he that will be first among you, let him be your
servant. The same thing he taught by his example, when he washed his Apostles
feet, John. 13. 13.
and commanded them to show the like humility one toward an other, which were
all brethren, which he their Lord and master showed toward them. Also Math.
23. 8. Mat. 23. 8.
etc. he forbids all ambitious Titles of Rabbi, Master, Father, etc. the
reason he adds, for you are all Brethren. For these names agree properly to
God and Christ. For the greatest dignity of an Ecclesiastical person is a
ministry, and not a lordship. S. Ioh. 3. John. 9.
also in his third epistle sharply reprooueth Diotrephes, because he was
Philoproteuon, one that desired the primacie in the Church. Howbeit in this
case we must take heed, that we spoil not the ministers of the church, of al
their lawful authority. For, although these testimonies of scripture,
directly condemn the authority of one Pastor above an other: yet neither do
they set every pastor at liberty by him self, to do what they list without
controlment: nor yet do take away the lawful authority he has over his
flock: but that imperious and pompeous dominion, which is meet for civil
magistrates, and great Potentates to exercise in worldly affairs: otherwise in
respect of their lawful authority, they are called by the Apostle in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 13. 7.
Guides, such as are appointed to ouersee the flock with authority, and unto
them submission and obedience is commanded in the same Chapter, verse 17.
Other names are applied to them in the Scripture, but they be for the most
part more general, pertaining to all kind of Teachers in the Church of GOD,
both in the time of the Law and of the Gospel, as Seers, Prophets, Watchmen,
Angels, Laborers, Builders, Stewardes, and such like: all which with many
other, serve to express some part of their office, as their knowledge, their
diligence, their authority, their faithfulness, their discretion: also the
necessity of them, the commodity that comes by them etc. But concerning the
names of Pastors, as they are a special office in the Church, this may
suffice. But for as much as we have undertaken, so to describe a Pastor and
and his office, as all other offices of the Church, may be described therewith:
we must not stay only in the name, but set forth also the whole substance
of the person. For which intent, it shall be necessary for us to consider a
Pastor or Bishop, these two ways: in the proper function of his Ministerye,
and in government with his Elders: By which we shall understand how this
Ministerye ought to be reformed and restored amongst us. As touching his
office, something has been said before generallye, under the description of
his several names. But now more particularlye, we must examine, what
belongs to his charge. The Pastor must be limited to one only congregation
of such competent number, as he, (if he be but one,) or if they be two, may be
sufficient, to the instruction of all and every member of the same Church. And
first, he may no more lawfully have charge of two or three churches, then he
can be possibly in diverse places. No more then a sheephearde of whom he
takes his name, may have the leading of sundry flocks in diverse places:
neither may he be absent from his charge, with better reason, then a shepherd
from his flock. As for substitutes or^ hyrelinges, will not be allowed in
this case: for Pastors are substitutes of God, and have an office of credit
committed unto them, therefore by no good reason may they make any substitutes
in their place, or commit their charge unto an other. The law of a man grounded
upon good reason, allows not substitutes of substitutes: nor committing over
of an office of credit in temporal matters. How shall God almighty then take
it in good part, when the flock of Christ, which he has purchased with his
own blood, shall be so greatly neglected, to the endaungering of their
everlasting salvation? Therefore the ordinance of God is, that the Pastor
should attend unto his peculiar flock. 1. Pet. 5.
That Elders should be ordained in every City, Tit. 1. 5.
Town and other places. Tit. 1. 5. Tit. 1. 5.
and Act: 14. 23. The Apostles ordained Elders in ^uery Church of Derbe, Acts.
14. 23
Lystra, Iconi^m and Tichia, and all the Congrega^^ons about.

Secondly, the office of Pastors is, ^ot only to teach the same truth in their
several flocks, but also to ap^ye it to the time and persons, of ^home they
have charge, with ex^ortation and reprehension: with ^onsolation of the
afflicted, and threat ^ing of the obstinate etc. This in ^we words is set
forth by S. Paul ^^eaking of the diverse Gifts of God (...) his Church, Romans
12. 7. 8.
he says: Whether it ^^e he that teaches, in his Doctrine, (...) he that
exhorts, in his exhortati^^. The Doctor therefore teaches without
exhortation. The Pastor tea^heth and exhorts withal. More (...) larg he
sets forth the same offi^^ in his exhortation unto the Past^rs of Ephesus,
willing them to follow ^^s example, Acts. 20.
who supplied that of^^ce, until they were able to succeed (...) his Place.
Also very briefly and yet fully, he describes the same unto Timothy, 2. Tim.
3. 16. 17.
showing first that al his foundation must be out of the scriptures, which were
sufficient for all parts o^ his charge, and then most earnestly commands
him to practice the same with all diligence: his words are these, 2. Tim. 4.
1. 2*
All Scripture is inspired of GOD, and profitable for Doctrine, for
exhortation, for reformation and for instruction, which is in righteousness,
tha^ the man of God may be prepared to a^ good works: Therefore I charge
thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom, preach the word, be
instan^ in season and out of season: improoue, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering and doctrine.

The first part therefore, and the cheifest of a Pastors office or duty is,
to feed with wholesome doctrine, the flock that is committed to his charge,
and therefore Saint Paul^ describing what manner of men are meet for that
charge unto Timothy, requires that a Bishop or Pastor be apt or able to
teach: 1. Tim. 3. 2.
for if a man have never so much knoweledge, and be not apt or able to teach,
he ought by no means to be admitted unto this vocation. And unto Titus writing
Chap. 1. verse 9. he requires that he be such a one as holds fast the
faithful word, Tit. 2. 9.
according to Doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with wholesome
Doctrine, and improoue them that say against it. Whereupon it follows
necessarily, that whosoever is himself ignorant in the knowledge of Gods
word, and therefore unable either to exhort with wholesome doctrine, or to
confute them that gainsay it, is altogether unmeet for the office of a Pastor
or bishop. Wherefore if ever we mind such a reformation, as God shall thereby
be glorified, and his Church edifyed, we must utterly remove all the
unlearned pastors, as men by no means to be tolerated to have any charge over
the lords flok: and also provide that herafter none be received into that
office, but such as are sufficient for their knowledge and ability, in
teaching to take so weighty a charge in hand. What man having but one hundredth
sheep, would make such a man shepherd or ouerseer over them, as were a
natural Idiott, or otherwise altogether unskillful or unable to perform
those things that belong to a shepherd? If no man have so little care of
brute beasts: What brutishe negligence is it to commit the people of God,
redeemed with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, to such unskillful and
insufficient Pastors, as neither them selves know the way of salvation,
neither are able to lead other unto it, whereof they are ignorant them selves?
If there be no way of salvation but by faith, Romans 10. 14.
and none can believe but such as hear the word of God preached: O Lord how
miserable is the state of many flocks in this land, who either seldom or
never hear the word of God truly preached, and therefore know not how to
believe that they might be saved.

But here it will be answered, that, as it is a thing greatly to be desired:
To it is altogether impossible to provide the Church of so many learned
Pastors, as should take charge of every several congregation. But hereto we
reply, that it is a thing necessarily required at our hands by God almighty,
and therefore we must object no impossibility, especially when our own
negligence, is the cause of all the difficulty, or if you will so call it,
impossibility. We confess it will be hard at the first, but we must do our
endeavor, and commit the success unto God, and there is no doubt but in time
it will grow to an happy end. But when we shall be altogether careless, as we
have been of long time, and that is worse, not acknowledging any default in
this behalf, (as there be that do not): and that is most of all, mayntaining
such lets and hinderaunces as be continual nurseies of ignorance and
ignorant pastors: We may be ashamed to allege that difficulty, for which none
are to be blamed but we our selves. We may be ashamed, now that our church has
had rest and peace, with free preaching of the gospel this 25. or 26. years,
under the protection of our most gracious Queen, to be so unfurnished of
learned Pastors as we are: whereas, if that diligence had been used of all
parts, as might and should have been employed of all them, that unfeignedly
seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, almost in half the time,
this necessity might have been well supplied. If we seek experience, what
diligent and careful provision is able to do with the blessing of God: look
to our neighbors and brethren in Christ, of France, who although they never
enjoyed one day of such peace, as we have don so many years: Yet how
plentifully they are furnished withal kinds of Ecclesiastical ministers, and
namely with Godly and learned pastors, it would rejoice any Christian heart to
behold in them, and lament to see the lack in us. But ^s for those that
acknowledge no de^ect in our Church, through the great multitude of ignorant
Pastors, We had rather at this time pray to God ^o lighten their blindenes,
then by any long discourse, to discover their palpable darkness. Would to God
there were not more difficulty in reforming them that maintain such
inconveniences, as except they be taken away, we shall never be disburdened of
the cankers of the church, those unlearned ministers. For while Nonresidents
and Pluralities be retained, we shall never want unlearned Curates, that for
small stipendes will supply the absence of Pluralities and Nonresidentes:
Which gross corruptions of pastoral office, as they may have some honest
pretense, so can they have no better pretense, neither are they retained with
a better conscience, then the Priests in our Savior Christ's time, suffered
the exchaungers of money, Grasyers and Pulterers to make a Burse or shambles,
and a Pultrie, yea, a den of thieves of the Temple of God, which was
appointed to be a house of prayer to all nations. Math. 21. 22.
Math. 21. 12. Mark. 11. 15. John. 2. 14. But especially, Mark. 11. 15.
while the whole office of a Pastor, John. 2. 14.
shall be thought to consist in reading only a prescript number of Psalms and
chapters of the scriptures, with other appointed forms of prayer: and that he
may be allowed as a sufficient Pastor which does the things, which a Child
of ten years old may do as well as he, so long shall we never lack
unlearned Pastors, ignorant and ungodly people: Symonicall and sacrilegious
patrones: So long the building of Gods Church, shall go but slowly forward,
beside other superstitious fantasies, mayntained in the peoples hearts, which
for shortness we omit to speak off. What though some say formal reading
might be borne withal for a time, until the Church might be provided of
sufficient Pastors, which yet is not granted: shall it therefore continue
always to the perpetual decay of knowledge, and hurt of the Church of God?
What greater discouragement is there unto Students then to see the rewards of
learning, bestowed as commonly upon the ignorant as upon the learned? What
encouragement is it to idleness and slothfulness, in them that be already
in that vocation, to behold them that take no pain, to live in wealth and
ease, without punishment of their negligence?

But here again it will be objected, because there are not liuinges able to
maintain all learned Pastors, we must be enforced to admit many ignorant
ministers. But again we answer, it is our part, not only to provide learned
Pastors: but also liuinges sufficient to maintain them, upon the necessity
of Gods commandment. Gal. 6. 6.
Let him that is instructed in the word (says Saint Paul) minister to him, 1.
Cor. 9. 7.
that does instruct him in all good things. Be not deceived for God is not
mocked. Gal. 6. 6. 7.
By which saying the Apostle confuteth all vain excuses, which many are wont
to allege, why they would contribute nothing to the maintenance of their
Pastors: al which he affirms to be vain, because they have to do with God,
and not with men only: For here is not regarded the living of a man, but how
much they esteem Christ and the Gospel of God. Therefore except we will mock
God to his face, Let us object nothing to testify such shameful ingratitude,
that we would doubt, how they should be provided of bodily food, of whom we
receive the food of our souls, as though we could not afford them an earthely
recompense, of whom we receive heaunely benefits. If nothing had been before
time allotted, toward the living of the Pastors; Yet were we bound in pain
of damnation, to provide sufficient for them; and now there is somewhat
toward a living where there is least, and in all places sufficient, if it
were well disposed: Why should we object necessity through lack of ^iuinges to
retain idols in steed of true Pastors? Look once again into France (for
examples move much) and behold the Churches there impouerished, and spoiled
with long wars, persecution and unquietness. They have neither Byshoppricks,
Deaneries, Prebends nor benefices to bestow on their Pastors, and yet minister
unto them all things necessary for an honest sober life: And shall we that
have all this while lived in peace, and prosperity, under a godly and
religious Princess, having all these helps, think it is impossible, by
disposition of godly and wise governors, to appoint a sufficient portion for
so many learned Pastors as are necessary for our Churches? There is none
excuse therefore to be admitted, but that we must endeavor to the uttermost of
our power that every several congregation, Church or parrishe be provided of a
learned Pastor. For unskillful sheepheardes have been to long thrust upon us,
to the great dishonor of God and defacing of the Gospel of Christ. We have
hitherto taken upon us without warraunt of Gods word, to allow such for
Pastors of men's souls, whom no careful owner of Cattle, would make
ouerseer of his sheep bodies. Which thing almightye God has always
detested, and signified his mislyking by diverse testimonies, both of the old
and new Testament. Therefore he says by the Prophet Esaye, complaining of
the unlearned Pastors of Israel, which was the only cause of their
affliction and miseries. Their watchmen are all blind, they have no knowledge,
Esai. 56. 10. 11. 12.
they cannot bark, they lie and sleep and delight in sleeping, and these
greedy dogs can never have enough, and these sheepheardes cannot
understand, for they all look to their own way, every one for his advantage
and for his own purpose. Come I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves
with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as, this day, and much more
abundant. If the Prophet had lived in these our days, might he not have spoken
the same more truly of many Shiers in England? We see therefore that blind
watchmen, and ignorant dumb Dogs, and idle greedy Curres and unlearned
sheepheardes that serve for nothing, but to fill their own purses, or their
paunches, by the testimony of God his spirit, are denied to be meet Pastors
of the people of God. The prophet Ezechiell also inueigheth at large, against
the vnfeeding sheepheardes of Israel: Eze. 34. 2. 3. 4
saying (Woe) be unto the sheepheardes of Israel which feed them selves:
should not the sheepeheardes feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat and you cloth
you with the wool: ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the sheep.
The weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye not healed, neither
have ye bound up the broken, nor brought again that which was driven away,
neither have ye sought that which was lost, etc. throughout the whole Chapter.
When feeding of Gods sheep is a matter of so great importance, and consists
of so many parts, which the Prophet has here described, how should we admit
them whom God rejects? which being ignorant and unlearned, know nothing at
all, and therefore nothing can do that appertains to this charge, or any part
thereof. Undoubtedly the retaining of such, is a manifest token of the
vengeance of God against us, for so he threatens by the Prophet Zachary: Zac.
15. 16. 16
his words are these. And the Lord said unto me: Take to thee yet the
Instruments of a foolish Shepherd, for lo, I will raise up a Sheapheard in
the Land, which shall not look for the thing that is lost, nor seek the
tender Lambs, nor heal that is hurt: nor feed that which stands up, but he
shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their hooues in pieces. O Idol
sheaphearde that leaves the flock, the Sword shall be upon his arm, and
upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall
be utterly darkened.

Now, seeing we are taught by these words of the Lord God, that it is a great
and horrible plague, to have the church of God encumbred with such foolish and
Idol Sheapheards: Let us study to remove such plagues from the flock of
Christ, whose arms are clean dried up that they have no force, and their
eyes utterly darkened, that they have no skill, so that they are not able to
perform those duties, which pertain to a wise and faithful Sheaphearde,
except we will betraye the Sheep of Christ, into the mouths of ravenous
Wolves, and specially into the teethe of that great ramping Lion the devil,
1. Pet. 1. 8.
who never cease going about to seek whom he may devour for his pray.
For what do these readinge Ministers differ from those Idol Sheapheards,
which God in his vengeance threatens to send for the ingratitude of the
people?

It will be answered (no doubt) that to supply their ignorance, there are added
to their appointed service, many Godly and learned homilies, which if they
read with their service, there is not so great need of Preaching, and
interpretation of the scriptures. We will derogate nothing here from the
dignity of those homilies: we will not accuse here the insensible reading of
unlearned ministers, neither yet the vnreuerent contempt of the ignorant
hearers; but, which all godly and wise men must needs confess, those
exhortations that are not applied, to the proper circumstances of times,
places, persons and occasions, are of small power to persuade any man, and
least of all the ignorant people, Let long experience the Mystresse of fools
teach us, if knowledge the instructor of wise men cannot move us. How many
papists converted? How many ignorant instructed? How many wicked reformed, are
ye able to show by this ignorant and unlearned ministry, with all the helps
of reading of for^all prayers and homilies, without ^eaching and applying the
Scrip^^res to the proper circumstaunces before rehearsed? Again, who sees ^ot
but he that is so blind, that he ^ill see nothing, that these parts of ^true
Pastors duty, which both the ^rophetes, Ezechiel and Zachary re^earse,
namely, to strengthen the ^eake, to heal the sick, to bind the ^roken, to
seek the lost, to bring ^ome that is carried away, to cherish ^e young Lambs,
to feed the strong ^eepe. etc. cannot be performed of ^y man by such means as
these, but ^nely by such one, as is a Godly and ^arned shepherd. Wherefore,
these ^oore helps of prescript form of ^ading of prayers, of Homilies, and
^ch like, when they are alleged to maintain the ignorance of unskillful
^astors, are called no better, by the ^dgement of God, but the instru^entes of
foolish and idol sheap^eardes, which have a certain pre^^nce of pastoral
office, but in effect are altogether unmeet for the same. Even as Idiots and
Idolles are good for nothing, but able to do much hurt, concerning whom our
savior Christ pronounces this fearful sentence. Math. 15. 14.
If the blind lead the blind, they shall both fall into the pit. How long
therefore shall we suffer the blind to lead the blind, to the destruction of
both? Let us therefore now at the length, remove these blind guides, and place
in their steeds faithful overseers, that may lead the flock of Christ into the
way of salvation. The ministers of the church are the salt of the earth. Math.
5. 13.
If the salt be unsavory, wherewith shall it be seasoned, It is good for nothing
but to be cast out, and trodden down of men's feet. Let us not therefore seek
politic shifts to maintain the unsavory salt, which our Savior Christ
pronounces to be good for nothing but to be cast out.

By these and many other testimonies of the scripture, it is as clear as the
Sun at Noone days, that it is the office and duty of a Pastor, both to be
able and willing to teach his flock, and that no ignorant and unlearned person
is to be admitted to that charge, or retained, if he be ^rept in, no more
then a blind man is to be suffered in an office, which must be executed only
with the sight: or a Humbe Dog to give warning which cannot bark: or an Idol
to have the place of a man, or a fool of a wise man or a Wolf of a Sheapheard,
or darkness in steed of light, or Salt that is unsavory, to season withal.
But while we entreat of teaching, to be the duty of a pastor, we do not only
mean public preaching, when the congregation is assembled, but also private
exhortation, reprehe^sion, consolation, of every particular person within his
charge, so often as need shall require. And that this also is the duetye of a
faithful Bishop, S. Paul testifies, setting before the elders of the church,
of Ephesus the example of his diligence which he would have the^ to follow. Acts.
20. 18. 19. 20.
You know (says he) from the first day that I came into Asia, after what
manner I have bin with you at al seasons, serving the Lord withal modesty,
etc. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable, but have showed you, and
taught you, both openly, and throughout every house. By which it is manifest,
that the Pastor must not only teach al his flock openly: but also he must
instruct every family privately, wheresoever he shall see it to be needful
or expedient, which duty cannot be accomplished by a reading Minister. Also in
the 26. verse. of the same Chapter, he commends unto the Elders, a general
care of the whole flock. Acts. 20. 26.
Take heed to your selves (says he) and to the whole flock. Which care can
not be well, or at al undertaken, except they be diligent to teach, both al and
every one of their flock, as need shall require. Which thing also he wills
them once again to observe in his example, verse. 31. saying: Therefore watch
ye, Acts. 20. 31.
remembering that by the space of three years, I ceased not night and day,
exhorting every one of you. By these testimonies it is evident to see, what
diligence the holy Ghost requires of Pastors in teaching, both publicly and
privately: as well generallye all their flock, as particularlye every one of
them. He therefore that is unapt to execute this part of a Pastors duty, is
altogether unmeet, to whom governance of the flock of God, shoule be
committed. In temporal affairs, no man vvil commit the least charge that can
be, to such persons as he knows to be altogether unmeet, or unable to
answer unto the charge: And shall we continue as we have done hitherto, to
put the^ in trust with the greatest charge that can be, the salvation of so
many thousand souls redeemed with the blood of Christ, whom we know
certainly to be able to do, no part of a Pastors duty sufficiently? God
forbid that we should still continue, so lightly to esteem so waightye a
matter, as though we accounted the blood of Christ, by which we are sanctified,
to be profane, and would contumeliously withstand the spirit of God.

But necessity (you will answer) has no law. This necesity we have answered
before, to consist in 2. points: in lack of livings, and lack of learned men.
The first we have showed ought to be no let, no not of an hour, if the other
want, could so soon be supplied. And both must of necessity be provided
for in time, or else we testify before God and his holy Angels, that they
which neglect or with stand this provision, shall be guilty of the blood of all
them, that peris^e through the desaulte of teaching, in the whole realm. The
lack of livings may be supplied, either by restoring the sacriledges of Abbeys,
as Impropriations of benefices. etc. or by dividing the supersluities of some
places that have to much, unto them that have too little, or by any other
godly means, that may be thought meet to these godly and wise governors, that
by duty ought, and by authority may do it. The lack of learned preachers, must
be so far forth supplied, as it may presentlye, by encouraging and exhorting
so many as are able, to take that charge in hand, by ouerseeing the Readers and
scholars in divinity in the Universities, to do their duties, the one in
teaching purely, the other in learning diligently: by thrusting out these
unprofitable heads of Colleges, and other drone Bees, which either are unable
or unwilling to set forward the study of divinity in their several huoses, and
placing diligent and learned governors and students in their places, and by
other good means reforming vniuer sities, by erecting of doctors and teachers,
in as many places as may be: by co^pelling the unlearned ministers, in whom is
any towardnes to become scholars in divinity, with some allow aunce of living
if they be willing to study, or else to send the^ from whence they came, to
get their liuinges with sweat of their brows: and especially considering the
gretnes of the harvest and fewnes of the laborers, by praying earnestly the
Lord of the harvest in this great necessity of ours, Math. 9. 38.
to thrust forth laborers into his Harvest. And in the mean time till God
shall bless us with a sufficient number of learned pastors, to take some
extraordinary and temporal order for ouerseeing the Churches, that although
they can not be all sufficiently instructed and governed: yet so many shall
not be altogether destitute, of al knowledge and spiritual government, as there
are now in this most corrupt state of the Church, in which we have hitherto
continued. If any man think this is over hard to be brought to pass, let him
consider that there was never work of more difficulty, then to build up the
Church of God: so that the necessity and commodity of the work, should cause us
to stay nothing at the difficulty thereof. For with our faithful endeavor, we
shall not want the mighty assistance of God, who will bless our Godly labors,
with greater success, then we can look for. If God therefore will grant that
these and such like means may take place, by the high authority of our dread
sovereign the Queens Majesty, and continue this comfortable peace, which we
enjoy, under her most gracious government, we dare ieopard our lives, that in
less then half the time, that is already prosperously passed, of her
Majesty's most honorable and glorious reign, the necessity of learned
pastors shall be so well supplied, as we shall have no great cause to
complain for lack of them, if we may use like diligence to continue them: if
not, we will spend the rest of our life in mourning, and expectation of the
heavy vengeance of God, which must needs fall upon us, for this manifest
contempt of his express commandment, and neglect of increasing the glorious
kingdom of our Savior Christ. In the mean time, we may boldly say with the
Apostle. Act. 20. Acts. 20. 26. 27.
We testify unto you this day, that we are clean from the blood of you all,
for we have not failed to show you the whole Counsel of God, concerning the
regiment of his Church.

Hitherto we have somewhat at large set forth, the principal part of a
Pastors office, which is to preach the word of God, and to instruct the people
committed to his charge in the same. Here follows now in the second part of
his duty, which consists in right administration of the Sacraments of God.
For seeing it has pleased God to add such outward signs to be helps of our
infirmity, as seals for confirmation of his promises, uttered by his word
Romans 4. 11. He has appointed ministers of the same, Romans 4. 11.
to deliver them unto his people. Math. 28. 19. Math. 28. 19.
Luke. 22. 19. For no man may take upon him any office in the Church, Luke.
22. 19.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 3. 4. Heb. 3. 4.
Seeing therefore that God has given some to be Pastors in his Church.
Ephesians. 4. 11. Ephesians. 4. 11.
And it is the duty of Pastors to feed the flock of God committed to their
charge, with all manner of spiritual pasture of their souls, appointed by God.
1. Cor. 4. 1. 1. Cor. 4. 1.
And that the Sacraments are a part of this spiritual food, it is manifest
that it belongs to the duty of Pastors, to administer the holy Sacraments:
and that the Sacraments appertain to the doctrine and word of God, it is
evident, that whom God has instituted to be minister of the word, him also
has he made to be minister of the Sacraments: and as the Sacraments are
compared by the holy Ghost unto seals: and the word or promise of God unto
writings: so it appertains to him to deliver the seal, which delivers the
writings. For, as the seal has always relation unto the writings: so have
the Sacraments unto the word of God. By this it appears, that as it is the
duty of every Pastor to administer the Sacraments of Christ: so this
office appertains to none, but to those which are ministers of the word. Our
Savior Christ authorizing his Apostles to Baptize all Nations, says: Go ye
forth and teach all Nations, Math. 28. 19.
baptizing them in the name of the father, the son and the Ghost, teaching
them to observe all things, that I have commanded you. Likewise to the same
effect, Go ye forth into the whole world, Mark. 16. 15.
and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that shall believe and is
baptized shall be saved. etc. Also instituting his holy supper, he said:
Luke. 2^* 19.
Do this in remembrance of me. Which remembrance Saint Paul declares, that
it ought to be celebrated, by preaching of the Lords death. So often (says
he) as you shall eat of tbis Bread, 1. Cor. 24.
and drink of this Cup, you shall show forth the Lords death until he come.
By these testimonies it is evident, that the administration of the sacraments
ought to be committed to none, but unto such as are Preachers of the word,
that are able to teach them that they baptize, that are able to preach the
mystery of Christ's death to them, to whom they do deliver the outward sign
thereof. How intolerable an abuse then is it, of the sacraments of the Lord,
to commit the administration of them to those men, that are not able to
expound the mystery of them. And seeing the elements of the world, of which
the outward ^art of the sacraments is taken, be lead and beggarly of
themselves, except they be animated and enti^hed with the promise and word of
God, which is the life of the Sacraments: what can it be better then
^acriledge to separate the ministratition of preaching of the word from the
sacraments? And forasmuch as the spirit of God, compares the Sacraments to
seals that are added, for confirmation of writings; we know well that a
word or writing, may be auailable without a seal, but ^euer a seal without a
writing.

Therefore in this behalf we have ^ad great defaulte, so long time to ^ommit
the administration of the Sacraments to those men, who not only have been
known to be unable, but also have been forbidden to preach the word. And that
which is more strange, to be suffered in this clear light of the Gospel, to
permit the ministration of baptism, not only to ignorante men, but also to
women which have no voice to speak in the congregation. 1. Cor. 14. 34. 1.
Cor. 14. 34.
and 1. Tim. 2. 11. Tim. 2. 11.
and that in private places, but in case (they say) of necessity, as though
there were such necessity of the outward sign, when it cannot be ministered
according to the institution of Christ, which is nothing else but to affirm
with the Papists, that Sacraments confer grace of the work wrought: and that
the sacrament of baptism, is a sacrament of such necessity, that whosoever is
not dipped in water, must be eternally condemned. Which heretical opinion, as
we have hissed out in our profession and preaching, so is it a great shame for
us to maintain by such corrupt usage of Christ's holy sacraments. Let us
therefore retain this principle, that the administration of the sacraments is
a part of the pastors duty: for although the office of preaching be more
excellent, then of ministration of the sacraments, as S. Paul speaks
comparatively. Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach. 1. Cor. 1. 17. 1.
Cor. 1. 17.
Yet they are of such affinity, that the accessory cannot be separated from
the principal thereof. For where is no preacher of the word, there ought to be
no minister of the Sacraments. Furthermore, it pertains to the duty of the
pastor, to make prayers: as Act. 16. 16. Act. 16. 16.
not only private, as all men are bound to do, but also public prayers in
the name of the whole Church. Act. 6. 4. 1. Timot. 2. 1. being the mouth
thereof. Acts. 6. 4.
For whereas the spirit of God, Tim. 2. 1.
commands al things to be done in decent and comely order, 1. Cor. 14. 16.
and forbids all confusion and disorder. As it were great confusion and
vncomelines, for every man to make his several prayers in the public
assemblies: so is it orderly for one to pronounce the prayer in the name of the
rest, and the rest to pray with him in silence, and to answer Ame^. It is also
dece^t that he which is the shepherd, 1. Cor. 14 40.
should go before the sheep in prayer, and the sheep to follow him in lifting
up of their hearts in mutual consent. Moreover for as much as preaching and
administration of the sacraments, ought not to be used without public
prayers: as it is the Pastors office to preach, and minister the Sacraments:
so is it his duty also to go before his flock in public prayers.

But here we have to observe two things: the first, that as it pertains to
the Pastor to conceive public prayers: so it is the duty of the whole Church,
in the name of the whole Church, to join in heart with the pastor in the same
prayers, that they knowing and understanding what he has prayed, may at the
end give there consent by answering Amen. 1. Cor. 14. 16
Wherein their is great abuse in our Churches. For, as though it wear
notinough, to keep out preaching by long prescribed forms of prayer: these
prayers are so pronounced by the minister, that a great number, and some not of
the worst disposed people, thinck, it pertains not to them, to give ear or
consent of mind unto them. We speak not here of such insensible Readers, whose
voice either cannot be heard, or else cannot be understood, whereof there be
great numbers: nor of the unfit place prescribed for the ministers, standing at
prayer in the east end of the house, when the simple people shall stand
oftentimes 40. or 50. yards of in the west end: or of the confusion of voices
whilst all speak at once: besides scrines of roode-lofts, Organe lofts, Idol
cages, otherwise called Chauntrie Chappelles, and high pewes between them:
which although they do manifestly hinder edifycation, yet may they not be
removed in many places, for defacing the beauty of the material houses,
whereas S. Paul so much estemeth the building of gods spiritual house, that
he commands the glorious gifts of the holy Ghost to cease in the
congregation, 1. Cor. 14. 28.
when they do not help to edification. But we speak of this that a great
multitude think they have well served God: if they have been present at common
prayers, or any part of them, as they were wont to think in popery, although
they be never so vainly occupied in the Church, some in walking, some in
talking, in gathering of money, not only for the poor, but for other
contributions, etc. And they that think they do best, are occupied in their
private prayers, or in reading of books, while their minister pronounces
public prayers.

Thus as preaching is neglected, upon color of public prayers: So public
prayers by private exercises, are made altogether unprofitable to a great
number. For who knows the right use of public prayer, but they that are
taught by the word of God. Let us therefore establish public preaching, and
public prayers will follow of necessity. But if we continue to uphold
formal prayers, that preaching be neglected, it will come to pass, that
neither shall be regarded. For what did thrust out preaching from the Romish
Church, but long prescript forms of reading, of singing, of praying: so that
their ordinarye was enough, and to much to occupye the whole day, though there
were no sermon, whereas contrariwise there would be no ordinary public
prayer without preaching. Which terrible example of the practice of Satan in
the man of sin, should make us afraid to give any like occasion of such
inconvenience hereafter to come. For is not this opinion already grown into a
great many men's heads, that the service may not give place to a sermon, no
though the time be not sufficient for both? And are there not many that had much
rather hear a chaunted Mattens and Euensong, then a godly and learned sermon?
Yea they frequent the one, and refuse the other. Let Cathedral Churches, etc.
be an example, where you shall see a great number, that tarrye while the
service is song, but depart so soon as the Sermon begins.

While the Organes pipe, some are drawn with the sweetness of music to come
up, but while the preacher cries out, continue beneath and in laughter or
brawling, be louder then he oftentimes. So, that which was wont to be said of
the Mass, Missa non mordet, the mass was a gentle beast, and did bite no man,
and therefore was so well beloved of many, may rightly be verified of our
ordinary service. For therefore a great number can so well away with it,
because it does not sharply reprove them of their sins, nor disclose the
secreates of their hearts, but that they may continue still in all kind of
voluptuousnes, and al other kind of wickedness. Whereas by preaching, their
conscience is gauled, there wickedness and hipocrisy discovered, their damnation
threatened, they are called to repentance and forsaking of their pleasant
sins, and to holiness and innocence of life. So that if there be any spark
of the fear of God in them, hearing preaching, so often as they use to hear
service, they will fall down on their faces and worship God, acknowledging the
great power of God in his ministers. 1. Cor. 14. 15. 1. Cor. 14. 15
But that they cannot away with all, being like unto Felix the liefetenaunt of
the Romans in Iewrie: Who when he heard Paul a poor prisoner that stood
before him bound in chains, preaching of righteousness, of temperaunce, and of
the judgment to come, he was weary of him because he was a great oppressor,
and an intemperate person, and therefore feared the judgment of God for his
sin, which he purposed not to forsake. Such is the majesty of Gods word,
when it is preached, that either it boweth or breaks the wicked in pieces.
God grant therefore that in steed of ordinary forms of prayers, we may have
preaching in all places.

The second thing that we have to observe is this, that although we make it
the duty of the Pastor, to pray in the name of the whole congregation, yet we
do not so mean, but that the whole congregation with one heart, 1 Cor. 14. 15
and 26.
and with one voice may praise God, with singing of Psalms, all at once. For
this custom has continued in the church from the beginning, that the
congregation have praised God with Psalms singing altogether. And these three
parts of a pastors duty, to preach, to minister the sacraments, and to
pray, are so necessarilye required of him in the word of God, as no man may
rightly execute the office of a Pastor, but he that performs al these, each
one in their due time. And to this part of prayer, may be referred the
blessing of marriages, not of necessity, but of an ancient use of the Church.
Furthermore, in those things that are necessary parts of the Pastors
office, the Church has authority to dispose them. as touching the
circumstaunces, for order and comeliness sake: but cheefely for edification.
As the days and times of preaching and administering the Sacraments, the
places meet for the same, and for public prayers: also the form and manner of
using those things, so that all things be don comely and agreeably to order,
but especially that in all things, principal regard be had to edification,
which S. Paul so often and so precisely urges in the 14. chapter of the 1.
Cor. For therefore ought our assemblies and comminges together to serve, that
therefore we may be better, that we may be taught, that we may be edified. 1.
Cor. 11. 17. 1. Cor. 14. 23. 24. 25. 26. 31. 1. Cor. 11. 17. 1. Cor. 14. 23.
24. 25. 26. 31.
And therefore we have great marvel that some are so precise in urging
ceremonies, as many think much hindering edification, but as most men
confess, nothing profiting to edifycation, having always in their mouth, that
sentence of Saint Paul. 1. Corinthians. 14. 40. 1. Cor. 14. 40
Let all things be done decently, and according to an order, And do so
little remember that the Apostle in that long Chapter, labors altogether to
drive al things to edificatio^, or else to drive the^ out of the church. As he
says of him that has the gift of tongues, being of it self an excellent and
comely gift of the holy ghost, and being used orderly of one or two by
course, with an interpreter, might do much good in the Church.

But if there be none interpreter (says he) Let him hold his peace in the
congregation. 1. Cor. 14. 28. 1. Cor. 14. 28.
The uncomeliness that Saint Paul reproves, was, that women should preach in
the Church, as ver. 30. 35. The disorder, that those gifts which served least
for edifying, were preferred before them that served most for edifying, as
tongs before prophecy. By which it is evident that S. Paul's words are wrested
of some, clean contrary to his meaning, to make him a Patron of idle, if not
hurtful ceremonies, maintained more upon will then reason, or granted of Gods
word, under the color of order and decency, not only with neglect, but also
with great hinderance of Gods building, by spoiling the Church of so many
learned pastoures. There are besides these things, certain other matters: as
confirmation, Churching of women, burial of the dead, thought to belong to
the office of a Bishop or Pastor. Whereof the first two are mere devises
of men, and ought to have no place in the Church of Christ. The other, albeit
it be to be retained with a certain honestye, yet it is not to be tied to
the proper office of a Pastor. And as for Confirmation, it ought therefore to
be shut out, and have no place in the church of God, as well because it
displaced Catechizing, and brought in steed thereof vain toys, and
Childishe ceremonies to the great hurt of the Church; as for that also it
derogateth much from the dignitye of Baptism, the sacrament of the Lord, and
is extolled above it, being a devise of man, and is pretended to be a sign to
certify the Children of the favor and gracious goodness of GOD, toward
them, falsely grounded upon the example of the Apostles: Whereas the
ministration of baptism, is permitted to every hedge-priest, minister and
Deacon.

And as for Churching of Women, because it sauoureth of the Jewish
purification, and of Popish institution, it ought altogether to be omitted,
for it breeds and nourishes many superstitious opinions in the simple
peoples hearts: as, that the woman which has born a child, is unclean or
unholy: whereas the Apostle pronounces, that Godly women are sanctified and
saved by bearing of Children. 1. Timoth. 2. 15. 1. Tim. 2. 15.
that it is unlawful for her, for any necessity, to go out of her doors,
before she be Churched: that this churching is a necessary part of the
Pastors office, that she must wear a white rail over her head, when she
goes to Church by the Midwife, waighted Home with the Parish Clearke, with
diverse such like Bables, which in a well reformed Church, are not to be
suffered. As for the burial of the dead, because Satan took occasion upon
Ceremonies appointed thereunto, to sow the seed of many Herisies in the
Church, as prayers for the dead, oblations for the dead, Purgatory, etc. Also
many superstitions, as hallowing of Churcbyardes, distinction of Burialls, as
some in the Chauncel, some in the Church, and some in the Church-yardes: some
with more pomp, as singing, ringing, etc. some with less, burying toward the
East, lights and holy water bestowed upon the dead, etc. It is thought good,
to the best and right reformed churches, to burye their dead reverently,
without any ceremonies of praying or preaching at them, because experience has
taught them, what inconvenience may grow thereof* by example of that which has
bin before And as they are not to be excused, if any for small tri^^es only,
raise up h^t contentions: so they have much to answer before God, that suffer
the people of God to lack the only food of their souls for such humain
constitutions. But to conclude, it is the duty of every true Pastor, to observe
those things that are concluded by the lawful authority of the church,
concerning ceremonial matters, for order and comeliness sake, and for
edification, and not to control public order, Acts. 28. 29.
by his private judgment, but upon great and weighty causes. We have hitherto
entreated of the proper duty of a Pastor himself: now it follows, that we
likewise set forth his authority in common government with the Elders. But
least any man should mistake that, which we purpose to say of his authority,
we have need to express what we mean by this word authority. For even
those things that we have showed before to be the duetye of a Pastor, may
also be called his authority, as to preach and teach, wherein is included his
authority to forgive and retain sins: also his authority to minister the
Sacraments, and to do other things in the Church, which none may do but
he. But in this place, we understand authority, for power of government in
the Church. Whereof the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
that it is one of the graces and gifts of GOD necessary for the building of
his Church. This authority of regiment, we have declared that it ought not to
be a Lordly ruling, 1. Pet. 5. 3.
neither over their flock: Luke. 23. 26.
nor yet over their fellow servants and brethren: and least of all, that
they ought to have dominion or Lordship over the faith of the Church. 2. Cor.
1. 14.
In all these the man of sin has exalted him self, contrary to the word of
God: So that he would be head of all the Church, Hierarchia.
Bishop of all Bishops, and have authority to make nevve Articles of Faith.
Whose intolerable presumption, as we have long since banished out of this
Land: so we wish that no steps of such pride and arrogance, might be left
behind him: namely, that no elder or minister of the Church, should challendge
unto himself, or accept it, if it were offered unto him, any other authority,
then that is allowed by the spirit of God: but chiefly to beware that he vsurp
no authority which is forbidden by the word of God. For wherefore do we de^est
the Pope and his usurped supremacy, but bicau^se he arrogateth the same unto
himself, not only with out the warrant of Gods word, but also clean contrary
to the same? Now, if the same reasons and authorities that have banished the
Pope, do serve to condemn all other usurped authority, that is practiced in
the Church: Why should not all such usurped authority be banished as well as
the Pope? We can allege against the Pope and rightly, that which S. Ioh.
Baptist did answer to his disciples. No man can take unto himself any thing,
except it be given him from Heaven. Ioh. 3. 27. John. 3. 27.
And that saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews: Heb. 5. 4.
No man may take upon him any honor (in the church of God) but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron. Insomuch that Christ himself, did not give
himself to be an high Priest, but he that said unto him. Thou art my Son,
this day I have begotten thee. He says in another place, Philip. 2. 6.
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Now seeing these
rules are so general, that the Son of God him self, was not exempted from
them, but showed forth the decree, wherein he was authorized: By what rule ca^
any man retain that authority in the church of god, which is not called
thereto by the word of God? Likewise we can allege again, against the
supremacy of the Pope, to prove that Peter was not superior to the other
Apostles, that which our savior Christ says to his Apostles, Luke. 22. 26.
Luke 22. 26. and Mat. 20. 25. Mark. 10. 42. It shall not be so among you,
Math. 20. 25
but he that is greatest amongst you, Mark. 10. 42.
shall be as the youngest, and he that rules, as he that serves. And Mat. 23.
8. Math. 23. 8.
You have but one master, which is Christ, and all you are brethren. If these
places prove, that the Pope ought not to be above other ministers of the
church: Why do they not likewise prove, that the Ministers are equal among
themselves? And for the most part, all those arguments and authorities of
Scripture, that are used to confute the usurped authority of the pope, are of
as great force aganst all other usurped authorities of one pastor over an
other. Therefore while we entreat of the authority of the pastors, we must
take heed that we open not a window to popish tyranny, in steed of pastoral
authority, and that we enlarge not the bounds of authority, without the
bounds of the Scripture. Wherefore while we search the Scripture, the only
rule whereby the Church of God ought to be governed, we find that in regiment
and gouerna^ce of the church, the pastor, bishop or elder, has none authority
by himself, separated from other. For in the Church, there ought to be no
monarchy or sole absolute government, but that is referred peculiarly to our
savior Christ only, 2. Tim. 6. 7. Jude. 4. 2. Tim. 6. 15.
And that regimente, which he has left unto his Church, is a consent of his
household servant, to do all things according to his prescription, as he
witnesses, Math. 18. 19. Math. 18. 19.
If two of you consent upon earth upon any matter, what soever ye shall ask,
it shall be granted to you of my Father, which is in Heaven: For wheresoever
two or three be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Seeing therefore that our Savior Christ, has neither authorized nor
promised to bless any other form of regiment, then that which consists of
the consent, and gathering together of his Servants in his name: we hold us
content with this simplicity, and therefore we are bold to say, that the
authority of a Pastor in public Regiment or Discipline, separate from
others, is nothing at all.

Let us then see, what is his authority joined with others, and first, who are
so joined in Commission with him, that without their consent he can do
nothing. We say therefore, that the authority of Christ, is left unto his whole
Church, and so to every church, that none may challe^ge Episcopal or
Metropoliticall authority, as it is with us at this day over other, without
great tyranny and manifest injury. For, seeing our Savior Christ, promised
his presence and authority to every Church indifferentlye, Math. 18. 19. 20:
Math. 18. 19. 20.
None may challenge any such prerogative a^ore other: but as the Churches are
limited out for order and conueniency, so is every one of them of like
authority in it self: but because they make al but one church, and one body of
Christ, therefore there is but one authority in them, to determine of matters
concerning them all. By which there appears to be a double authority of the
Pastor: one with the several congregation, in which he is Pastor, the other
with the whole Synod or assembly, whereof he is a member, and both these
authorities, we find sufficientlye authorized in the Scripture, as shall
playn^lye appear in the several Discourses of them. First therefore, we will
speak of his authority in his several Church, in which he may do nothing
without the consent of the Church. And first, let us examine, whether this
authority be so diffused over the whole Church, that the hearing, trying and
determyning of all matters, pertayneth to the whole multitude, or to some
special chosen persons amongst them, meet for that purpose.

The authority is the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, granted unto the
Church: But because the judgment of the multitude is confuse, whereas God is
not the authoure of Confusion, but of order: and that we find in the word of
God, certain Officers appointed for gouernmente: we are bold to affirm,
that that charge belongs unto those that are such.

And that does S. Paul plainly declare, where he puts a difference of the
several offices of the Church, whereof he names Governors for one. 1. Cor.
28. 29. 1. Cor. 28. 29*
and Romans 12. 8. Romans ^2. 8.
Let him that rules do it with diligence. Therefore there ought to be in
every Church a Consistory or segnorye of Elders or governors, which ought to
have the hearing, examination and determining of all matters, pertaining to
Discipline and Government of that Congregation: which authority of theirs
nevertheless ought to be moderated, that their judgment may be rightly
accounted the judgment of the holy Church. Which thing consists in these two
points. First, that the Elders be elected and chosen by consent of the whole
Congregation, men of Godliness and Wisdom, in whom the whole Church
reposeth such confidence, that they commit unto them their authority, in
hearing and determining such matters, as without horrible confusion they cannot
perform themselves. And hereto also may be referred that, which is said of
Election of Pastors, that the Apostles Paul and Barnabas did ordain, by
Election of the congregation, Elders unto many Churches, Acts. 14. 23. Acts.
14. 23.
because, the name of Elders is common to both: to Pastors and Governors, and
is used in the Scripture to comprehend both at once, as it appears manifestly
by S. Paul. 1. Tim. 5. 7. 1. Tim. 5. 7.
Those Elders that govern well, are worthy of double honor, especially those
that labor in the word and doctrine. Of which testimony, we learn these
three things: First, that there be Elders in the Church, which meddle not with
teaching, but are occupied altogether in governing. Secondly, that the Elders,
which labor in teaching, otherwise called Pastors, are joined also in
government with them, which teach not. And thirdlye, that the name of Elder,
comprehends both sorts of Elders. And especially in the place before
alleged for election, there is great reason to lead us to think, that the
elders for government, are as well understood, as the other for doctrine, because
it is written in the same place, that after they had ordained them Elders in
every congregation by election, Acts. 14. 23.
as having set the Churches in perfect order (which could not be, except they
had established discipline as well as doctrine) they committed the^ to the
Lord, in whom they believed.

The second point for moderation of the elders authority, in such sort that
their sentence may be the sentence of the Church is this, that when the
co^sistory has traueled in examining of causes pertaining to Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and agreed what judgment ought to pass upon the matters, they
propound it to the whole multitude, that it may be confirmed by their consent.
Whereof S. Paul speaks, touching the execution of Excommunication (because the
fact was manifest) When you are gathered together with my spirit, ^. Cor. 5. 4.
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to deliver such a one unto Satan, Now therefore, to^ prove that there
ought to be a Consistory of elders in every Church, for governing of the same:
It is manifest by the commandment of our Savior Christ, touching him that
despises pryuate admonition: Math. 18. 17.
If he hear not them, tell the congregation, if he hear not the congregation,
let him be unto thee as an heathen and publicane. Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever you shall bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven. In which saying
of our Savior Christ, this word Congregation, is not so largely taken, as in
other places for the whole multitude, but for the chosen assembly of elders.
For our savior Christ, in that word alludeth unto the assembly of elders that
was among the Jews, which they called but corruptly of a greek word
Synedrion, which signifies a Counsel or Consistory, Sanedrin, which had the
hearing and determining of all difficult and weighty matters among the Jews,
the like whereof he willed to be established in his Church, for administration
of government. For, seeing it was first instituted by God for government of
his Church in the old law, as has been showed before out of Number. 11. 6.
Number. 11. 6.
although it was shamefully abused by the wicked Jews, our savior Christ
tra^slateth it into his Church also in the new Testament: and the name of
Elders, does most aptlye agree unto them that be governors in the Church
now, even as it did to the ancients of Israel: so that the Pastors seem to have
borrowed the name of Elders, specially in respect of their government. The
name of this consistory also in the new Testament, we find to be agreeable with
that of the Jews, whereof our savior Christ speaks when he says: Mat. 18.
Tell the congregation or assembly. S, Paul. 1. Tim. 4. 14. 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Despise not the gift which was given thee, thorough prophecy, with imposition
of hands of the Eldership, where the greek word is Presbyterion the assembly
or Consistorye of the Elders. Which word is used also by Saint Luke in his
Gospel, speaking of the consistory of the Jewish Elders. Luke 22. 66. Luke.
22. 66.
As soon as it was day, the whole Eldership or assembly of Elders came
together, both chief Priests and Scribes, and brought him into their
counsel. In which saying, their counsel Synedrion is called Presbyterion. Also
Saint Paul Act. 20. 5. Acts. 20. 5.
that he had been a persecutor of christians, takes witness of the high
priest and of the whole consistory of Elders, using the same word Presbyterion.
By which it is evident, that our savior Christ by this word Ecclesia in that
place, means a consistory or assemblye of Elders, whose authority he does
ratify with such power, that whatsoever is bound or loosed by them on earth,
in the fear of God, and with hearty prayer, the Lord will bring it to pass,
yea he him self will be in the midst of them, as President of their
counsel, to direct their consultations, to the glory of God, and the profit
of his own Church. Therefore in every Church, there ought to be a consistory
of Elders or Governors, which with the Pastor may take charge of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and good order to be observed in the church, to
the punishment of vice, and the advancement of true virtue. These, if they
govern well, as Saint Paul does testify, are worthy of double honor, both
that honor which is due to Godly men, and that which is due to good governors.

How necessary it is, The end of Discipline.
that Discipline should be in the Church, to keep men in awe from offending,
and to bring offenders to repentance, to avoid the infection of sin, within
the Church, and the reproach that grows by neglecting the punnishment of
sin, among them that are without the Church: We think it needless to stand
long in proouing, the matter of it self is so apparaunt, and has such
plentiful testimonies in the scripture. And especially let the reasons of
Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 5.
1. Cor. 5. and 2. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 2.
where he purposely entreats of ecclesiastical Discipline, be weighed. A
little leaven sowreth a whole lump of dowe. For infection; ye are puffed up
where ye should be sad and ashamed. For ignominy: We deliver him to Satan,
to the destruction of his flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of
the Lord: For repentance, public reprehension of many, which being Godly
refuse to eat with such one, is profitable both to drive him self to
repentance, and to keep other in order for fear of like punishment. Where
this Discipline is not, no marvel if all wickedness ouerflowe, to the
dishonor of God, and of his Gospel, to the destruction of many and corrupting
of more, to the grief of the Godly, offense of the weak, encouragement of the
wicked, and rejoicing of the adversary.

Let us therefore proceed, in setting forth the authority of the Pastor
with the Elders, which is; first to punish offenders, and bring them to
repentance: or else to cut them clean from the church, as rotten and infected
members. But here we have to enquire, for what offenses the Church may
proceed to so sharp a punishment. For God forbid that the swoorde of
excommunication, should be drawn out to cut off the members of our body, for
every small disease that is in them, but only when the disease is deadlye, and
the member rotted thereby. For, we ought as hardly to be brought to
excommunicate any of our brethren: as we would have a leg or an arm, cut
off from our body. Therefore the popish tyranny is detestable, which thundereth
out their pretended excommunication for every trifle: yea such as are no
sins; as non payment of a little money, where it is not deteyned of fraud:
non appearance, where men otherwise have necessary impediments, as though it
were but a small matter, to put men out of the protection of Christ, and to
deliver them unto the tyranny of Satan: to deprive them of eternal
salvation, and to cast them into everlasting damnation. Least therefore we
should use such unreasonable rigor, the spirit of God teaches us, what manner
of sins deserve excommunication. 1. Cor. 5. 11. 1. Cor. 5. 11.
If any that is called a brother, be an whooremonger, or a covetous person, or
an idolater, or a slaunderer, or a drunckard, or an extorcioner, with such a
one see that ye eat not. These offenses therefore and such like, are to be
punnished by excommunication. Also an obstinate Heretic, that will not repent
by admonition, is worthy of this punishment. Tit. 3. 10. Tit. 3. 10.
2. Tim. 2. 16. 1. Tim. 1. 20. 2. Ioh. 10. and 11. 2. Tim. 2. 16.
And not only these great and notorious sins, 1. Tim 1. 20.
deserve this correction, 2. Ioh. 10. and 11.
but also lesser crimes, increased with contumacie and contempt of the Churches
admonition, become worthy of the same castigation. Therefore says our savior
Christ of private offenses, Math. 18. 15. 16. etc. Math. 18. 15. 16. etc.
If thy brother sin against thee, go and reprove him between him and thee
alone: if he hear thee thou have won thy brother: but if he hear thee not,
take with thee one or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every
word may stand: if he disobey them, then tell the Church, if he disobey the
Church, then let him be to thee as an heathen or Publicane. The Apostle Saint
Paul likewise. 2. These. 3. 6. ^ These. 3. 6.
etc. concerning those that were idle, and walked disorderlye, will have
all-gentle means used to bring them to labor and good order, but if they
would not be reformed for any admonition, he commands them to be
separated by excommunication. But it may be objected that hitherto appears
not so great use of this Consistorye, why it should be thought necessary for
excommunication: Neither does Saint Paul make mention of it in all places,
where he speaks of excommunication. We answer, that although the simple
institution of Christ, and approbation of the holy Ghost, should suffice us to
think it necessary: yet there are many necessary uses thereof to be
alleged. For whereas our Savior Christ commands in private offenses, the
matter to be brought before the congregation, except you understand thereby,
the congregation or assemblye of Elders: there shall follow horrible confusion
and disorder thereby. For, admit a man might accuse his brother unto the whole
multitude, yet how should the whole multitude admonish him, and exhort him to
repentance? Again, of these notorious offenses that are worthy of
excommunication, some are openly known, so that they need no trial, as the
adultery of that Corinthian. 1. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. ^.
some are in controversy and are to be examined, concerning which, Saint Paul
warns Timothy, that he admit not any accusation against an Elder, but under
two or three witnesses: and charge him before GOD, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his elect Aungelles, that he do nothing through rash, or over
hasty judgment: and that he do all things without partiality or affection
unto parties. 1. Timothy 5. cap. 19. 1. Tim. 5. 19 and 21.
and twenty one verse. We see here manyfestly a necessary use of the
Eldership. For how is it possible for the whole Church, to examine and
discuss such difficult controversies? Therefore it behooves the Church, to
have such ordinary Delegates, as may and ought to apply their diligence, vuto
such matters. Moreover, to ouersee the Church for matters pertaining to order
and Discipline: How can the multitude ouersee themselves, or the Pastors
only, which have a principal care of Doctrine, to atte^d upon? And to the
second part of the objection, that S. Paul does make mention of the Eldership
or Consistory of Elders in all places, where he speaks of Excommunication:
we answer, that it is not necessary he should so do. For, whereas our
savior Christ has prescribed a form thereof, that he which obeys not the
Congregation should be excommunicated: and that in other places, he makes
sufficient mention, both of the Elders and of the assembly, we ought to
understand, that his purpose is, to observe that form to the uttermost. And
although he do not always make express mention thereof, yet must we not
imagine, that he me^t to alter or change the same. In the first to the
Corinthians the fifth verse, It is manifest, that albeit he^ desired nothing
more, then that the incestuous Adulterer should be excommunicated, and
therefore determined of him for his own part, as absent in body, but present
in spirit: yet he acknowledges that he could not be excommunicated, without
the consent of the Congregation, being gathered together in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 1. Cor. 5. 4.
Likewise when he should be received again, he was to be pardoned, not only
by him, but by them also. 2. Cor. 1. 10. 2. Cor. 1. 10.
And therefore, if so high an Apostle, could not by his private authority
excommunicate that Corinthian: we must not think, that by his private
authority but by consent of the Church of Ephesus, he excommunicated Himmineus
and Alexander, 1. Tim. 2. 20.
although he do not make express mention of the consent of the church in that
place. 1. Tim. 2. 20. 1. Tim. 2. 20.
So likewise where he speaks to Timothy in the singular number, concerning
the hearing and determining of matters pertaining to Discipline, we ought to
acknowledge, that he teaches in Timothy his person, the duty of elders, and
never meant to give Timothy an absolute or singular authority, to be judge in
these matters, without consent of the Eldership, whereof he makes mention but
a little before. To conclude therefore, the Pastor with advise and consent of
the Elders, has authority to hear and examine matters, pertaining to
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and as the cause requires to excommunicate
offenders, and upon their repentance and amendment, to receive them again into
the bosom of the church, approved by the word of God. Insteede of which,
Antichrist has set up a tyrannical jurisdiction of one Bishop to be judge of
excommunication, which is practiced neither for causes sufficient, nor by
sufficient authority, in so much as it has been already testified by the
scripture, that the power of excommunication, is in no one man, no not in an
Apostle, but is common to the whole church, and ought to be executed by lawful
delegats of the church also. But so much that usurped authority presumes,
that the bishop as an absolute owner thereof, commiteth it over to his chancellor
or Archdeaco^, the Archdeacon to his Official, and he to his register, and he
again to his substitute, and his substitute to his servants, man or boy as it
happens: in so much that a learned preacher, may be excommunicated by a
folish boy. If this matter seem not to require speedy reformation, god has
blinded our eyes that we can not see the clear light of the sun shining in our
faces. For if we look to banish the tyranny of the Pope out of all men's hearts,
we must utterly remove al his detestable enormities out of the Realm, as it
was wont to be said in the common prayers of the Church in the time of K. Henry
and Edward, whereas now by reteining still, all the detestable enormities of his
prerogative and faculties, and whole course of his Canon law, the papacy is
not so much banished in name, as translated in deed from the Sea of Rome, to
the Sea of Caunterbury, under the shadow of the Princes supremacy, with as
heinous injury and contumely, of the lawful authority and godly supremacy of
the Prince, as joined with the great dishonor of God, and the miserable
disorder of the Church. But we mean not in this place to prosecute our just
complaints, nor to inueigh against the abuse of these things, with such
vehemency of words as the worthiness of the matters deserves: but only in
setting forth the plain truth, to give a glimpst by the way of the
contrary falshoode.

We must therefore return to the authority of the Pastor, which he has
joined with the Elders of the Church, whereof he is pastor. The Church has
always had great care for provision of the poor, by which compassion they
showed, that they were lively members of the body of Christ, and avoided great
reproach of them that were without. For what shame is it, for them that profess
to be all sons of one father, and therefore all brethren: yea that be members
all of one body, to suffer their brethren and fellow members, to lack
necessaries to sustain their temporal life: as though they that communicate in
all spiritual graces and blessings, were not worthy to take part of these
worldly benefits, at leastwyse so far forth as to supply their necessities?
Therefore our Savior Christ, always commends brotherly love among his
Disciples, to teach us how ready we ought to be, to distribute unto the
necessities of our brethren, which is a true testimony of our love declared by
his own example. For, although he were so poor, that he lived of the alms
and liberality of other men: yet of that which was more then served his own
necessity, he used to bestow upon the poor: as John. 13. 29. Ioh. 13. 29.
to teach them whom he has blessed with Temporal riches, which he
refused, to enrich us with heavenly treasures, that they of their
superfluity, would be content to give to the relief of their poor
brethren, which he did not neglect in his extreme poverty: To teach also them
that have but mean substance, that they ought not to be excused, but somewhat
to contribute unto the necessity of their poor brethren, when he that had
nothing at all but that which was given, even of that bestowed part. Therefore
the Apostles in the primitive Church, thought it to be expedient, for the
better providing for the poor, that certain men should be appointed of
approved Godliness and diligence, which should take the special charge of
the distribution unto the poor. Act. 6. Acts 6.
These men were called Deacons or ministers, because they did minister and
serve the poor in their necessities, and because the occasion of the
ordinance continues always (as our Savior Christ has said) we should
always have the poor amongst us, John. 12. 8. Ioh. 12. 8.
whereby GOD would exercise our charity. The office of Deacons also is
perpetual. Therefore the Apostle Saint Paul, prescribes what kind of men
are meet for that office. 1. Timothy. 3. 8. 1. Tim. 3. 8.
And in every well constituted Church, they were ordained accordingly: as
Phillip. 1. 1. Phil. ^. 1.
Also after the ordeyning of the seven Deacons, this office was divided into
diverse parts, as necessity showed diverse occasions. For some were appointed
for the collection and distribution of al^esse: as Romans 12. 8. and some for
attending upon the sick and impotent among the poor, Romans 12. 8.
as in the same place. Let him that distributeth, do it with simplicity, and
let him that shows mercy, do it with cheerfulness.

Which kind of Deacons. 1. Cor. 12. 28. 1. Cor. 12. 28.
are called helpers: and for the service of this office, were appointed diverse
old poor widows, who as they were maintained by the church: so they served
the church, attending upon the other poor, who being sick and impotent, had
need not only of things necessary, but also of service and attending. 1.
Timoth. 5. 5. 1. Tim. 5. 5.
These offices being instituted by the spirit of God, for the necessary use of
the Church, which use still continues, ought also to be retained among us. For
we see, for want of these offices, what great inconveniences are among us,
concerning the poor. For, although there be very good politic laws made for
provision of the pore: yet small relief comes thereby to the poor indeed: at
least wise many abuse the relief which they receive, which comes of this,
that there be not in every church or congregation, such Deacons as the holy
ghost has appointed, which should take a special care, and employ a great
diligence, for the provision of the poor: not only some, to gather and
distribute, but also to see it well employed on the poor, and to employ the
poor, that live of the alms of the church, to the relief of their fellow
poor, which are more impote^t the^ they, as it was used in the Primative
Church. And above all things, to beware of them that walk disorderlye, and
labor not if they be able. Of which kind of people, when there is so great
multitudes in this land, that they do even ouerflowe the Countries, and have
been known to be practizers of great matters against the state: It is
maruayle, that neither by politic, nor by ecclesiastical Law, they are
brought into order, and set to labor, or else (as Saint Paul
prescribes,) so that they should not eat, until they be willing to labor.
2. These. 3. 10.

But now, to return to the Election of Deacons. Concerning the form of choosing
of Deacons, we may read at large. Acts. 6. that they were chosen, by consent
of the whole Church, and had the approbation of the Apostles. And because
we may not think, there was any confusion in that blessed company, we
must needs confess, that which has been before declared, that there were
even in that assembly and first Church at Jerusalem, certain elders
appointed, which in the name and by the consent of the rest, had the
disposition of such matters, as appears by many places of the Acts of the
Apostles, where the Elders are named with the Apostles: As Acts 15. 4. 12.
etc. but especially concerning this matter of the distribution unto the poor,
we read, that when the Church of Antiochia, was so well disposed as to make a
collection to be sent unto the poor Brethren that dwelt in Jury, they sent
unto the Elders, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Acts. 11. Act. 11. 30.
30. By which it appearethe, that the Elders had the disposition and
appoynting of such as should destribute it unto the Congregation, which were
the Deacons. For it is agreeable to reason, that he that should do any
service in the name of all, should be chosen and approved by the consent of
all. For the Regiment of the church, as it ought to be furthest of from all
Tirannye: so ought it to be as far from Confusion and disorder. Tyranny is
avoided when no one man, (contrary to the ordinance of Christ) shall presume
to do any thing in the Church, without the advice and consent of others that
be Godly and wise, and authorized by the consent of the Church. Confusion is
prevented by the grave counsel, and orderlye assemblye of Elders, unto whom
the Church has committed her authority.

By this it may easily appear, what great defaulte there is in our Church,
where those that are said to be ordained Deacons, never purpose in their life
to execute any part of a Deacons office, neither are chosen for that end: but
only that within a short time after, they may be made Priests or ministers,
nothing in the world differing from the superstition of Popery: where the
office of Deacon was conferred only, as a step unto priesthood. As though it
were necessary, that every one which is ordained an Elder, should first be a
Deacon, and yet when he is made a Deacon, he is but an Idol, yea scarce an
Idol of a Deacon, having no resemblaunce at all unto a Deacon indeed, but that
he is a man. This profaning of Gods institution, God will not always suffer
unpunished, especially when it is not maintained of ignorance or infirmity,
but defended against knowledge, and upon wilfulness. Therefore, the Collectors
are more like to deacons a great deal, then those that the Bishops make
Deacons. For, first they have after a sort election of the Church, whereas the
other have, but the approbation of one man. And secondly, they gather and
distribute the common alms unto the poor, which the other never think of. But
yet we may not allow them for lawful Deacons indeed, because they are not
always endued with such qualities, as the Apostle requires. 1. Tim. 2. 1.
Tim. ^.
For they ought to be men of good estimation in the Church, full of the holy
Ghost, and of wisdom, that should be chosen, Acts. 6. For, as it is an office
of good credit, so ought the person to be of good reputation. Therefore says
S. Paul, that Those Deacons that Minister well, do get them selves a good
degree, 1. Tim. 3. 13.
and great liberty in the faith, which is in Christ Jesus. Insomuch that S.
Paul him self does salute in special words the Deacons, next to the Bishops
or overseers in the Church of Philipi. Phillip. 1. 1.
We read also, what worthy men were chosen to be the first Deacons; as
Stephen the first Martyr, and Philip, which afterward was an Evangelist, when
the Church was dispersed thoroughe the persecution raised about Stephen. So
that every ignoraunte contemptible person, is not to be allowed unto this
office: but as Godly, wise, and worshipful, as may conuenientlye be found
in the Congregation, may not think them selves too good to minister unto
Christ, in his members, and in the name of the Church. The Election also of
our Collectours, is too Profane for so holy an Office. We may read in the
Historye of the Acts: Acts. 6. Act. 6.
with what grauitye, reverence, and religiousnesse, the Apostles ordained
Deacons, with Prayer and Imposition of hands. For these and such like
causes, although the ordinarye Collectors have some resemblance, with the
Deaconship of the church: yet we cannot in all points allow them for
Deacons: whose office truly consists only in ministration unto the poor,
as we have showed, in that they be Deacons. We have declared before, that
there is a double authority of the Pastor, the one joined with the Elders of
the Church, whereof he is Pastor: the other with the Synod or holy
assembly, whereof he is a member.

Of the former we have entreated hitherto. Now it follows, that we speak
of the latter. There aryseth oftentimes in the Church, diverse Controuersyes,
which cannot be otherwise expressed, pertaining to the state of the whole
Church, then by a general assemblye of all the Pastoures of that Church,
which is called a Synod or general Counsel. Also there be diverse cases,
wherein the several Churches, are driven to pray the aid of the Synod,
where matters can not be determined among them selves. For this cause, the
Holy Ghost has ordained these Holy assembles, with promise, that they being
gathered together in the name of Christ, he him self will be among them.
With the Synod, the Pastor has authority to determine, concerning regiment
of the Church. Wherefore we have to enquire, of what persons a Synod does
consist: For which intent we find in the history of Act. 15. 6. that when a
cont^ouersie arose concerning the Ceremonies of the Law, whether they were to
be used, by those Christians that were converted of the Gentiles: The Apostles
and Elders came together to consider of this matter, and that the people was
not excluded, appears by the 12. verse, the whole multitude, being persuaded
by the arguments alleged by Peter, held their peace, and quietly heard
Paul and Barnabas, declare what signs and wonders, God had wrought by them
amongst the Gentiles. And least ye should understand the multitude in that
place, for the multitude of the Apostles, It follows in the 22. verse. Then
it pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to choose certain
men. etc. By which scripture we learn, that the Synod consists principally
of Pastors, Elders, Teachers, and men of wisdom, judgment and gravity, as
it were of necessary regents. For, although the whole multitude came together,
yet the Apostles and Elders came together to enquire, and consider of the
matter in controversy, the multitude heard, and for their better instruction
and modestye, submitted their consent, unto the determination of the Apostles
and Elders. All men's reasons were heard. For there was great disputation, but
the authority of Gods word prevailed, good order was observed. So, after the
matter was thoroughly discussed, by the godly arguments, alleged by Peter and
Barnabas, and Paul, the controversy was concluded by the sentence of James, to
whom that prerogative was granted, not of singular authority, but for orders
sake. And this place does admonish us, to entreat some what of the
preeminence of one Elder or pastor above the rest We confess that in every
assemblye or company, some one of necessity must have this prerogative, to
order and dispose the same with reason, or else great confusion is like to
follow. But this preeminence is only of order and not of authority, as to
propound matters to be decided, to gather the reasons and consent of the rest,
and so to conclude, etc. As we see in this place James did: of whom also we
read, that he had this preeminence. Act. 21. 18, Act. 21. 18.
etc. And we may gather the same. Gal. 2. 9. 12. ^al. 2. 9. 12.
Not that James had greater authority in his Apostleship, then Peter or Paul,
or John, or any other of the Apostles: But because he was chosen of the rest
to have prerogative of order, which some one must have in every assembly, and
such was the prerogative at the first, which was granted sometime to the
bishop of Rome, and sometime to some other bishops, to be president or
prolocutor in the general counsels, being chosen thereto for the time by
consent of the rest, as the prolocutor is chosen in our conuocatio^s, that are
called with parliaments. Therefore, as it were an absurd thing for our
prolocutor in our convocation, to take upon him to be a controller of the
whole synod, and to challenge that office to him and to his heirs for ever:
so unreasonable is the authority that the Pope claims over general counsels.
One therefore is to be chosen by consent, to be as it were the prolocutor or
moderator of order, but not of authority in every assembly, whose prerogative
must so be tempered, that in all things tirannie be avoided. Which we see by
experience easily crepeth in upon proud natures, to whom if you grant an
inch, they will be ready to take an ell, according to the Proverb. But let us
return to the authority of the sinode which consists in deciding and
determining such matters as cannot otherwise in particular churches be
concluded, either because they concern the common state of al churches, or
because they lack sufficient authority in some one church. First therefore
the lawful Synod has to consider, if any controversy of doctrine do arise,
that it be determined by the word of God: for in the controversy of binding
the Gentiles, to the observations of the ceremonial law, was a matter of
faith and doctrine.

Secondly, it has to determine of the use of the ceremonies, not of will
without reason or ground of scripture, but upon necessary causes of avoiding
offense and similitude of superstition, of bearing with the weak, of order and
comeliness and edification. So did the Synod of the Apostles and Elders,
command for a time abstinencie from meat offered to Idols, otherwise lawful
in it self, for offenses sake, and for avoiding of all pollution of Idolatry.
Act. 6. 20. 29. Act. 6. 20. 29
and forbearing the weakness of the Jews in abstinencie, from eating of blood
and of strangled, which was forbidden by God before Moses time, to teach that
Childishe age of Gods people to abstain from cruelty, as in Genesis 9. 4. Genes.
9. 4.
Such ceremonial constitutions are but temporal, and so long are to be
retained, as the cause continues, for which they were made. So that if weakness
cease, or be turned to obstinacy, they are no longer to be retained. Also for
order and comeliness, and best edification, the Synod has to determine, what
shall be observed in particular charges: as of the time, place, and form of
preaching and praying, and administering of the sacraments. For, who should be
able to know what order, comelines and edification requires according to Gods
word, but they that be Teachers and preachers of the same unto al others? For
it is absurd, that they should be taught by such in these small things, as
ought to learn the truth of them in all matters. This authority therefore
cannot be granted unto any Civil Christian Magistrate, that without consent
of the learned Pastors and Elders: yea against their consent (of whom, as in
some respect he is a feeling member) he may lawfully make ceremonial
Constitutions, whereby the Church must be governed, in mere Ecclesiastical
matters.

It is ou^e of all controuersye, that before there were any Christian
Magistrates (for we will, not speak of SERGIVS PAVLVS proconsull of Cyprus,
because he was but a Lieuetenaunt of the Roman Emperor) this authority was
proper unto the Synod.

Which authority we know to be granted to the Church by our Savior
CHRIST: practiced by his Apostles: continued by their successors three
hundred years, before there was any Christian Emperors, (for we receive not
Phillip for a Christian Emperor) and long time after there were Christian
Emperors, even as long as any purity continued in religion, until both
Emperors and Synodes were thrust out of all lawful authority, which they
ought to have in the Church, by the tyranny of Antichrist.

But we find not in the Scripture, this authority granted by Christ to
Civil Magistrates, which in his, and his Apostles time were not, nor any
promise that when they were, the Synod should resign it unto them. Therefore
it remains, that it be showed by them, that defend that this absolute
authority is in the Civil Magistrate, by what spirit or revelation, or
Scripture (if there be any that we know not): For, we would be glad to
learn how this authority was translated from the Church, (in which it was
once lawfullye vested) unto the Civil Christian Magistrate.

Therefore, until this may be showed, by sufficient warraunt of GODS holy
word, we hold that the Synod of every Province, has authority to decree
concerning ceremonial orders of the Church: Whereof some may be general to al
congregations, some particular to certain Churches. For, as it were to be
wished that all places might be brought to one perfection: So it is not
always necessary, that they be like in all things. The wisdom of the
Synod therefore ought to have such regard of all churches, that they have
special respect to every one. Wherein we of long time in England have been
carried away, with an untrue principle, that uniformity must be in all places,
and things a like, as though we would feed old men and sucking infants all
with one kind of meat: or as though we would cloth all ages in a robe of one
assize: and that which is more absurd, compel men of ripe age to suck the
dugge, to wear their biggins, and to carrye Rattles and other Childish bables.
Our land is not yet wholly converted to Christ (so great has been our
negligence hitherto) therefore there can not be such an vniformitye of orders
in all places, as shall be profitable for all. Therefore it were meet, that
the Overseers and Elders of the Church, should come together to consider of
this matter, what orders were most meet for diverse places, to bring the^ to
the obedience of Christ: what for the furtheraunce of them that are newly come,
and what for the continuance and increase, of the^ that are very well come on.

The same doctrine, although not the same parts of Doctrine, is to be every
where: but ceremonies, even as they be ceremonies, do admit variety: as time,
persons, and occasions serve to be diverse. Yea Christian liberty, in them
sometimes, is necessary to be testified, because there are many so simple, that
they know not the difference between those things, that are necessary in the
Church, and those that are not of necessitye. There be that think a Cross or
Font (as they call it) is as necessary in baptism, as water: and that kneeling
at the Communion is more necessary then preaching of the Lords death: that a
Surplusse in common prayer, is more necessary, then a devout mind: and great
occasions offered to the ignorant so to think, when they see them that
preach most diligently, pray most feruentlye, and minister the Sacraments
most reverently, according to Christ's institution, to be displaced of all
ministry, for a Cross or a Font, or a Surplusse, or some such other trifle.
The Synod therefore, ought to be careful in ordayning of Ceremonies, not
only that they be pure and agreeable to the word of God: but also that they
be expediente for the time and persons, for whose use they are ordained: And
as wilful contemners of good orders established by public authority, are
worthy to be corrected, so intangling of men's consciences, or tyrannical
coaction in these indifferente matters, must always be avoided. The Synod
has further authority concerning Discipline, to refourme and redress by
Ecclesiastical Censure, all such defaultes and controversies, as cannot be
determined in the particular Churches: as for example: If the Pastor himself,
have need to be seuerelye punished, where there is but one Pastor in a
Church: or if Elders, which should be refourmers of others, have
notoriouslye misgouerned them selves: or if they have been led by affection,
to condemn an Innocente, or to iustifye the ungodly: in these and such like
cases, all Contention is to be concluded, by the authority of the Synod. Some
example we have thereof. Acts. 15. Act. 15.
where those contentious Schismatiques, that withstoode Paul and Barnabas at
Antiochia, were constrained to yield by authority of the Council, and Paul
and Barnabas restored to their credit.

For which causes, Synodes ought oftentimes to be assembled, though not
general of the whole realm, but particular of every province or shire, as it
may be most conveniently, that such things as are to be reformed, may be
redressed with speed.

Last of all, forasmuch as the election of Pastors, is a great and weighty
matter, which ought not to be permitted to the judgment of any one man, but
pertains to the Church, whereunto they should be chosen, both for better
advise in choosing of a meet man, and for authority in causing him to accept
their election: it is convenient that it be done by judgment of the
particular Sinode. That no one man has authority to ordain Pastors, and to
impose them over churches, has been before declared, by example of the
Apostles Paul and Barnabas, who although they were Apostles, yet would they
not challenge that prerogative unto themselves, but by common election, they
ordained Elders in every Church. Acts. 14. 23. Acts. 14. 23.
Timothy also received his charge, although it were through prophecy, by
imposition of hands of the Eldership. 1. Timoth. 4. 14. 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Therefore as it has been evidently declared before, the assembly of Elders,
consisting of grave, wise, and Godly men, ought to enquire, when the Pastors
place is void, where they may find a man meet to supply his room, and
therein to desire aid of the Synod. The man by such Godly advise so chosen,
ought to be presented to the Congregation, and of them to be allowed and
received, if no man can show any reasonable cause to the contrary. This is
the right election and ordaining of Pastors, grounded upon the word of God,
and practiced by the primative Church, two hundred years after Christ, until
the mystery of iniquity, grew to work more openly to the setting up of the
tyrannical kingdom of Antichrist. By this we may plainly see, that our
presentation of patrons, is both profane and prejudicial: our giving of orders
by Bishops is presumptuous, and full of absurdities. First, because they
take upon them to do that, which none of the Apostles durst do: that is,
without election of Churches, to ordain Elders. Secondly, that they give an
Office without a charge, to make a Pastor, and send him to seek a Flock,
where he can find it: which is as unreasonable a thing, as if one were
chosen to be a Churchwarden, and had never a Church to keep: or made a
Constable, that had never a Town or place appointed, whereof he should be
Constable. For the name of a Pastor, Elder, or Ouerseer, is the name of an
office in Act and esse, because it is a proper Relative, and not a Potentiall
abilitye in the Clouds.

If Bishops as they be now, were consecrated after the same manner to seek
their Byshoprickes, where they could find them, it (...) no greater
absurdity, then it is to ordain Pastoures, and let them proll where they can
for their benefices. Thirdlye, by this wandering (we may also say vagabounde)
ministry, shifting from place to place, and in all places to be counted a
Minister where he has no charge, it would grieve a man to think, what
inconveniences does follow, but principally, how filthily it stinketh of the
old Popish indelible character, from whence it has his ground, and neither of
any reason, or of the word of God. And yet forsooth it is so perfect, that it
may abide no reformation. Fourthly, if you will see how well the authority
which they claim and practice, is used of them, that only have the choice
and admission of Ministers: Look over the whole Realm of England, What a
multitude of unfit Pastors shall you find in every place? So that Jeroboam
never made worse Priests of the refuse of the people, to serve his Golden
Calves, then they have ordained Ministers to feed the Flock of Christ, which
he has purchased with his own blood.

This complaint we confess is grievous, but the indignity of the matter
inforceth it. We know that vain excuses shall not be wanting, of necessity,
etc. But if necessity compelled the^ to take such at the first; what necessity
compels them, to suffer them to be such still? For, if they would needs
admit ignorant persons to that charge: yet should they have enforced them to
study, as well as to other things, they have enforced them unto, that in time
they might have grown to be meet for their calling. Which if they had done in
10. 12. or 13. years space, a great many might have proved excelle^tly well
learned, and able to serve in the Church with great fruit and profit: and the
rest according to proportion of their time, might have come to some mediocrity
in knowledge, whereas now as ignorant and as unfit as they were the first day,
so are they still for the most part, and will so continue to their lives
end, if they may be suffered in idleness, as they have been hitherto. Then
it is a torment to think what ambitious suing, what envious laboring, what
unseemly flattering, what prodigal bribing, is used to attain to great
dignities in the Church, to far unmeet for the modesty and grauitye that
should be in Christian preachers. And as for the inferior benefices, from the
fattest Parsonadge, to the poorest Vicaradge almost, if it be worth 40.
pounds by the year, what Symonicall bargains of leases, Annuities,
Reseruations, exhibitions: yea, notwithstanding the Act of Parliament, Anno.
13. by Antedates and other subtle conueyances, what christian heart can think
of them, without detestation of such horrible abuses? Shall we speak here any
thing of the popish priesthood, the greatest blasphemy that ever was: how long
was it allowed for a lawful ministry, until by the Godly meaning of the
said Parliament, some brandmarke of shame, was set upon it? But how
pitifullye that authority was abused, which was by the same statute committed
to the bishops, in allowing of priests that came to do their penance, by
negligence of the bishops, and bribery of their Officers: the country cries
out of it, and the state of the church, is little amended by it. Old Sir John
Lacklatin, that had not seen some of his benefices, a dose^ year before, was
carried about on his Mare, and sometimes on a Cart: First to the bishop whom
he chose, if he might for his purpose, such one as had been a priest of his
own order, and cared least what ministers serve in his Diocese, and then
from Shire to Shire, one distant an hundred mile from another, mumbling up his
Articles in his morowmasse voice, in every Church where he had living, and
returned as very a beast as he came.

But this and all other inconveniences before rehearsed, should utterly be
avoided, if we might once establish the lawful election of Pastors,
according to the word of God. It were also greatly to be wished, that it might
be brought to pass, that in every Congregation, there should be two pastors
at the least, both because the charge is great, and also for supplying the lack
of the one, if the other were sick or absent upon necessity, or any such like
case. Which thing were both agreeable to the example of the Apostolic Church,
and also very profitable for the Congregation. We do not mean this in
every Parish, as they be now distinguished, but in every Congregation as
they may be disposed, both for best edifying and also for sufficient living for
the Pastors.

It will be objected, when we have all things at our pleasure, concerning the
Election of Pastors, yet will there creep in many abuses. We answer, they
shall not so soon, nor so easily, nor so many abuses creep in, as now at
wide Windows, yea, great port-gates do throng in.

But if as many or more abuses (if more could be) were crept in, yet were the
case better then it is now: for we should be sure, that God approoueth our
order, though he condemn the abuses, because it is grounded upon Gods word,
whereas now he abhors both.

But of the authority that Pastors have as members of the Synod, we have
spoken hitherto sufficiently. By which it is evident, how all things have been
corrupted in Poperye, which had at the first any good institution, which
corruptions we also retain at this day, without desiring of any refourmation.
For, to begin first with our particular Synodes, good lord what a mockery they
are of law full synodes, being holden for no other end almost, but to gather
up fees, both ordinary and extraordinary, with daily new devises to poll the
poor Priests of their money, which they extort for seeing the Letters of
orders, for Dynners and such like matters. And yet a new invented pyllage,
whereby they compel men to buy Books of them for 4. pence or 6. pence, which
are to dear of a penny or two pence: and not only such small Ware, but also
great books, being such as every parish is appointed to buy, must be bought
of them for two or three Shyllinges in a Book dearer, then it may be bought
in Paul's Church-yarde: yea otherwhiles, though the Parish be furnished of
them already, they are not authentical, except they be boughte at Master
Chauncellers and Official, at Master Regesters hands. As for refourmation of
any thing in the Church, there are indeed many presentiments, and men sworn to
present matters, but little or none amendmente at all does follow. So that it
is a common saying in the Country, when the presentment is once received, they
shall never hear more of it. Soon after the Visitation or Synod, the
petitbribing Sumner, rides forth laden with Excommunications, which he
scatters abroad in the Country, as thick as Haileshot, against this parson,
and that Vicar: this Church warden, and that Side-man, whom he himself when
he came to summon him to the Synod, for a Cheeze or a Gammon of Bacon, had
undertaken to excuse for none apparaunce. But when he is once Excommunicated,
there is no remedy, but he must trudge to the Chauncelour or Official for
absolution, who after he has once absolved his Purse of a few Groates,
gives him his blessing and sends him away. And this is the image of our
little or particular Synod.

Our general Conuocations have a more shevve of good order, Choosing of
Clearkes of the Conuocatio^ house.
but in effect little better. For first, they are stuffed full of Popish and
profane Chauncelloures, and other Lawyers, which being mere lay men, and
unlearned in Divinity, by their own Law, ought to be no members of the
Synod: And yet these will bear the greatest sway in all things. The Bishops,
as though they were greater then the Apostles, must have their several
couuenticle, whereas the Apostles and elders came together with the whole
multitude, Acts 15. Acts 15.
And as they are severed in place, so will they be higher in authority. So
that whatsoever is decreed amongst them, that must be called the
determynation of the whole Synod. So that no man must be suffered to
speak any thing against it, be it never so reasonable, or agreeable to the
word of GOD: yea, whosoever will not subscribe to all such things, as
they decree, must be excluded out of the Convocation, as was practiced and
threatened in the Convocation at the foresaid Parliamente, unto diverse Godly
and learned Preachers, that offered to speak against diverse gross and
palpable erroures, that had escaped the Bishops decrees. As for the
distinction of Canonical and Apocriphall books, for explication of the clause
in the article of Predestination: where it is said, that the elect may fall
from Grace, and such like matters. If this be not to practice Lordshippe over
our faith: to set down decrees of Religion, which must be accepted of all
men, without either reason or testimony of the Scripture to prove them, and no
man permitted to show any reason or Scripture, that inforceth his Conscience
to the contrary, but only to hang upon the authority of bishops: Let some
other declare what Paul means, 2. Cor. 1. 4. 2. Cor. 1. 14.
where he denies, that he would exercise any Lordship, over the faith of the
Corinthians.

For, although their decrees were never so perfect, yet it were an example of
tyrannical Dominion, neither to give reasons to satisfy the ignorant them
selves, nor to hear or confute that which might be alleged against them by
others, but for a few lordbishops in comparison of all the convocation, to sit
by them selves and order all things at their pleasures, as though the Gospel
sprang first from them, or had come unto them only, it sauoreth of nothing so
much as of popish tyranny: Whereas otherwise it is well known they are not al
of the best learned, nor all of longest study, nor all of soundest judgment,
nor all of greatest zeal, nor all of best example, and therefore not meetest to
be the only determiners in Ecclesiastical matters, to the prejudice of the
whole synod. Wherefore it is greatly to be desired, that our synodes also,
which are so far out of order, may be reformed according to the scripture,
and the example of the primitive Church, that all things may be done with such
modesty, gravity and judgment, as they were by the Apostles and Elders.
Acts. 15.
Act. 15. And now that we have set forth the whole Ecclesiastical ministerye,
according to the word of God, with all the duties and authority that
pertayneth unto it: the place requires, that we should also entreat of the
authority of the civil Magistrate in matters ecclesiastical. Of the title of
the princes supremacy, if it be truly understood, we move no contronersie: but
that it does properly apperteine to the civil magistrate, to be the highest
governor of al persons within his dominion, so that the soueraign Empire of God
be kept whole. But herein rests all the doubt, how this is truly to be
understood, and that shall we best understand by the contrary: namely by the
usurped tyranny of antichrist. For antichrist did challenge unto himself al
authority, both that which is proper to god, and that which is common to men.
Therefore that the pope claimed to be that only head of the church, from which
the whole body received direction, and was kept in unity of faith: This was
blasphemous against Christ, and therefore may not be usurped by any Civil
magistrate, no more the^ by the pope. Likewise, where he challenges authority
to alter, change and dispense with the commandment of god, to make new
articles of faith, to ordain new sacraments, etc. this is also blasphemous and
ought not to be usurped of any civil prince, On the other side, where he
challenges authority over all princes, and so over all the clergy, that he did
exempt them from the civil jurisdiction, this is contumelious, and injurious
against al christian kings. And therefore every prince in his own dominion,
ought to cast off the yoke of his subjection, and to bring al ecclesiastical
persons unto his obedience and jurisdiction. Here have we the first part of the
title of supreme government over al persons. In matter or causes
ecclesiastical: likewise, the pope does not only presume against god, as we
said before: but also against the lawful authority, given by God unto men. For
he forbids princes to meddle with reformation of Ecclesiastical matters, or
to make any laws pertaining to causes of religion, answering them, that those
things do appertain only to him and the general counsel. But when he comes
to debate any thing with his clergy, then al laws and knowledge, are enclosed
in the closet of his breast. When any general counsel must be holden, all that
they do receives authority from him. For except he do allow, it is
nothing. And he is so wise, that neither with the council, nor without the
counsel he can err or think amiss in matters Ecclesiastical: whereas it is
not only lawful, but also necessary for Princess, if they will do their
duty, to look to the reformation of religion, and to make laws of matters
Ecclesiastical, but so that we confound not the offices of the Prince and the
Pastor. Eor, as it is not lawful for the Prince to preach, nor administer the
Sacraments: no more is it lawful for him to make laws in Ecclesiastical
causes, contrary to the knowledge of his learned Pastors. For, as these three
parts of a pastors duty, are granted to him by God, preaching, ministering of
sacraments, and Ecclesiastical government: he may no more take from a Pastor
the third, then he may the two first. By this it appears, how far it is
lawful for Princes to intermedle with causes Ecclesiastical: namelye that it
is the chiefest point of their duty, to have especial regard that God may be
glorified in their dominion, and therefore they ought to make civil laws to
bind the people unto the confession of true faith, and the right administering
and receiving of the sacraments, and to all ecclesiastical orders, that they
being instructed by the word of God, through the ministry of the preaching
of the same, shall understand to be profitable for edifying of the church of
Christ, and the advancement of the glory of God. If any shall offend against
the laws, whether he be preacher or hearer, beside the ecclesiastical censure,
which he should not escape, he is also to be punished in body by the civil
magistrate. This we see that all christian Emperors observed, that when any
controversy arose, either of doctrine, or of order and ceremonies, they
commanded the Clergy to consult and determine thereof, according to the
scripture, who assembling together incounsel obeyed their commandment. Their
conclusion then by authority of the Emperor, was commanded every where to
be observed, and those that impugned it, to be punished: the same order we
read also to be observed, by the christian kings of France and Spain, yea
and of this our Brittany also, in governing their Ecclesiastical state, by the advice of the Clergy of their dominion. But it will perhaps be said, that for
Princes to subscribe to the determination of priests (as they call them) is no
supremacy, but a subjection. We answer, it is no subjection unto men, but to
God and his word, to do nothing in these matters, but by the faithful advise
of the^, that know his will, and are bound to teach it unto all men: No more
then it is to be counted a subjection for a Prince in civil affairs, to
follow the advice of wise and faithful Counselors. Whereby we see that if
Gods ordinance were not plain in the scriptures, yet reason it self would
conclude, that if in Temporal matters, a wise prince will do nothing of weight,
without the counsel of wise men: how much more in Gods business which are of
greatest importance, should they not decree any thing with out the advice of
them, that be learned in those matters. And if all princes by heathen wise men's
judgments are so rulers, that they are servant of the laws, and of the common
wealth: why should it be accounted for any dishonor unto princes, to be
obedient to the laws of God their father, and to serve to the commodity of
the church their mother? It is a greater honor to be the son of God, and the
child of the church, then to be a monarch of all the earth. Of this honorable
subjection to GOD and his church. Esaias prophesies Chapter. 49. 23. Kings
shall be thy nursing Fathers, Esaias. 49. 23.
and Queens shall be thy Nurses. They shall worship thee with their faces
toward the earth, and lick the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know that I
am the Lord. The prophet means, that Kings and Queens shall be so careful,
for the preservation of the church, that they shall think no service too base
for them, so they may profit the Church of Christ withal. Unto this
honorable subjection, the holy Ghost exhorts princes in the second psalm:
after that they have tried that they prevail nothing in stryuing against the
kingdom of Christ: Be now therefore wise (O ye Kings): Psalm. 2. 10. 11
be learned that judge the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto
him with trembling, Declaring that it is a joyful service to be obedient to
Christ: yea to serve GOD is indeed to reign. And especially it is to be
noted, where Saint Paul commands prayers and supplications, to be made for
the conversion of Kings unto the knowledge of the truth, and their own
salvation, that he alleadgeeth this reason, 1. Tim. 2. 2.
That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and honesty
under their protection. A godly and honest life, we may live, under enemies of
the Church and persecutors: but a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness
and honesty, only under a christian Prince. This thing therefore the Church
most humbly desires of the prince: for this end the Church continually prays
to GOD for the Prince: in this respect the Church most obediently submits
her self unto the Prince, as a Child to his nurce, that both prince and people
may honor God in this life, and after this life, reign with Christ
everlastingly.

Thus have we breefely set forth a form of reformation, touching matters
ecclesiastical (as we are thoroughly persuaded) agreeable to the word of God,
and as we are able to prove, consenting with the example of the primitive
Church, building only upon the most sure foundation of the canonical
scriptures: but intending more at large, if occasion shall serve, hereafter to
set forth, the practice and consent of the Godly fathers in their Acts,
Counsels and writings, following the same rule and interpretation of the
scripture that we have done. Therefore we protest before the living God and his
holy Angels, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, that shall come to judge the
quick and the dead, and before the Queens majesty our most gracious
Sovereign, and the whole assembly of all estates of this Realm: that as the
whole world may plainly see, we seek hereby not our own profit, ease nor
advancement, but only the glory of God, and the profit of his Church: so by
this present writing, we discharge our conscience, according to our duty
which is to show unto all men the true way of reformation: and to move them
that have authority to put it in practice, and to seek by all lawful and
ordinarye means, that it may take place, that if it may please God to give it
good success, at this time to be embraced, we may fulfill the rest of our
course with joy. But if our sins be the let, that this or the like grounded
upon Gods word, may not now be received: yet the present age may see and
judge, what is the uttermost of our desire, concerning reformation, which
hitherto for lack of such a public testimonial, has been subject to
infinite slanders, devised by the adversaries of Gods truth and hinderance of
Godly procedings unto reformation. And that the posterity may know that the
truth in this time, was not generallye unknown nor vntestified, concerning the
right regiment of the church of god: nor this disordered form of
ecclesiastical government, which we have received for the most part of
popery, delivered to our Children without contradictio^, that our example should
not be prejudicial unto them: as the example of our Godly fathers (which in
this point neglected their duty) has been prejudicial unto us. The Lord
grant for Christ's sake, that we being so far from perfection, God may open
al our eyes to see the same, and bend our hearts earnestly to labor to
attain thereunto: and in the mean time, so far as we have attained, that we
may proceed al by one rule, that we may be like affectioned to seek the glory
of God, and to build up the ruynes of his temple, that with one heart and with
one voice, we may praise the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in his holy
Temple, which is the congregation of saints in the holy ghost, to whom be al
honor and Dominion for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

