To my loving brethren that is troubled about the popish aparrell, two short
and comfortable Epistels.

Be ye constant: for the Lord shall fight for you, yowrs in Christ.

To all my faithful brethren in Christ Jesus and to all other that labor to
weade out the wedes of popery, Peace in the Lord Jesus be with you, and make
you perfect in all good works to do his will, working in you that which is
pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Dear Brethren, because we are creatid for gods glory the edification one of
another in Christ, and are bound to serve thereunto by wealth or woo, life or
death, and chiefly, they to whom God have given the greter gifts, and whom he
has called to higher romes, are most bound to be zealous for gods glory with
godly zelousie to profyt the church and spouse of Christ under their charge,
and that by no subteltye as the Apostel warnithe, they should be corrupted from
the symplicitie of Christ: therefore there is no doubt of your good zealle and
diligence. My good fathers and dear brethren, who ar first callid to the
battle, to strive for gods glory and the edification of his people, against the
Romish relics and rages of Antichrist, I doubt not but that you will
coragiouslye and constantlye in Christ, rape at these rages of Gods enemies,
and that you will by this occasion race up many as great enormites that we all
know, and labor to race out all the dregs and remnants of transformid
popery, that are crept into England, by to much lenite of them that wylbe namid
the Lords of the clergy: what is he that has the zeal of gods glory before
his face, that will not join both in prayer, and in sufferinge with you, in so
good a cause, that is so much for gods glory, and the edificacion of gods
church, in the pure simplicite of Christ's word and sacraments, wherein our
enemies and persecutours are strangely bewitchid. I wot not by what Circes
cupe, that they do make such a diversity betwixt Christ's word and his
sacraments, that they can not think the word of God safelye enough
preachid, and honorably enough handlyd, without cap, cope, surplis. But that
the sacraments the maryinge, the buryinge, the churching of women, and other
church service, as they call it, must needs be decored with crossinge, with
capping, with surplessing, with knelinge, with preti wafer cakes, and other
knackes of poperi. O Paul that thou were a live, thou durst tell those
politic gentelmen, that there has bin to much labor bestoued upon them in
vain, thou durst say unto them, as thou did to ye Corinthians, that they
eat not the Lords supper, but pley a pagent of their own to blind the
people, and keep them still in supersticion, fare from the symplicite of
Christ's supper: but how many sely sowles is there that does believe verily,
that they have an English mass, and so put no difference between truth and
falshod, between Christ and antichrist, between God and the deuell, they are
strangely bewitched. I say that thus will bind their English presthode and
sacraments, but much more enchauntid that can find no garments to please them.
But such as have been polutid openly with popish supersticion and Idolatry, but
most of all in this point shall their madness apere to all posterites, that they
make these Antichristian rages Causam sine qua non, that is, a cause without
which there is no holy ministry in Christ, so that this shall make an English
priest, be he never such a dolt or vnlearnid in the knouledge of the scripture
as we have very many, and without these romisshe relics not Paul him self
shall be admittid (as one of them did blaspheme and the rest of them in effect
do affirm) well against such popish chaffer and popery, has byne long
agone foughten witheall, when the great captains of that religion lyuyd, and
yet God gave the victory. Therefore let us not fear now, although it does begine
to sture again, for there is no craft, conninge, counsel, wysdom, or policy
against the Lord. We have Christ and his Apostells and the Prophets ever
stryuing against the Ipocrites of their time on our side. a stra^ for popish
polici we have the word of God to warant us, to rote out al monuments of
supersticion and Idolatry, and are charged to abhor them, to account them,
accursed, and to defy them, and to detest them as menstreous clowtes, they have
not the word of God for them. And what wysdom is in them, says god by his
Prophet Ieremi, they talk of obedience and concord, but there is no obedience
against the Lord, no nor concord to be desired, but where gods glory and
verite is preserved, Else better to have all the world in hurly burleis, and
heaven and earth to shake, then one ioyte of gods glory should decaie. So far
forth as in us leithe, we have their own laws and proclamacions, to rote out
all monuments of supersticion and Idolatrye, and their oune words are
contrary to their doings. Yt should apere that they repent their reformacion
proclamid, as did ye Isralites, they build again that which ons they have
distroied and this is done openly that all the world may wonder, and behold:
but what is done secretlye, god will one day have it declarid openly, ye they
make the name of god and this doctrine that we profess to be evil spoken of
already. By many of their doings, their judgment hastes that for such causes
persecute Gods true preachers. Wherefore let us not fear their threteninges,
there can none ^ersecute the godly for this cause and trasshe. ^ut either such as
are nether hot nor cold, and then they shall be vomyted out unless their zeal
increase, or such as have no God before their eyes, whose god is their belly,
or ^is open papists, whom god has given up ^o a reprobate sense, wherefore we
must thus take it, that they are gods rodds for our sins, because we have not
ben more zealous in Gods cause, nether careful to seek his glory, that wolf
Wynchester and blodie bucher Bonar fought once against many godli men for the
ground of this gere, and they had all the power of the Realm seruinge their
lusts, but behold how the Lord in short time overthrew them al, to give us
coradge to go forward, the Lord forgive us, we are to slack and neglygent in
heavenly things, this monster Bonar remainithe and is fed as papists say, for
their sakes, and it must be grauntyd, it is for some purpos, although he be a
traitor and an enemi to the crown and realm, and both to God and man, which
brunnid gods holy testament, murderid his saints and his servants. But what
the Lord requyrith to be done with false Prophets it is manifest: we have
both the law of god and man for us, But we are answerid nay, you your sealues
shall be compellid to turn your coats and cappes, and get you into his leueris,
and to be like him in your garments. O Elyas that thou lyuedste, or tha^ thy
spyrit wear amongst us, thou woldes^ say with the Prophet Sophoni, that God
will vysit the werears of this Idolatours garments or strange aparell, thou
would say, that things dedicatid once to idolatry, is not indifferent, thou
would say reverence to the sacrament is wrought by doctrine and discipline,
and not by popisshe and Idolatours garments, thou would say, what decency
can there be gaynyd to the sacraments, by that which has been deuisyd and vsyd
to deface it, if the gold ordeinyd by god for the reverence and decenci of the
Jews temple, is not to be admittyd to beutify the church of Christ, much
less copes brought in by papists the enemies of god, and always continwyd in
their service as orname^tes of their religion in no wise ought of us Christians
to be retaynid. But the papists triumph and glory in their assembles, that
the hot gospelars shall be driven to their doltishe attires, for the Lords sake
let us never give them any cause of Joy, though we should dye for yt: Moses
would not yield on hoof of a best in gods business, he would not leave the loupe
unmade, nor make a button or a claspe more or less. Eleasar will not decemble
by eating of unlawful meats, the faithful Isralites would not receive so
much as an yni bushe. Contrariwyse Orygen caryinge a branch and professynge,
that he bare it for Christ at the first. But was afterward compellid to open
Idolatry, so cursid a thing it is to give any place to the wicked: all the
papists that say, they worship Christ in the cross, and God in the
sacrament, do still under these words continue still in their Idolatri, beware
of deceitful words, that cover wickid purposes, to draw us from Christian
symplicite. Let us stand constantly against all abuses, and repent for our
former coldness in religion, and our sins, and call for healpe from above, for
the hand of the Lord is not shortenid: we are assured that we seek Gods glory,
and our adversaries may see, if they can se any thing, that this thing that
they seek is not for gods glory, seeing the papists the enemies of God, do so
desire yt and glory in yt. And rejoice, that we, whom they most hate, cannot
besafe but under their garments: we are assurid that we seek gods glory in
folowinge Christ his Aposteles and Prophets. who ever despised these
pharisaicall outward faces and visures, Christ fyndethe fault with the
garments of the phariseis. Paul counts all his pharisaicall, show to be
donge. Zachari says, that the false Prophet shall be ashamed of his prophecye,
and forsake his garments wherein he deceyuid. and shall the true Prophets be
feign to crepe into their coules? for by the same autorite may be comaundid any
peace of popery, so that it be named policy. Ezechias and Josias knew no such
authority, but they say: It is for policy, For it plainly apearithe that
there is less care for religion, then for policy. But beware that the example
of Ieroboham be not followed, that made such like prestes for policy as would
do as he commaundid them. Achaz of policy brought the fashion of an alter into
Jerusalem, as he saw at Damascus, where he had overcome the Idolatours and
their Idols, but cursed was his policy, and so ar all they that will retain
any thing of their Idolatry. Nabuchodonosors Idol was for unity and
policy, but without the warraunt of gods word, there is neither good unity
nor policy. The godly father Bucer callithe the tenthes and the first fruits
sacrilege and roberie, they be kept still for policy. Cross and candelstickes
ar supersticious, though they be kept. I wot not for what policy the
adoration of the Sacrament in the countres, where they knock and knele to a
wafer cake is a popish policy. That women baptize, that pluralites, tot quots
impropriacions, non residence, despensacions, suspensions, excomunications, and
absolucions, for money ar grauntyd, yt is evell, like as are many other
inormites borrowed from Rome, which remain in the name of policy. All these
things were abhorryd as popish supersticions, and Idolatries, among our
gospellers both bishops and others, when they were under gods rods in
pouerte. But how they now have learnid courtely deuinite, to ground all upon
policy? Humble them again o Lord, that they do not forget the, and thy great
kindness and mercy shewid upon them, and sture up their hearts and minds, that
they may be careful over thy pore flock. O Christ, whom thou have dearly
bought, by this their policy ar blindid, and carithe for no more, but that they
may have this supersticious show which is so stifely maintained. Let him mumble
as he list, if he be thus apparelid, al his service is well enough, otherwise
yt is nothing worth, Thus cause you them to perish by your polices, for whom
Christ has dyed. further more, if poperi be superstitous and idolatrous, evel
and wicked, as yet there was never a worse thing in the world, then ar we
commanded to abstain from all participatio^ thereof, and from all the show
thereof ab omni specie mali, that is, from all show of wickidnes. These
garments were the show of their blasphemous preisthod, herein they did singe
and say their supersticious idolatrous service, they did sense their Idols
and healpe forward their Idolatrous masses, what policy can it be then to
wear this gere. But a supersticious wickid and popish policy, they do it
for policy, they say, that their priests may be known and magnified of men.
Did not the Pharisees use the same policy, to do all their works and make
all their garments both Philacteris upon their headdes, and their wide and
side robes and borders, that they might be more expectable, and notorious to
the people: but their woo is thr^tenid above al other sinners. To such
ypocrites, as being void of all true holiness, delight in all outward shows,
their curse is most inculcate, their polyci is that ye preistes shall wear
white in the churches to signify their virtue, their pureness, and holiness. and
when they go fourth of the church they must wear black gowns and black
horns, for contrary polycies, and for diverse significacions, Our master
Christ's polycie was expressyd in one word, feed, feed, feed. and the
Prophets before, and the Apostelles afterward, if Christ be the wisdom of
the father, the true ministers shall be well enough known, by that one mark
which he gives: and if that he have not that mark better unknown then
known, both for him self and others, therefore let them not say for shame,
that they seek gods glory, Christ's will, or the edification of his church, by
their polycie. Whiles they threte^ and stope the spredinge of gods word and
fedinge of Christ's flock, co^mandyd by writing to excommunicate the most
faithful laborers in the planting of the gospel, because they will not wear
the rages of popery, to expulse ye most valiant soldiars against the Romish
Antichrist, the most earnest ouerthrowars of the kingdom of satan, which
standith in sin and blindness. O beware you, that will be Lords over the flocks,
that you be not sore punyshed for your pride, toward your brethren, and your
cowardlines in gods cause, that for Princes pleasures and pompose liuinges, do
turn poperi into policy, and to become our persecutors under the cloak of
policy: it were better to lose your livings, then to displease god in
persecutinge of your brethren, and hinder the course of the word. But as our
deutie is, we will pray for you, and for all our brethren in the ministeri,
that god of his grace would grant us more zeal for his glory, than any of
us has had heretofore, more desire to edify, Christ's people in pure
simplicite, to present them a chaste virgin unto Christ, then hitherto has
apeared, that when the hedeshepherde shall call to accounte, we be not ashamyd.
But being found perfect in all good works, may receive the crown prepared,
as for you dear brethren whom God has called into the brunte of the batell,
The Lord keep ye constant, that ye yield nether to tolleracion, nether to any
other subtelte persuasions of dispensacions, or lycences which were to fortify
their Romish practices. but as you fight the Lords fight, be valiant. God will
not leave you, nether forsake you, as you seek gods glory, god will glorifye
you, and as by you Christ's church is edifyed, comfortid and confirmid in
Christian simplycite, so shall you receive comfort by Christ your heed
captain, when you shall be called to give acomptes of your stewardshippes, and
to be rewardyd for your fidelite, the matter is not so small as the world do
take yt, yt will appear before all be endyd, what an hard thing it is, to
cut of the rages of the Hidra of Rome, it is beutifull, but poysonful, there is
no daling with such a mounster, beware of lokyng back to Sodom or delyght
any wit in the garments of Babilone, neither once touch the poysonid cupe,
though yt be of gold or gliteringe. Let us repent of our former sins
vnfaynidlye, and then shall we abhor and stamp under our fette these rages,
that were apoyntid to supersticion and idolatry, Let us hate the blasphemous
preasthode, so injurious to Christ's preisthode, that every pache and token of
it be in execration, detestation, and accursed, and take no part of yt upon
our heddes nor backs, least we be accursed as it is. Let us not make the
heritage of god as a bird of many colors, holdinge of diverse religions, Let
us not mixte the Jews with the gentills, let us not in no wise mixed this our
religion with any thing of Antichrist, let us not confyrme the blind in their
blindness, neither the weacke in their supersticion. But rather let us take
away, if we can, the names, memories, and all momuments of poperye and that
Antichrists priesthod. Let us open our wyndous with Daniel, and profess what
we are: their cruelte shall be our glory. Let us follow Paull, that knew that
the truth gospel cold not be retainyd, if any Iewishe ceremonies were
mayntainyd. Let us rather never wear any garment, then we should wear
those, whereby our brethren should be weakened, offendyd or boldenyd to take
part with the idolatours, and so through our hautines in knouledge, our weak
brethren perish, for whom Christ died. Behold and mark well, how they fall
backwarde that yield in any jot, and se how they are edifyed, and increase in
godliness, which hold that right way that you go in, the which the Lord
increase you, and us all, and strenthen us with his holy spyrit, that we may
continewe to our lives end, al ways both by our thoughts, words, and
works, to avaunce his glory and honor daily more and more, now and for ever.
Amen.

Grace and peace with all manner spiritual feling and living worthi of the
kindness of Christ, be with all that thrist the will of God.
TO my faithful and dear brethren in Christ Jesus, as in comen dangers of
fire, or such like, welbelouyd, they that be fare of, com to socoure those
that have need, true Christian love
so I being out of iepordre and far of, can not but of deuty wyshe well to
those that be touchyd about the popish apparel in this liberty of Gods
truth, which is tought plainly without offencis, in ye greatyst misterys of
our religion and salvation, yt is much to be marvayled, that this small
controuersye of aparell should be so heuely taken. But this is the mallis of
satan, the practi^^ of the wi^kid.
that where he can not overthrow the greatist matters, he will cause great
troubels in trifels. Peter and Paul agreyde in the greatyste articles of our
salvation, and yet they differyd so about meattes, that Paul withstode and
rebuckid him openly. The infirmites of the godl^^
Paul and Barnavas fell at such bitter contencion, whether Mark should go
with them or no, that they partyd companyes, and either of them went sundry
ways. the constance of the godl^
God defend us from the like. Paul circumcisyd Timothe when there was hope to
wine the Jews: but when they would have it of necessite, he would not
circumcise Titus, therefore compellinge would not be vsyd in things of liberte,
yt is a lamentable case, that among them that are civil and full of knouledge,
that yt should come thus to pass. Consider dearly beloved, I beseech you, how
that all countres, which have reformid religion, have cast away the popish
aparell with the pope: and yet we that will be taken for the best gospelars,
are contentid to keep it as an holy religion. Mark well also how many godly
and learnid ministers there be here in all countres, that be so zealous not only
to forsake the wicked doctrine of popery, ready to leave the minystry, and to
lose lyuinges, rather then to be like the popish teachers of supersticious
order in aparell or behavior. This realm has such skacite of teachers, that
if so many worthy men and learnid should be cast out of the ministry for such
small matters, many placis should be destitude of preachers, and yt would give
an incurable offense to all the fauourars of gods truth here, and in other
countres, also shall we make so much and so precious of the popes rages that
other reformyd places, exteme as oil and filthye, God forbid. S. Paul byddich
women use such aparell as becomith them that profes true godliness, which rule
is much more to be obseruid of men, and especially of preachers. But if we
forsake popery as wickid, shall we say that their aparell becommith saints,
and professars of true holiness. Saint Paul bydith us refrain from al outward
show of evell, but surely in kepinge of this popish aparell, we forbear not an
outward show of much evell, if popery be iudgid evell, as greter wickidnes can
not be, as we would have a diverse show of aparel to be known from the common
people, so is yt necessary in aparell, to have a show, how a protestante is to
be known from a papiste. Yt has pleasyd God to call us to preach his
heavenly word to that hye office, God give you grace and us all to seek his
honor and glory: if we so do with a pure heart and mind, he has promised, He
that honorith me, I will glorify him, and he that contemnith me, I will
contemn him. Let there be no curtisye made to healpe gods people now they be in
danger. Call to your remembrance Queen Easter, she begane to make curtisy to
speak in ye cause, but Mardocheus said unto her: If thou now hold thy peace,
God shall deliver by an other mean, and yet thou and thy fathers house shall
peryshe. You that can and may do good, do it while time is offerid, the time
will come when it wylbe to late: yet god will comfort his by some other mean:
It is a perilous thing, not to healpe in the time of neade, and not to suffer
religion to go forward in all syncerite, and to further gods cause when ye
may, when Terenti a good Christian captain returnid with great triumph and
victory, the Emperor Valerius bade him axe what he would, and he should have it
for his good service: he having God before his eyes, desired nether riches,
nether honor, but those which had aduentered their lives for true religion,
might have a church alowid them, to serve their god purely in, and several from
the Arrians. The Emperor being angry with his request, pullyd his
supplicacion in pecis, and bade him axe some other thing. but he gathered up the
pecis of his, paper and said: I have receuid my reward, I will axe nothing
else, God encrece about Princes the small number of such zealous futers and
promoters of religion, and then no doubt gods glory shall florishe when we
seek his dew honor, and not our own profit. But to avoid contencion and
scisme Austen gevith good counsel to godly and quiet men, that they mercifully
correct that which they can, and that which they can not, patiently bear,
groan and morn, with love, until god either correct or amend them. But how this
Christian love should be kept in this church, when so many godly for so small
things shall be thruste out, and also how many already is from the ministry and
their lyuinges, yt passyth many good and godly mittes to conceive. S. Paul's
rule in such things, says: All things to me is lawful, but all things is
not expedient: all things to me is lawful, but all things edefye not.
Therefore in this case we must not so suttelly dispute, what Christian liberte
will suffer us to do, but what is metist and most edefying for Christian
charity, and promoting Christian and pure religion. But surely how popish
aparell should edefie, or set forward the gospel of Christ Jesus, it can not
be seen of the multitude, nay, it is to much fealt how gredly it reioysith the
adversaries of the truth, when they see what we borowe of them, and contend for
the same as things necessary. mark well the bysshopes wearing of their white
rochets, what ground they first had, and from whence they receyuid it. There
was a certain man, namid Sisinius an heriticke bishop of the Novacions, and he
first begane yt. all those other popish trashe has the like foundacions, but
they have to long contineuyd and pleasyd popery, which is beggarly pacchid up
of al sorts of cerimones, and that they could never be routyd out sense, no
not from many professors of the gospel. Wherefore you that se others that is
come to a better perfection, grudge not at yt, but be thankful to God, though
things may be borne wyche for a time for Christian lybertes sake, in hope to
win the weak. yet when lyberte is turnyd into necessite, yt is evell, and no
longer lyberte: and that, that was for wynning the weak sufferid for a time,
is become the confyrminge of the froward in their obstinacy. Paul vsyd
circumcision for a time as of lyberte, but when it was vrgyd of necessite, he
would not bend unto it. That famous father Master Bucer, when he was axyd why
he would not wear a square cape, made answer, because his head was not
four square. wherein surely he notyd well the comlynes of aparell to be, when
yt was fassionyd like the body, and a great folly when a square cape was set on
a round head.

God be merciful unto us, and grant us uprightly to seek his honor with all
earnestnes and simplicite. The Lord comfort his afflictid church, and grant
that in this oulde age of the world, we may serve the Lord of hosts in
synglenes of heart, and labor to rote out all stomblinge blocks in religion,
that Christ's glory may nakydly shine of yt sealue, without all tradicions or
inuencions of men, as in the beginning when yt was purest, and all such
deuyses unknown, but inuentid of late to bleare the eyes of the ignorant, with
outward show of holiness. God grant that we may give all honor to whom al
honor is deue, both inwardly and outwardly, to serve him unfeignedly all the
days of our life. Fare well dear brethren in the Lord Jesus, who ever keep
us in his faith, fear, and love, for ever. Amen.

To my faithful Brethren now afflycted, and to all those that unfeignedly love
the Lord Jesus, the Lord guide us with his holy spret, that we may always
serve him both in body and mind in all synceryte to our lives end.
WHen I do remember, dearly beloved, the great charge inioynyd unto us of
almyghtie God, and the strayghte accounte that we shall have to make, for the
right use and dispensacion of his mysteries, I find no comparison might
justly move any Christyan to doubt of the better of those two choyses, only
that which makythe a show for the mayntenaunce of popish apparel is the
opynion of indifferency, which thing he yt will persuade, mark well good
Christyan.
must first prove that it tendythe to Gods glory. Concurrythe with his word,
edefyeth his church, mayntaynyth Christyan lyberte: which condycions and
circunstances if they want, The thing which otherwise by nature is
indifferent, does degenerat and become hurtful. but how can Gods glory be
auaunced by those popish garments which supersticyous men and Antychrist have
inuentyd for the maynteyninge and beutyfyinge of Idolatry, what agreement can
man's supersticious inuencyons have with the eternal word of God, what
edifycacion can there be where the spirit of god is greuyd, Christ's lytillous
discoragyd, the bondage of ceremonies what it bringith
ye weak brethren brought into doubt of relygyon, the wicked papists confyrmyd
in their error, And adore new set open to all Popish tradycions and
Antychristian impiety: nether can any man call this Christian liberty, where
a yoke is laid upon the dysciples necks, where the conscience is cloggyd, true
preachers thretenyd, the curse of Gods word stayed, the congregacyons spoylyd
of godly and learnyd pastors, the Sacraments brought under subieccyon of
Idolators and supersticious vestiments, therefore where either the formar
condycion want or this latter be annexsyd, yt can not be called a thing mere
indifferent. Augustine upon indifferent things says, Those things that are
not contrary to faith, nether yet contrary to good manners, and have somewhat
to exhort to the amendeme^t of life, whersoeuer we se such things commaundyd,
or do know to be institutid, we do not only allow, but also we will follow them
in praysynge and imytatinge them: if the infyrmyte of some do not let that yt
should be a further detrimente or damage, here Augustine requiryth two points in
things indifferent. First that they induce to a better life, and do serve to
edyfycacion, next that we beware lest any offense come therbye, mark well the
nature of indifferent things
or any weak conscience be hynderyd in ye curse of religion, Christ him self
geuyth a good warning saying, woe be to offenses, there might be brought diverse
examples and testymonies to prove, that things which of them selves have byne
or are indifferent, by circunsta^ce and abusinge become euel, what thing is
more requirid for sundry causis in this life, then fasting, and for the days
and times, what things can be more indifferent. yet if by ye obseruacion of
days and appoyntinge of time we should confirm the opinion of the wicked, the
godly will have nothing to do in ceremonies of the wicked.
and so give consent to them we were worthily to be blamyd and reprouyd, as
Augustine wytnessith writing after this sort, To fast on the Sunday is a great
offense, cheflye after ye detestable heresye of the Manichees, which is planlye
contrary to the Catholyke faith of many, and the scriptures of God did show it
self, which co^stitutyd to their hearers, to fast on ye Sunday, was a most
mete day. Tertulian in his book De corona militis, defendyth the cause of a
soudyar that was zealous for the glory of god, and would not wear a garlonde on
his head as ye rest of his fellows did, lest he should seame to consent with ye
Idolators, God send us many such zelours christyanes.
and so bring true relygion into doubt, and whereas many of the Christians
myslykid of this soudyars fact, which for so small a tryfill would hasarde the
Emperors favor and so adventure his life, saying to wear the garlonde was not
against yt scriptures. Tertullian who justified this zealous act answerethe on
this soudiars behalf saying: If for this cause it may be said yt he might
lawfully be crownyd, because the scriptures do not forbid it, by this same
reason it shall be answered, that therefore he ought not to be crounyd, because ye
scriptures does not command it. The Counsel of Toletane ordenyd that in
Baptymse should be vsyd but one dyppynge, lest they should seame to consent
with the heretics which used to dypp the child thryse, and sendynge to Gregory
for his counsel herein, they receuyd this answer, for the eschewinge of the
sclaunder of seisme and tradycion of the heritikes, let us hold the simple use
of Baptism, lest they which amongst us do use to dypp thryse to allow the
assercyon of the heretykes, while ye follow (...) not only to hold the Idol
as accursyd, but also that we utterly abhor and accounte most abominable
things that apperteyne there unto, and have nothing to do with it, least we be
snaryd with it, read we not in the Machabees, how the Lord distroyd all those
that had any stuff of the Idols, 2. match. 12 Joshua. 7.
and how was Achan plagyd for reserving those things, which the Lord would
have dystroyd and accursyd, a subtle practys.
we read that Iulianus the apostata caused the heathen to accomodat them
selves to the manners of the Christyans, and their vsages thynkyng by this
means to entice them to Paganism, and if we compel the godly to conform
them selves to the Papists, I greatly fear, least we fall into Papisme:
alas, that such compulsyon should be vsyd toward us, and so great lenite toward
the Papists, how many Papists inioye lyberte and lyuyngs, which neither have
sworn obedyent to the Queen's majesty, nether do yet any part of deutye
toward their miserable flocks, those mysers laughe, and triumph to se us
thus dealt with, not ashamyd here upon to bragg, that they trust that the rest
of their things will follow. But he that sittyth in the heavens, shall laughe
them to thorn, and at leangthe shall give an end to our deep syghinges, and
deliver us from all heaviness sorrows and myseris, wherefore let us never yealde
to this tryumphe of the Pope against Christ, Lord Jesus be merciful unto us,
and let thy wrath be pouryd upon them that call not on the name of the Lord,
if true reformacyon can not be had. Yet let Christyan liberty prevail
against compulsion to evil, let not the Papists abuse us as the Iewys did
the Christyans, when they had the temporal sword on their side, pytey ye
dyssolate churches hear the cries and gronyns of so many thousands of gods
pore children that hunger and thyrst for sprituall fode, we neade not to
apealle to gods word, to the prymatiue church to the just plages which has
byne pouryd and is pouryd contynuallye, upon the wordle for lack of true
reformacyon of relygyon, but let your own conscience judge between our cause
and our enemies, and if we seek nothing but gods glory crave equity and
right desire Christyan liberty, labor to overthrow Idolatry and to wine
soulys unto Christ, why should we not be hard, why are we so uncharitably
dealt with all the Lord move your hearts and open your eyes, that we may all
praise gloryfy his holy name, that when the end of our pilgrimage shall be endyd
most ioyfullye we may rest with him in his everlasting glory through Christ
our savior, to whom with the Father and the Holygost be all praise glory
and honor, for ever.

To the Reader.
TO my faithful Brethren, we give thanks to God for your constancy and
vpryght delynge in this great controversy now raysyd by packynge of enemies
about the wearinge of popish apparel, and as ye have well begone, there is no
doubt, but the Lord in mercy shall keep ye pure and blameles to the end. It
has byne no small joy and comfort to many godly and good Churches, which
daily and howerly prays for your perseuera^ce, and that it would please God
to ease it, when his good will and pleasure is. So on the other side much
lamenting the blyndnes of those that goes about to defend it: but
especially those that are become persecutors of their godly and faithful
brethren: but as charity requires, we desire God never lay it to their
charge, but give them grace to rise again unto whom we le^e them wether they
stand or fall. Let Lottes wife be a warning in time to take heed. Moses that
blessed servant of God would not alter the value of a curten, or a lytill pyne
in the Arcke, so zealous was he in the Lords work: nor never brought any
thing out of his own head to the people: But had always the warrant of the
word for him, to conclude, what so ever may be objected against the refusars
of those ydolators garments, for what so ever they bring, may be redused into
this points, that Godly men either need not or ought not to be scrupulous in so
small a matter, which answer ye shall understand as folowith with an answer to
a question at the end hereof. The Lord for his Christ sake make Ephrahim and
Manassis agree, that we may all with on heart and mind vnfaynydly seek Gods
glory, the edificacion of his people, that we may live in all godly peace,
unity, and concord. This grant, o Lord, for Christ Jesus sake, to whom, with
the, and the Holygoste, be all praise, glory, and honor for ever and ever. Fare
ye well dear Brethren.

DEarly beloved, you that have wit, understanding, and will to be instructyd
in this controuersi^ now raysyd in the Church about apparel, at this time
this shall suffyce. Yt is true that the teachers of handye crafts affirm,
that no man can attain to such excellent perfeccyon in work, as may be
disputed of by reasone, much less when the rule of religion must be framyd
according to the rule of Gods will, which is ye rule of all perfeccyon, may
we look that any thing can so perfectly be performyd of imperfect man, that in
all points yt may answer to the perfeccion that God requirith: nevertheless God
requirith his service to be such as him sealfe is, deuyne, pure, sincere,
unmingled, and in no part corruptyd, and as lack of strenthe shall not excuse
us, in that we can not, so neclygence makythe us more wicked, if that we may
perform, and we will not. First we are requiryd to love God with all our
hearts, all our minds, and all our strength, that precisenes is comendable,
which withholdith not a lytill, when all is requiryd. Deuteronomy. 18.
Thou shall be perfect with thy Lord thy god. Thou shall not bend either to
thy ryghthande, or to the leafte. Thou shall nether add, (...). Thou shall not
inquier for the gods of the Gentyls, saying: How did those Gentyles serve
their gods. Thou shall not do so to the Lord thy god. For whatsoever the
Lord abhors, that did they to their gods. God will have his children so to
abhor these supersticion, yt they should fle even from that infeccio^ that
comythe by hearing. The zeall that God requirith.
Furthermore, so many things as ar co^mandyd of leprous, me^streous, dead
bodies, were many, which might not be touchyd without defyling, what other
things were they in that rude people, God keep us from all outward show of
Popery.
but exercises of precyse pureness and cleanes, the observance of such
shadows, although it has been long since abolyshyd, yet the everlasting
truth remaynyth: much more in presence of the body, that no profane or
defylyd thing may be minglyd with gods service. Moreover god forbydyth all
strange corruptions mixtures, when he forbyddyth them to sow land with diverse
seeds, to plowghe with an ox and an ass, to wear lyuyne and woollen to
gether. For lyberte and costome even in ye least matters bredythe boldness, and
in his commandment god has also respect to the kind of apparel. Finally
when this cleanes is streachyd even to brute beasts, mark well.
who would not believe that God requirith an utter detestacion of all uncleanness,
especially in religion. Seeing all these laws perteyne to the first
commandment, according to the same precise rule did the holy fathers exercise
them selves unto puryte, therefore it is never read that the godly Patriarchs
did sacrifyce upon the Idolators alters, but whythersoeuer they remouid,
Example of holy men.
always they buyldid new alters. Furthermore Abraham would not take a thryde
of the King of Sodoma. Jacob buried the earinges that wear ornaments of
supersticion, with the Idols them selves. Moses to blemishe the service of
God would accept no conditions at all, there shall not remain on house,
says he very precislye. Dauith would not take the names of the Idols in his
lypes. Ezechias brake the brazen serpent, not only cha^gyd the use of it. What
greter herytykes ca^ there be, then the Papists?
The Holy ghost praysithe those godly Kings, which destroyed the high places,
as Ezechias and Josias, in which places sometime the people did worship god.
Elyazer would not feign that he did eat swynes flesh. S. Pawle byddythe,
Refrain from all show of evil. S. John forbyddyth us to salute an herytyke
(...) wytnessith, when he met an herityke, would not give him other answer,
but that he knew him to be the Deuells eldeste son. for such fear had the
Apostels and their disciples, that they would not comunicate with on word
with any that had corruptyd the faith. Finally S. Pawle in plain words
co^mandyth precisnes, Ephe. 5.
saying, Take heed that ye walk precislye or exactlye, for so the greek word
signifies. Last of all, let us not forget what our Savior Christ says: He
that is faithful in the least, will be faithful in the most. Who also
teachith us, how faithfully and precislye we should walk, what cold be more
precisly spoken of, the law shall pass until all be fullfyllyd, and he that
breakyth one of the least commandments, and teachith other so to do, either by
word, or by example, shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven. Yt is evident by
these reasons and examples, that no precisenes or scrupulosite in gods
religion, can be to much or blame worthy. Towchinge ye substance, there is no
controversy, but yt is lawful as the good creature of god, and to this purpose
pertayne those sayings: The kingdom of heaven is nether meat nor drink.
Meat co^mendith us not to god. Whatsoever enterithe in to the mouth, defylyth
not the man. All things ar clean to them that are clean. and other like
places of scripture, all which they pertayne to the matter or creature and
substance only, not to every use, fassion, or manner of using. It is to much
doltyshenes, not to understand all thing a right, except we will also
conclude of the same places, that by glotony, dronkenes, whordome, disquisyd
aparell, and such like, the law of god is not broken. garments therefore that are vrgyd in respect of the form and use, they are not indifferent, and first
of the end, which they labor so much to prove that it is chaungyd, that those
things which before were vsyd to supersticio^, now are co^mandyd for order and
comlynes. No godly man doubtyth, but the Queen's Majesty intendinge an other end
in commanding of those things, then the Papists vsyd them for. But who so
well considerith ye nature of those things, shall plainly se, that the end
which the commander propoundyth, does not follow, but according to the
diversity of them yt use them, and them that judge of them, a clean contrary
end ensuythe, for many popish prestes use them to the same supersticious end
that they did in Popery, and greatest of all is ye multitude of ignorant
people, that iudgith none otherwise of them. Cor. 8.
All men have not knowledge, for some with conscience of the Idol, even yet do
eat meat offered to Idols. So Gedeon made an Ephode, Iud. 8.
not that ye people should go a whorynge after it, yet was it the destruction
of him and his house for ever. Secondly it can not serve for order and
comlynes, Cor. 14.
which has in it no necessary cause of edifying. Let all things be done for
edifying. Nether can it be conuertyd to ye comlynes of the Christian Church,
which is the chaste spowse of Christ, which is taken from Antichrist, and the
filthy whore of Babylon. What consent has Christ with Belyall: what portion
has the faithful with the infydell? or what agreement has the temple of God
with Images? If the reason of S. Paul be examynyd, 2. Cor. 6.
by the which he dissuadith the Corynthians from eating of meat offeryd to
Idols, the same may be also extendyd to garments consecratyd to Idolatry. The
nature of cerymonies and rytes is to make the vser to have fellowship with the
principal of that religion, as the Jews of the alter, Christians with Christ,
and Gentiles with Deuells. As many as are partakers of the bread which we
break, are partakers of the body of Christ. They therefore that eat meat
offeryd to Idols, are partakers of deuells. And as many as are baptized have
put on Christ: it is not to be fearyd, least as many as wear antychristes
robes, will take more if auctorite command it, neither does the auctoryte of the
Christian Magistrate excuse us, except we think, Act. 15. Deuteronomy. 12.
that Sergius Paulus might permyte that S. Paul had forbidden the sentence of
Iamys, which is, that the gentyls should abstain from the polucion of Idols,
God will borowe nothing of Idols to garnysh or become his religion. thou
shall not do so to the Lord thy god, but rather he commandyth utterly to
destroy their alters, woddes, pyllers, and their very names. He forbyddyth
them also to bring any thing in to their howses that belongythe to Idols.
Esaye chap. 30. byddyth those that are earnestly turnyd to the worship of
god, to cast away the relics of Idolatry, You shall, says he, put out the
covering of the Imagis of silver, that is all thing belonging to Idolatry.
and the precious vestyme^ts of the golden Imagis, and thou shall cast them
away like a menstrous clowte, and say unto yt: Auawnte, or get the hence.
Fynallye when all godly men abhor the monstrous apparel of Friars, Monks,
Chanons, I can not se, by what order they should exteme the ornaments of
Popish Preastes, whose order is as wicked as Freyers, Monks, or any other,
which thing may be said of the rest of the Popish ceremonies, which may all
with like precepte and color, and by as good reason be receuid in the
Churches as those. But admyttinge that these things were never so indifferent,
yet it can not be that we should think them lawful, for us to use them: For
eue^ those things, which by them sealues are lawful, when an other
circumstance is ioynyd to them, then become they unlawful for a Christian to
use them, as in these cases. First we can not cast of all doubtfulnes, having
so many reasons on our side, and so many examples both of learnyd men, and
best reformyd Churches, but in all things most indifferent. Saint Paul
chargith every man to be certanly persuadyd in his own mind, which some men
untruly translate, Let every man abownde in his own sense, for he that with
doubt of conscience eatyth, which of it sealfe is lawful, is condemnyd,
because he does it not of faith. Now the assurance of faith must be sought no
where, but in Gods word. Secondlye, thowghe we should satisfye our
consciences, yet this man is defylid, which is not persuadid by Gods word, but
increased by our examples, that he dare do that, whereof before he doubted, and
this is to give an offense, as they commonly call it to anger them, for they
that are best pleasyd with these matters, are most offendyd, that they stomble
and fall, we must not do what so ever is lawful, but what so ever also is
profitable to edifying: nether must we only regard what lyberte permyttyth,
but rather what our brothers proffyt requiryth. Thyrdlye, we may not
altogether neclecte what infydells judge of us in the using of things lawful
by them scalfes, and therefore S. Paul byddeth them that are called to the
feasts of the gentyls, so sone as mencyon is made of meat offeryd to Idols,
to abstain from eatinge of it, because of him that told of it, and his
conscience, not of him sealfe, but of an other. What the Papists judge of us,
may casely be seen by this, ye Harding for the retayning of those Popish
cerymonies, co^teynith hope that popery shall be restoryd: what the ignorant
people judge of the reamnants of papistri retaynyd, wise men may well consider.
Herunto might have byne ioynid the sentences of old Doctors, Justinius,
Ireneus, Tertullianus, Agustyne, Ambros, Chrysostums, Celestinus, and almost
all the rest, for abhorrynge the customs and ryghtes of the Jews and gentyles
and heritykes, but Gods truth nedyth not man's auctoryte, except they that be
against us, in this cause will appeal to the fathers, the^ shall they
perceive, that in number both of Doctors, and sentences, we shall be nothing
inferior to them. In the mean time this may suffyce, to show first that the
precysians is blameles, secondly the garments are not indifferent, and thyrdly
that thowghe they were indifferent, yet there is sufficient reason at this time,
why we should not wear them. Come Lord Jesus, and make an end of this wicked
wordle, that thy saints may come to gether, that we may sing with the in thy
holy hill for ever. He that ouercomith, shall be crownyd. Pray, pray, as the
Apostell Peter says: the end of all things is at hand.

An Answer to a question, that was mouyd, whi the godly men would not wear a
surples.


We are persuadyd, Mayor.
that we may not use any thing repugnant to Christian lyberte, nor maintain
an opinion of holiness where none is, which were Ipocrisy, nor consent to
Idolatri, which were denial of the truth, or discorage the godly, incoragynge
the wicked, nor distroying ye Church of Christ, which are bownde to edifye,
nor consent unto confusion, where God requiryth order, nor show disobedience,
where God requiryth to obey.

Minor.
But in using of a surples, we should do that which is repugnaunt to Christian
liberty, maintain an opinion of holiness, where none is, show consent to
Idolatry, deny the truth, dyscorage the godly, and incorage the wicked or
ungodly, consent to confusion and show disobedience, where God commandithe to
obey.

Conclusion
We may not with good conscience, as we are persuadyd wear a surples.

The Mayor is prouyd by Saint Paul Gal. 5. who commandyth to Christian
liberty, by the example of Christ Matt. 15. who would not have his disciples to
maintain an opinion of holiness, note the example of good men.
which the Jews had in wasshyng of hands: by the doctrine of Pawle.2. Cor.
6. who will have no agreement with the temple of God and the Idols: by the
example of Danyel.6. who openid his wyndowe toward Jerusalem, lest he might
seame to deny his profession or consent with ye wicked: by the example of
Paul Gal. 2. who reprouyd Peter for the discoragyng of the godly gentiles, and
incoraging of the froward Jews: by the doctrine of the same Apostell.2. Cor.
13. where he teachith that Mynysters have power to edifye, not to destroy: by
the example of Patriarchs, and Prophets, which in the worshipping of God, wear
by no means confowndyd with the Idolators: by the doctrine of Peter and John
acts, which affyrmithe to be more right to obey God, then men. But for more
evident proof hereof, we may let you se some practices of ancient Fathers.
Tertulian in his book De corona militis, lykythe them unto dom^e Idols, such
as do use any thing according to the ornament of Idolles: and further, if to
lean upon an Idol, is strange from the faith, fasting is good, yet the godly
would not use it that day, as the herytyk did.
what shall seame upon the habyte of an Idol. Augustyne ad Casulanum, warnythe
not to fast on the Sunday, least thereby consent might be showed to the
wicked Maniches. They that wear any thing after the manner of Idols, and if
it be strange from faith to lean upon an Idol, what is it to wear the habyt
of an Idol. The fourth Counsel of Toletane Canon. 5. for avoiding of consent
with Herytyckes, decreed that once dyppynge should be vsyd in Baptysme. A
Papist of our time affyrmith that the Apostels to avoid consent to Iudaisme,
abolysshed the Sabothe day, and sanctyfyed the day of the Lord. The great
Clarke Orygen, as Epiphanius wrytith in his.2. book.1. Beware of decemblyng.
Tome, carried palm with those that offeryd to the Image Serapis, allthoughe he
protestyd openly, that he did offer unto Christ, and not unto Serapis, yet was
he excomunycatyd, and cast out of the Church by the Marters and Confessors
which then were at Athens. The Christian sowdiars which by Julian sultelte
were browght to offer incens, Beware of deceytfull practyses.
as it is written Historia Tripartita lib. 6. chap. 30. when they perceuyd their
fault, which unawares they had committed in consentyng to Idolatri, they rane
forth into the streats professede their relygion, testified them sealues to be
Christians, affyrmyng that their hands only had co^sentyd unto Paganism, the
nature of true Christian.
and that their hearts did nothing agree thereunto, and whereas their hands had
offendyd vnadvysydlye, they wyshyd to bestow their whole bodies to be
tormentyd for Christ, although with torments and pains most creuell and
horyble. I trust we need not to labor any further for the proof. By the use
of the surples men are iniciat in to ye Popes clergy, as it aperith by ye
Pontifycall, De clerico faciendo. If ye Galathians by circumcision rather lost
their lyberte in Christ, then profytyd any thing, by iniciatinge them sealues
in to Iudaisme. How may you retain the lyberte in Christ, and profyt in his
religion by wearinge the Popes lyuerye, we can not perceive? But by the use of
the surples, is mayntaynyd an Ipocritycall opinion of holiness, ye Pontifical
termithe it Habitum sancte religionis, the habyt of an holy religion. Durand
lib. 3. de rationale diuinorum, says, That it is Vestis linea, the lynyne
garment, in which they that serve about the services of the alter and holy
things, ought to use upon their clothes, a surples, it is for the whitnes of
it, or it signifies the puryte or chastete, according to that saying: Let
your garments, that is, your works, be white at all times, that is clean:
Mark what lying signs is in the surples inuentyd by Papists.
but for his name, it figurith the mortificacion of the flesh. It is called a
Surples, because that in the old time they did wear it upon shynny coats,
made of the skynnes of the dead, which is vsyd to this day in certain
Churches, representynge that Adame, after he had synnyd, was clothed with such
garments. Thyrdly, with what good conscience can the godly wear yt, judge good
Brother.
it notith Innocenci, and therefore it is put on before all other holy
vestures, because that they that are deputyd to worshippynge, ought to excel
in life and in all virtues, according to the saying of the psalm: Innocencies
do ryghtly cleue unto me. Fourthely, for the bredthe of it, it betokenythe
Charity, wherefore they are worn upon profane and common vestures, it is to
be markyd that charity coueryth the multitude of sins. Fyftlye, for the
fassyon of it, in that is it made like a Cross, or Jews gallows, it fygurythe
the passion of the Lord, and they ye wear, that ought to be crewcyfyed with
the vices and concupiscences. In mayntayninge this opinion of holiness, with all
other inue^cions, which by lyinge seignes, which they have had to it, we know
not how to avoid consent unto that Idolatri, which Durant and the Papiste
maintain and profess, and to deny the Popes ceremonies, the doctrine which
we teach, how should it not dyscorage the godly, and incorage the
supersticious in their errors? we can not edefye the Church of Christ
apparentlye, shewinge our sealues to be on of the Popes clergy. Seeing S. Paull
These. 3. willythe to avoid all apparens of evil, and to be shufflyd in a
surples, which the Popes clergy wear, were rather a confusion then an order,
which they them sealues would be loathe to suffer, if they might get again the
keys into their hands, they would cry with open mowthe, as their pontifical
teach them, and pluck the surples of our backs by the autoryte of almyghtie
God the Father, the Son, The surples is an holy garment of the Papists.
and the Holyghoste. saying, and we take from the all our clerkly habyt, and we
put on ye apparel of religion, and depose, degrade, and spoil the of all
orders clerkely benefice, and clerkelye lyuinge, Mark the follye of Papestes.
and we restore the to the servitude and ignominy of the secular habyte. Is it
not a disorder, that Christians should show them selves slaves to the Popes
order? were it not better to serve God in commun attire, then to please the
Pope by disquisinge our selves in supersticious surplessis: were it not better
to obey God, who wyllyth us to serve him in spret, and in truth, then to obey
men, followyng the deuyse of Pope Syluester, the fassyon of the Jews, and
practyse of the Papists: where it not better, by leaving of a Surples to
follow Christ in breaking men's tradicions, the^ by the use thereof to be a
companion of Popes and Pharisees? If this do not seame sufficient to prove the
Minor at this time, it shall be more at large dyscoursyd hereafter. Concerning ye
Queen's Maiestes commandment, herein we acknowledge our sealues bownde to obey
in all things lawfullye commaundyd, so can not we be persuadyd to use that in
the minysteri, which our consciences teaches us to be replenished with
Idolatrous Ipocrisye, and also the example of other men which does were it,
ought nothing at all to move us to were a surples in the minysterie, no more
then to consent with them in persecutyng those men whom they term sedicious
scismatyckes for leauyng them of. Thus as ye se, shortly dear Brethren, we
leave the surples, as the Popes badge to the shaven Clergy, and you as Gods
chosen to the protection of the almyghtie whysshynge, that God may give us
grace as well inwardelye as outwardlye, to seek for syncerite, and to wayght
with all patience the good will and pleasure of the almyghtye, who will and can
healpe when pleasith him. Fare ye well in the Lord Jesus.

A Godly Prayer.
OH Lord God and heavenly Father, which art a just Judge to punish all them,
that do contynewe to offend the, as thou art a Father most pytyfull to receive
to mercy all those, which give over themselves to please the, show me thy
grace and favor, so that I may be truly touchid with inward displeasure of my
sins, and that in the place of flattering my self to sleep in sin, I may be
so cast down in heart, that the rather I may truly with mouth confess most
humbly to give the, the honor, glory, and praise, dew unto thy holy name, and
that as thou of thy great mercy doste instruct us thereunto by thy holy word,
so (for thy names sake) make that ye same may so lighten and clear our
conscience, that in dew examination of all our hole lyffe, we may truly learn
to be angry and displeasid with all our former, and corrupt living. Oh that it
may please the to draw nere unto us, in addressyng and guydyng our footsteppes
in the true and perfect may of obedyence to thy holy laws and commandments.
Send thy holy Angel to pitche his tents round about us, that Satan and his
internal army, never prevail against us, but allways with strong faith we may
thorough Jesus Christ withstand all his crafty engines and snares, knowing
undoubtedly that thou never forsakest them that put their trust in the. Oh let
us not be led by the infirmytie of our untoward flesh, but strenghten us by
the virtue of the holy spirit. Suffer us not to lie under thy heavy wrath and
vengeance through Ipocrysye, but rather touch us so inwardly, that we may
without ceasyng, syghe, and groan unto the, by true and unfeigned repentance.
And although we be not always so well disposyd to ask and pray, as we ought
to do, yet (good Lord) for thy names sake, stretche out thy mighty hand, that
by the gracious workyng of thy holy Spirit, our minds and hearts may be
drawn from all erthly and corruptible things, so that our prayers may proceed
of an ernest and inward affection, so that we never presume to come before yt
with a dobell heart, knowing that whosoever askethe and prays for any thing
of the, not asking in faith, can not obtain. Increace our faith therefore (oh
merciful Father) that we presently may lively feel the benefit of remission
and pardon of all our sins, thoroughe the merytes and death of Christ Jesus
our Savior, and so work in us forever hereafter to live in thy fear, and to
stand in awe of thy displeasure, that thou may contynew our merciful Father
world without end. God grant yt.


