Whether it be mortal sin to transgress civil laws, which be the
commandments of civil Magistrates.

The judgment of Philip Melancton in his Epitome of moral Philosophy.

The resolution of.D. Hen. Bullinger, and D. Rod. Gualter, of.D. Martin Bucer,
and.D. Peter Martyr, concerning thapparrel of Ministers, and other indifferent
things.

Whether it be mortal sin to transgress Civil laws, which be the
commandments of Civil Magistrates?
Moral virtue requires not only to restraigne outwardly the hands, and to
rule external actions, but also it requires in the mind a deliberatio^ and
an intent of counsel: It also requires a mind inured to hold in all
braydes, and to use a certain moderation to deliberate. These two things are
truly required to virtues, and youth must be trained up, to understand the
force and nature of either of them. Deliberation or aduisement, must seek out
and understand the causes and reasons of al actions, which (as it were with a
bridle) draw back the furious mind into the right way, and show what is to
be done.

But moral is called that facility of the mind, or equabilitie, moderation,
and stay, wherewith it can restraigne it self, until that it be well advised of
the matter, to do that which is most right, with a certain pleasure.

Seeing then it is nedeful to understand the causes of honest actions, it is not
enough to know the laws, but it is most necessary to the perfourmance of
moral virtue, to know what the authority of the laws be, how far it is
needful to obey them. The mind being with this doctrine established, shall
both think more honorablye of the laws, and also understand how far
forth it must obey. This judgment of the authority of laws parteyneth to
moral virtue.

First I answer, that to break ciui^^ laws, or the precepts of civil
Magistrates is mortal sin, though there be no matter of offense: Romans 13.
for Paul says plainly, that we must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance
only, but also because of conscience, that is, that we not only fear civil
punishment, but also know that our conscience is made gilty, if we do not obey.
Now it is the part of a good mind to consider, how great this band of
obedience and common quietness is, which God also requires, that we obey laws
and Magistrates.

And if we obey not, he says that he will revenge it. And God truly punishes
both in this life, and also after this life, Exodus 20.
as the fourth precept speaks of punishments in this life. If thou will live
long upon earth. etc. for that precept gives charge of obedience, that we obey
not only our parents, but also all them to whom our parents do give their
authority, to wit, the magistrates. And therefore many other sentences in the
scripture, Prou. 24.
speak of the punishments that shall be suffered in this life. Fear God and
the king, and have no fellowship with the seditious, for their destruction shall
come suddenly. And Christ says, Mat. 26.
He which takes the sword in hand, shall perish with the sword: for to
take a sword in hand, signifies to take up the sword forbidden by the laws
and the Magistrates, that is, to be seditious, and to disobey the present
Magistrates. And the examples set out in the scriptures, do not only show
this, but also the histories of all ages, that murderers, theefes, perjured
persons, unjust judges, seditious and tyrauntes, are for the most part punished
by God in this life. This I say unto this end, that we may know, how that
God requires this discipline, to keep men ^^awe with fear of punishment.

This fear increases reverence toward ^he laws, and causes some morality
in our minds, when as it brydleth as it were our lusts, and inureth them to
obedience. And there is no doubt, but that many grievous chances are
punishments of this barbarous liberty, which many take upon them, and will
not be ruled by the authority of the superiors. For the law of God erreth
not, which says, Honor thy father and mother, if thou will live long upon
earth. Besides that, there is more reverence in our minds, when as we believe,
that the breach of the laws is punished with eternal torments after this
life, except we do repent. This sentence touching the precepts of magistrates
must wisely be understand, namely of those precepts, which bid us not to do
against the commandments of God. We must also consider, whether it be
wantonness in them which disobey, or whether some causes happen, which have some
excuse. The difference which Gerson uses, lyketh me, who discerns laws,
saying, That some are made for necessity such as serve for common quietness, as
of theft, murder, marriages, dividing of inheritaunces, tributes, warfare,
judgments, and such like. Some are not made so much for necessity, as for
comlynesse, as it is provided, that a woman marry not, before she have left
mourning for her former husband.

This difference likes me, not only because reason breadeth sundry bonds, but
rather, because the mind of the magistrate is evident, which in the former
matters simply requires obedience: in other lighter matters it does not so
exact it. The mind of the lawemaker must be considered, how far he will
bind, and yet in these lyghter things there may be no wantonness and
contempt of authority, for it is an evil example. But it is profitable as
well for discipline, as the quietness of the common wealth, so to accustom
our minds, that even in trifles they may regard the authority of the laws.
And this we must know, that we live not to our selves, but to the common
wealth. We must therefore take heed, that our examples be no public hurt. The
same does Plato most gravely write in his fifth book of laws, that he is the
best and most worthy citizen, which accounts not triumphs or any victories
to be the chiefest renown in the city, but to excel others in diligent
obeying of the laws.

But here the question is asked, whether the like judgment be of
Ecclesiastical ceremonies, which by the authority of man are ordained. I
answer, that herein this rule must be observed, that in case of offense it is
sin to break them, but no offense being given, they may be broken without
mortal sin. For it is needful to keep this doctrine, that such ceremonies
are things indifferent, and not necessary for righteousness before god, as it
is indifferent to wear a gown or a cloak etc. This rule of Paul is profitable
both to common peace and the quietness of our consciences, for it co^serueth
public rites, ^t bids to beware of offenses, common tumultes, and public
disturbing of orders. Again it delivers the conscience from many
superstitious opinions, and horrible cruelty: for if good minds do think
that the obseruyng of such orders is necessary (no cause of offense being) it
wylbe a hard bondage.

In so great a number of rytes, how often shall our consciences fall? sometime in
fastings, in rehearsyng of prayers, in keeping of holidays, or such like: many
things happen to them, especially which have business, why they can not
always observe these orders. Therefore this rule contains a profitable
moderation, which forbids public offenses, preserves customs profitable
for quietness, and privately delivers the consciences from danger.

When the causes of these laws and traditions are understand, good natures
will the more embrace the^, then is it fit that these things be known, namely
that these ordinances are appointed by ye Church for good and public orders
sake, and that the Church will not privately entangle any man's conscience. And
most moral it is to love common quietness and order, good men therefore will
greatly embrace these ordinances, seeing that to quietness and order they are
auayleable, and in that they are delivered from superstitious opinions, and
know that without danger these ceremonies may be left, no offense being given.

But here it is asked, whether Ecclesiastical ordinances, and the civil
laws of magistrates do diversely bynd. I answer. The bond is unlike: and
although reasons may be asked, yet the playnest way is to judge these things
by the evident and clear testimonies of scripture. First therefore I will
rehearse them, then will I add the reasons and interpretation, lest any
absurdity may be taken by our opinion.

Touching obedience due to the civil laws, Paul says, we must obey, Romans 13.
not only for fear of vengeance, but also for conscience sake. This
commandment byndeth us even without matter of offense: for we must obey the
authority of God, though no offense be given. Coloss. 2. Galat. 5.
But touching Ecclesiastical ceremonies, Paul says, Let no man condemn you
for meat or drink, or a piece of an holy day. And again, Stand fast in the
liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and wrap not your selves again in
the yoke of bondage. And Christ says, Mat. 15.
That which enters into the mouth, defiles not the man, and the apostle
excuses them, which break traditions.

Because it is needful that this doctrine be in the Church, that those
traditions touching meat and such like are no worshypping or ryghteousnes, Not
of necessity in them self: But for necessity of obedience.
but things indifferent: therefore the gospel teaches, that our consciences
may not be burdened with the opinion of necessity. Notwithstanding, because
this life can not lack ordinances and ceremonies, this moderation is
needful, to have them so observed, lest the doctrine of true worshyppyng and
of the benefit of Christ should be darkened. Again, lest our consciences
should be burdened with infinite vexations, which might cause shipwreck of
faith? Therefore the Gospel will have us understand that these rytes may be
left out, without matter of offense be given, but for good order, and for
auoydyng of offenses, they ought to be kept. This liberty being lymited by the
authority of the Gospel, can not be taken away by man's authority.

I have showed by the testimonies of scripture, that the bynding is unlike.
This is the playnest answer unto this question, but we will show the reason.

The first is taken of the efficient causes, or the right of power, and this
Gerson follows. The Civil magistrate by Gods authority, has right to make
honest and profitable laws, in those matters which parteyne to the defense of
this corporal life and civil society, as of judgments, the penalties of
offenses, contractes, successions, and such like, as Solomon says, Pro. 8.
By me kings do reign, and appoint just things.

But Ecclesiastical power is limited, so as it has a commandment what it
ought to teach, and that it invent no new worshippyng, neither burden the
consciences with traditions of ceremonies. For Peter says, Why tempt you God,
laying on a yoke. etc. Act. 15.
And Paul, Why make you decrees? Colo. 2.
touch not, handle not. etc. Seeing then that the right of either power is
unlike, the laws also diversely do bind.

Second reason, of the final causes of laws. Civil laws, are the bands of
common society, therefore in breakyng them, charity is always hurt, for
because every one ought to use his obedience, as a seal, to the defense of
common quietness, also the common tributes and al his travail must thereto be
applied: when this they do not, they deceive the rest, and enjoy other men's
offices, employing nothing of their own unto it, even as he which to a common
banquet gives not his money, beguileth the gestes.

The example also in breaking it does hurt, and troubles common quietness:
therefore in civil laws, respect of charity and offense is always of force.
Civil laws always to be observed. Ceremonial may sometimes be broken.
But most part of ceremonies are private, and domestical observations, the
breach whereof hurts not others. Then seeing in them is no hazard of charity,
nor offenses chance, ye authority of these laws is unlike* ^or of these
also we have spoken, that then they are necessary, neither can they be broken
without sin, when as the breach breadeth offenses, that is, hurts others
men's faith and manners, or rashly troubles the quietness of others. And
although it be profitable to consider these reasons and causes, and to
understand the degrees of laws: yet is it more sure playnelye to give
judgment out of these sentences of scripture before recited, for the reasons
have many doubts, and do not sufficiently stablishe the conscience. And wise
men may seek and invent many dark matters on both sides, if that we shall
judge only upon reasons, and not out of the scriptures. But here young men are
to be warned, that although it be needful to know, that these indifferent
things are no worshippyng of God: yet they must learn, that the case of
offense is large, and with diligent care they must beware of it: for in the
breach of traditions two things are hazarded, discipline, and tranquillity,
or the agreement of the common wealth. It is fit for us to understand chiefly
the greatness and force of either of these, being occupied in the studies of
lea^nyng and virtues.

First for discipline sake, there need certain ordinances: for unskillful
persons, must be accustomed to ceremonies and rites, to holy days, to certain
readinges, to pr^uate and public exercises, and for that cause Paul calls
the law a schoolemaister: for these ceremonies are certain institution^;
necessary for young years.

And although the Gospel does bring a higher doctrine, yet it will not have
discipline and institution to be abolished, but it commands that men be
restraygned, ruled, and taught with such instructions. What profit this
discipline has, I have showed else where: for God is effectual in the which
are tractable to be taught and resist^ not his word. Wherefore the example
hurts in the breach of traditions, for the common people, which naturally
hates the bands of laws, willingly follows these examples, and thereof takes
contempt of the whole discipline, and of all the laws. These ordinances being
abolished, there can be no discipline, neither can youth and the unlearned
people be taught.

Then of necessity must follow exceedyng barbarousnes, and destruction, where
youth and the common people can not be instructed. How great a wickedness and
murder is it, to give such examples, whereby this desolation may arise? And
in the other part of offense, how much evil is it, that the quietness of the
Church and common weal is troubled*

In this corporal life we have need of ceremonies for order sake, or for
decency, which for man is most semely. For if this order b^ disanull^d,
infinite confusion does follow. For where there is no authority of teachers,
no certain times to teach, no certain teachers, no certain form of
doctrine: in such confusion, neither can the Gospel be preserved, neither the
Church instructed.

Finally, as order and consent of public ordinances does join me^ in
fellowship together: so confusion of order does separate men's minds breadeth
horrible tumultes, and endless war.

Let us then think, that in breach of traditions, the example commonly and
easyly spreads abroad amongst others. Let us consider, what evil is in an
example. Wherefore lest we burden our consciences with danger, lest we hurt
others, let us observe with greater care the public ordinances whatsoever.
It is tyrannical to regard more what delights our selves, then what may do
good to others: for we are not borne unto our selves: but our life parteyneth
unto others, especially unto the Church, that is, to the glory of Christ, to
the conservation of the ministry, and the retayning of discipline for the
people. These two things which are the greatest, the Church desires chiefly
to defend. Herein let us show our obedience, our diligence and endeavor, for
the common quietness and health of us all. Plato says, we must love our
country more then our mother, because our country is a certain heavenly
thing. But the Church ought to be our true country, and this truly is
heavenly: for it is the Temple of God, and the congregation of the members of
Christ. Wherefore this we must love, and wyllyngly obey it, and yield much
unto the profit and tranquillity thereof. Galat. 4.
Paul calls traditions, beggarly elements: which although they be beggerlye,
that is, small things, transitory, not eternal, they are no worshippyng, they
are no ryghteousnes, yet they are elements, that is, ordinances, which this
corporal life can not want, because of discipline and good orders sake.
Wherefore thos^ ordinances are not to be disanulled, but Paul's counsel must
be considered, who although he call them beggarly, yet he calls them
elements, and so takes away the praise of righteousness, showing still that
there be ordinances, which have their profit. Great is the for^e of
discipline, there is no sweeter harmonye, then good order in a common wealth.
Therefore these are called elements* that is, ordinances, which preserve tha^
harmony.

Philip Melancton upon the.xiii. Chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans.
LET every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no power but
of GOD. The powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive
to them selves damnation. For rulers are not fearful to good works, but to
the evil. VVylt thou not fear the power, do well, and thou shall have praise
of the same: for he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But if thou do evil,
fear: for he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God,
revenger of wrath on him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for fear of punishment: but also because of conscience
etc.

In the end of this precept stands the conclusion, and the proposition
repeated again. (That of necessity we must obey) And that certaynely for
conscience sake, no^ only for the penalty.

This addition or exaggeration must b^ diligently considered. He that is taken
of a thief, if he can avoid him, escapes without offense. But contrary, if
any man could cast from him such charges as the magistrat^ commands, yet he
cannot reject them without sin, without the magistrate agrees thereto, for
that we be necessarily^ bound to the magistrates, and also for conscience.

Some teachers have holden in disputation, that the precepts of the
magistrate^ do not bind to mortal sin, because ^ mere man cannot inflicte a
pain eternal But the error of these men, is plainly confuted by the
testimony of saint Paul, which says, We must be subject, not only for
penalty, but also for conscience, that is, lest our conscience should be
defiled with mortal sin. Ergo, it is mortal sin, to break the statutes
of the magistrate, for that God has made us subject to magistrates, and he
lays his punishment upon such as contemn the magistrate, because therein
also the authority of God is contemned.

And here may it appear, that in the Gospel the authority of the magistrate
is more confirmed and defended, than in any other doctrine: for no other
doctrine so earnestly byndeth men to obedience. For the Gospel does command
obedience, not only for corporal or temporal pains, but also to escape the
wrath of God, an eternal pain, and there is no bond greater than this bond
of conscience. Therefore Emperor Julian, and such other, did great wrong to
the Gospel, when they wrote that the doctrine of the Gospel dissolueth
policy.

And for this cause pay you tribute, for they are Gods ministers, serving for
the same purpose. Give to every man therefore his duty, Tribute, to whom
tribute is due, Custom, to whom custom, Fear, to whom fear, Honor, to whom
honor belongs.

Before he spoke generally of obedience, now he adds the special kinds
thereof, in commaundyng to yield three things, to wit, tribute, fear, and
honor. Tribute comprehends all external burdens which b^ due: as
impositions, customs, diligence, marshall exercise, and such like services
either of body or of goods. For why? the common wealth can not be defended,
unless the princes receive aid of the labor and charge of the subjects.
Therefore in this place Paul affirms tribute and custom to be due, in
saying, that therefore you do pay tribute, for herein the ministers of God
(namely for their ministry, which is the preservation of the common wealth)
be occupied: but this preservation asks the help both of soldiers and other
seruitours, not only in war, but also in peace. Although (considering
indifferently) we find that every magistrate continually do war, whylest he
punishes run gates, thieves and pickers. And for so much as such people as
these, can not be suppressed without the help of soldiers, and citizens: By
duty we are bound to the maintenance of such assistaunce, to make
contribution, and when the greatness of the danger does so require, to minister
our further help to ye magistrate in that behalf. And as officers sent to
apprehe^d runagates, are bound faithfully to do ye same: so soldiers in time
of war, their cities being beseeged, are bound faithfully to defend the
holds committed to their charge to the uttermost that they may. In this kind
of duty, deserves great commendations my country Bruta, situate above
Spires, in the territory of the prince Palatine. For it was defended by the
citizens, with loyal says and great constancy, twice within these few
years. First, in the year of our Lord 1504. being violently assaulted more
then a month together by a valiant army of the Switzers. After that, of late
in the year of our Lord. 1525. when the vplandishe people had stirred up an
horrible commotion, and had moved sedition generallye throughout all Germany,
at what time my countreyme^ remained in their allegeances toward their
princes. And whereas the rebels had assembled out of the lands of Spira and
Whitenberg, on both sides of the town, to spoil the marchaundize, which were
then to be carried from Franckford into Sweuia (because that these rebels had
made the passage dangerous) these marchaundizes were left with us, and
committed to the fidelity and v^liantnes of our countreyme^. In this daunge^
the faith and courage of my countrymen dy^ most manifestly appear: for both
those fur^ous rebels were repelled by force of arme^ from the town, and
those goods (committe^ to their custody) were to their great commendation
defended against all violence.

Fear and Honor, parteyneth to the mind.

Fear, signifies obedience from the hear^

Honor, signifies not only extern^ reverence, but also a reverence in the
consc^ence. And here is a difference betwixt Chr^stian men, and wicked men. For
wicked me^ do only fear the civil punishments, an^ this fear is soon
slypped out of evil men^ hearts: but Christian men do truly fear^ the
magistrate, because they fear God, an^ for that they know him to revenge all
contempt against the magistrate. Wicked ^en show outwardlye the signs of
reue^ence, but inwardlye they think very ill ^f the magistrates, as the
Philosophers do ^estifye in their books, holdyng by disputa^ion, that the
public state of government ^s but mere tyranny. But the Christian men do
truly give honor to the magistrate: and herein stands honor, to attribute
to them power, liberality, wisdom, and iu^tice. And whereas Christian men be
perswa^ed, that all power is ordained of God, and that it is maintained from
God above, they ^cknowledge that power, and think that ^hey be bound to give
place, and submit ^hemselues thereunto. And they also acknow^edge that
bounteousnesse, because they see that mankind has high corporal benefits ^y
the magistrate, that is to say, peace, de^e^ce of their own life, of their
wives, of their ^hyldren, and quietness to seek for their ly^yng, to learn
religion, and other good sci^nces. These be those great benefits, such as ^o
greater ca^ be expressed in worldly causes: ^or these, christian men give
thanks to god, because that he grants these things by ^he magistrate. And
again of their party, they show thankfulness toward the magistrates. And
whereas they be persuaded that this power is ruled from God above, and that
these benefits be given from thence, they pray to God for the magistrate, that
he would vouchsafe to govern him, and to conserve the public peace: for
they know, that not only wicked men, but also the devil himself, lay in
weight against princes, and that without ceasing, they practice the destruction
of all mankind. Therefore this is the chief honor, which the only christian
man attributes to the magistrate, that is to say, Thanks giving to our God,
and prayer for the magistrate. As Hieremie gives special precept in this
cause, that the Jews in their exile would pray for the king of Babylon, and
all his whole kingdom. And Paul bids that we should pray for the
magistrate. 1. Cor. 2.
And verily there is no greater or vehementer exercise of faith amongst so many
public perils, than prayer for public peace. And it is our part to
understand those peryls, and to judge them to parteyne to our self.
Furthermore, the christians attribut^ to the magistrates, wisdom, and
justice, that is, they do not prefer their private judgments, before the
laws and decrees of the magistrate: but obey them. They quarrel not with
them, they do not disanull the laws: and this honor is most necessary to the
pulique peace, not to use cauillation against the laws, nor enuiously to
interpret the^. Moreover, hereto it belongs to cover, to excuse, and to
mitigate, the ouersightes of the laws and of the magistrates. This courteous
interpretation, as it is necessary in our private conversation, so much more
is it necessary in public society toward ye magistrate, as it is written,
Love bears al things, 1. Cor. 13.
and love is the bond of perfection, Coloss. 3.
to prevent all dissolutions of the common wealth. Again, James, 5. 1. Pet. 4.
Love covers the multitude of sins. Again, Obei your magistrates, 1. Pet.
2.
though they be rigorous. Rude and unskillful men, are diligently to be
admonished in this, that they quarrel not, nor change the laws and public
institutions. Father Noe did curse his son Cham, for that he uncovered him
and scorned him: and even so let them be assured which deprave the laws, they
which maliciously make the worst of the magistrates ouersightes, that they be
cursed o^ God, and shall be punished for this offense, for that they give not due
honor to the laws and magistrates, and this slanderous reprehension of laws,
ought the rather to be eschewed, because it brings forth horribl^ commotions
in the common wealth. As Xenophon prudently says, Al innouatio^s in the common
wealth, to be very dangerous. And Plato says, As a man ought not to use any
violence to his father, being in dotage, so likewise should there no extremity
be showed to the country in their weakness. For it is impossible, that great
alterations in common wealths, should be ended without manslaughter. Howbeit,
when the magistrate does command, that we should our selves do any thing
against the precept of God, obedienc^ is not to be given, but in this case, the
rule is to be followed. Acts. 5.
We ought to obey god, more than men.

To the reverend fathers in Christ D. Rob. Horn Bishop of Winchester. D.
Ed. Grindal Bishop of London. D. Ioh. Parcuste B. of Norwiche, his honorable
Lords, and most dear brethren in England.
Right reverend honorable Lords and dearly beloved brethren, the Lord Jesus
bless you, and preserve you from all evil. We send^ you here our opinion,
concerning matters of apparel, written to our worshipful friend master. N.
and master. M. those godly and learned men. And for that cause we send it
unto you, that you might understand, we deal not with our brethren privily,
without your knowledge, who are the principal and chief ministers, and that
so much as in us lies, we seek the unity and concord of your
congregations, in all respects. And we heartely beseech almighty God, to
have a special regard of your estate, and to continue you in one consent an^
unity. We earnestly exhort you, right honorable and dear brethren, to be
careful for those faithful ministers and learned men for they have commonly
their affections. For which cause the apostle warns us, that on^ help to
bear another burden. You man by your authority do very much with the most
noble Lady your Queen: bring it the^fore to pass with her Majesty, that our
goo^ brethren may be reconciled and restored again^ And we also beseech that
you. D. Horn, ou^ good lord, and dear brother, that as soon as these my
letters may be delivered, ye cau^^ them to be sent to the Bishop of Norwiche,
to communicate them to. D. Iuel, to. D. Sands, and to. D. Pilkinton, to whom
also I purpose to write at the next mart at Franckfort by gods grace. These I
have written in haste as well in master Gualters name, as in myn^ own, sendyng
them to Basile, from thenc^ to be conveyed to Antwarpe. And we heartily desire
you to send us word, whether ye hau^ received them or no. Fare ye well right
reverend fathers. The Lord bless you, and your labors.

From Tigurine this third of May. M.D.Lxvi. H. Bullinger your very friend.

To master. N. and M.
THE Lord Jesus bless you right worshipful and well-beloved brethren, and
preserve you from all evil. I have received your letters, in the which you ^.
seem to complain, that my answer unto your question was over short and
brief. ^erily my brother, I saw no cause then, ney^her do I see any yet, why I
should have ^ritten those letters any larger. For you on^y required to know
my judgment, touching ^he matter of apparel, for the which ye now ^ontende in
England. Unto which question ^ thought I should answer in few words: ^or so
much as in few words I could de^lare my judgment. And then also I
vnder^toode, that. D. Peter Martyr, of most happy ^emembraunce, handled the
same question at Oxforde, and hear to many times at large, whereto I could say
no more. And I remember also, that in my letters unto you, brother M. I made
mention of my opinion herein. And that I may now speak a word or twain what
I think hereof: Surely, I like not in any wise, that (if ye were commanded)
ye should say service at an altar, rather burdened, then beautified with the
image of a crucifixe in massing apparel, that is, in ^albe, Casula.
and in a vestment, which has the pict^ of Christ crucified ha^gyng on the
back. (...) ^o far as I ca^ perceive by my letters rec^ued out of England,
there is no content^ now of any such garment. But ye question

Whether it be lawful for Mi^^sters of the Gospel to wear a rou^^ cap or a
square, or to put on a wh^^^ robe called a surplesse, whereby t^^ Minister may
be decerned from t^^ vulgar sort? And whether a Mi^^ster ought rather to leave
his hol^ calling, then to wear such apparre^

Touching which question, I wrote (...) mind the last mart, unto the
reverend f^ther my lord. R. Horn B. of Wincheste^ briefly repeating. D.
Martyrs words. M fellow minister and well-beloved Kynsma^ D. Rodolphe Gualter,
wrote unto him al^ not long before, a coppie whereof I send he^ enclosed unto
you, and to the rest of our br^thren. Wherefore, if ye will hear us, and (...)
desirous to know our judgment concernin^ this matter of apparel, as you
signified unto me the last mart you were: lo you hau^ our judgment in that
Epistle, whereunto y^^ will not agree, we are heartily sorry: and ^ng we have
none other counsel, we most ^artily and incessantly pray to god, who is (...)
all things, and at all times to be called (...) that he vouchsafe by his holy
grace and ^wer, to comfort and help our miserable ^ate.

You brother. N. proposed a few such que^ons: but our brother. M. heaped
together a ^eat many more of the same argument. Al^t I, according to my simple
skill, did never ^owe to have matters distracted into so ^^ny questions, and to
be entangled with so ^any doubts, which otherwise being more ^gle by them
selves, might be more easyly ^solued: yet notwithstanding, I will write ^wne a
little to every one of them, that ^rein also I may satisfy you my worshipful
^^d dear brethren, as much as lies in my under vtteraunce, and rather dull,
then quick ^^d sharpened wit. And I beseech you, that ^^u would accept in
good part this my do^^g, as of your brother, and one that vnfained^ loves you,
and to judge thereof with a quiet ^ynde, void of all affections. For my part
utterly abhor all contentions, and de^re nothing more humblye of almyghtie
^od, then that it might please him to remove all dissension and strife far
from his Chur^^ which from the first beginning has ma^ueylously hurt true
godlynes, and as it w^ torn and rent the Church in pieces, w^ it never so
quiet and flourishing.

Whereas it is demanded, whither laws ought to be enjoined (...)
Ecclesiastical persons for weary (...) apparel, that thereby they may (...)
known from the lay people. I answer, that there is ambiguitie and doubt^ the
word, ought: for in case it be vnd^^stoode for that which is necessary, and
a^parteynyng to everlasting life, I supp^^^ the lawmakers them selves do not so
vnd^^stande or mean it. But if it be said that may be done for comlynes and
decency, a^^ for dignity and orders sake, that it should (...) but a civil
observation, or some such ly^^ thing, as is that wherein the apostle wy^^ have
the minister or Bishop ksmion, that i^ modest, or comlye, I do not see how he
o^fendeth, which wears such a garment, (...) is commanded to wear it.

Whether the ceremonial attyr^ or worshippyng of the Leuitica^^ priesthood,
be to be brought again into the Church? I answer, That if a cap or a seemly
garment, without superstition be commanded to be worn by a minister, no wise
man will say, that right Iudaisme is brought in again. Moreover here I
repeat the same, that I see Peter Martyr has answered, who when he had
showed how the sacraments of the old law were quite abolished, which we
ought not to bring again into the Church of Christ, having now Baptism and
the Lords Supper, in steed of them, thus he says. There were notwithstanding
in the Leuiticall law certain actions of that nature, which could not
properly be called sacraments, for they served to decency, order, and some
commodity, which as agreeable to ye light of nature, and also profitable for
our commodity, I suppose may both be brought in, and also retained. Who sees
not, that for mainteining peace, and for that the faithful might the better
live together, the Apostles commanded the Gentiles to absteyne from that is
^^rangled, and from blood. No doubt these were things belongyng to the
Leuiticall law. Furthermore, no man is ignorant ^^at tithes are appointed at
this day to sustain ministers. It is evident that Psalms and Hymns are now
song in holy congregations and meetinges, which notwithstanding the Levites
also used. And that I le^ not this pass neither, we have holy days in
remembrance of Christ's resurrection, an^ such like. Shall all those be
abolished, because they are tokens and relics of the old^ law? You see
therefore, al things of the Leuitical law are not so abrogated, that non^ of
them may be used. Thus far. P. Martyr

Whether we may wear such apparel, as the papists do? I answer. We
may, so long as it is not proved that the Pope brought in the differences o^
garments. Nay it is manifest, the differenc^ of apparel is more ancient then
the Pope is Neither do I see any cause, why we may no^ go as the papists do in
apparel, which is not superstitious, but of policy, and for comlynesse
sake. If we should have nothing common with them, then must we forsake a^ our
Churches, refuse all lyuinges, not minister baptism, not say the Apostles or
Nicen^ creed, yea and quite cast away the Lorde^ prayer. Neither do you
borowe any ceremonies of them. The matter of apparel wa^ never taken away at
the beginning of refo^mation, and is yet retained, not by the Popes law, but
by the kings commandment, as an indifferent thing of mere policy. Yea
truly, if you wear a cap or a peculiar kind of apparel, as a civil and
politic thing, it smells neither of Iudaisme, nor Monachisme: For these will
seem to separate them selves from the civil and common life, and account a
meritorious deed in the wearyng of a peculiar garment. So Eustachius Bishop of
Sebastia, was not simply condemned for wearyng a peculiar kind of garment: but
for that he put religion in his garment. The cannons of the counsel of
Gangren, Laodicen, and of the.vj. council, are well known. If in case any of
ye people be persuaded that these things savor of Papisme, Monachisme, or
Iudaisme, let them be told the contrary, and perfectly instructed therein.
And if so be, through the importunate crying out hereon before the people by
some men, many be disquieted in their conscience, let them beware which so do,
that they bring not greater yokes on their own necks, and provoke the Queens
Majesty, and bring many faithful ministers in such danger, as they can not
ryd them selves out of again.

Whether these men, which hitherto have used their liberty, may now with
safe conscience, bring them selves and their Church into bondage, through the
commandment of the prince? I answer thus. I think they ought to take heed,
lest by odious disputing, exclaymyng, and stryuing for apparel, and by this
importunate dealyng, occasion be offered to the princes Majesty, not to leave
the matter any le^ger in their choice, who have hitherto used this liberty,
and that she being incensed with necessary clamours, command them either to
wear that apparel, or to give over their charges. Truly it seems very
strange unto me (be it spoken, my worshipful and dear brethren, with out your
offense) that you so persuade your selves, that you can by no means with a
safe conscience submit your selves and your congregations to the bondage of
apparel, and do not rather way with your selves, if ye refuse to wear a
thing mere politic and indifferent, and odiously contend always, unto what
manner of bondage you submit your selves and your churches, who leauyng your
charge, expose your Churches to Wolves, or at the lest wise to unfit teachers,
who are not so able to edify the people, as ye your ^elues are. Do you set
your churches at liber^ie, when you minister occasion to oppress them with
more and with greater burdens? You know well enough after what a great many
seek, how they are affected toward ^he preaching of the Gospel, and what
they would prove, if they succeed you, and what we may hope for at their
hands.

Whether the apparel of the Clergy, be a thing indifferent? Surely it
seems to be an indifferent thing, ^n so much as it is a mere civil thing,
appoin^ed for decency, seemelines, and for order, wher^n is put no religion.
This much I thought good to answer briefly unto your questions, any learned
and loving brother. N. Now I ^ome to our brother. M. questions, in dissoluyng
whereof, perchance I will be more ^riefe. Whether a particular kind of
apparel, differyng from the lay men, were ever ^ppoynted for ministers of the
Church? And whether in these days, it may be appointed in reformed Churches?
I answer. That in the ancient Church, there was a particular fashion of
apparel for Priests. It appears in the Ecclesiastical history of
Theodoret. li. 2. ca. 2. 7. and of Socrat. li. 6. ca. 22. No man is ignorant,
which has but lightl^ read over the monumentes of the auncien^ fathers, Pallium
but that the ministers used a cloak i^ their service. And therefore I sa^d
before, tha^ the diversity of garments had not his or^ginall of the Pope.
Eusebius cites out o the ancient writers, that S. John the Apole ware on his
head a leaf, or thin plat^ like unto a Bishops miter. And Pontiu^ Diaconus
witnesses of S. Cyprian the ma^tyr, that when he offered his neck to the
ex^cutioner, Birrum. Dalmatica.
he first gave him his cap, and the deacon his upper garment, and so stood
apparreled in white linen. Moreover, Chrysostom makes mention of white
apparel of ministers. But it is certain, that when the Christians turned from
their paganism to the Gospel, in stead of gowns, they pu^ on clokes: Pallium
for the which being afterward mocked of the infidels, Tertullian wrote very
learned book, De pallio. I could brin^ more stuff of this sort, if this
suffised no^ In deed I had rather no apparel were laid upon the ministers
against their will but that they used the custom of the Ap^stles. But in so
much as the prince commands the cap, and the surplesse, wherein (as ^ have
often said) she puts no religion, an sith the same thing has been used
amongst the old fathers without superstition, or offense, while the Church
was as yet in better estate: I would not wish good ministers to account the
forwardness of religion to be chiefly in these things, but to yield somewhat
unto the time, and not to braule contentiously in matters indifferent, but to
judge with modesty, that these things may be, and that we must go forewarde
according to the time: for they are nearer the Apostles simplicity, who know
of no such distinction, nor do urge it, but yet in the mean while do not
refuse discipline in their apparel.

Whether the prescribyng of apparel, be agreeable with Christian liberty? I
answer. That indifferent things may sometimes be prescribed, yea, and also
constrained to, as I may term it, as touching the use, but not as of
necessity, What is meant by necessity.
that is, that any indifferent thing of his own nature should be forced to a
man's conscience, and thereby a kind of religion charged to his conscience. The
times and places of holy assemblies, are rightly accounted to be indifferent:
and yet if there be no order prescribed therein, I pray you what confusion and
misorder would rise hereby?

Whether any new ceremonies may be increased, besides the express word of
God? I answer. That I like not with increasing of new ceremonies, and yet I
will not deny, but ye new may be devised, so that there be no worshippyng of
Go^ placed in them, and that they be appointed for order and discipline.
Christ him self celebrated the feast or ceremony of the dedication,
Encoennia.
and yet we read not, that the same feast^ was commanded by the law. To be
short, the greater part of those propositions or questions touching matters of
apparel, do stand on this point. Whether any lawe^ ought or may be made in
the Church, touching apparel? And so ye question is brought to this general
proposition, that is, What is lawful to be decreed concerning ceremonies? Unto
these questions I briefly answer. That I would have no ceremonies brought
into the Church, but such as are necessary: yet in the mean season I
confess, that the laws touching these ceremonies, which perchance are not
necessary, and sometime unprofitable, may not by and by be condemned of
wickedness, so that factions and schisms be stirred up in the Church, for so
much as they are without superstition, and things of their own nature mere
indifferent.

Whether it be lawful to renew the customs of the Jews, being abrogated,
and to translate the rytes proper to idolatrous religion from them, to be used
in reformed Churches? Touching this question, I answered before, when I spoke
of Leuiticall rites and ceremonies. But I will not in any wise have the
ceremonies of Idolaters, not purged from their superstition and errors,
translated into reformed Churches. And again on the other side, it may be
asked, whether the received customs, after the superstition is taken away, may
be for discipline and orders sake, retained without sin?

Whether conformity or agreement in ceremonies, be to be required of
necessity? I answer. That the agreement of ceremonies in all Churches,
peradventure is not necessary. In the mean time, if a thing unnecessary,
which yet is not wicked, be commanded, therefore we may not forsake the
Church committed to our charge. There was not the like fashion in ceremonies in
all the ancient Churches: and yet those which used conformable ceremonies,
despised not those which were without the same. I eas^ly beloue, that wise and
politic men do vrg^ a conformity in ceremonies, because the think this will
mainteyne concord, and because the Church throughout all England is one;
wherein if there be no wicked thyn^ mixed withal, I can not see how you can
e^uiously object any thing against such goo^ orders.

Whether ceremonies ioyne^ with open offense, may be retained or no? I
answer. That all offense must be avoided, but in the mean while, w^ must
beware lest we conceal, and cloak ou^ own affections under the color of
offense You know there is one kind of offense g^uen, and an other kind
taken, and wylfull^ procured. Here I will not dispute, whethe^ you without
great offense given, can forsak^ your Churches, for the which Christ dyed and
that for a matter of indifferency.

Whether that any constitution of men, are to be tolerated in the Church,
which albeit they are no^ wicked of their own nature, yet do help to
edification never a whit^ I answer. That if the constitutions, which the
princes Majesty would enjoin you to, be without impiety, you must rather
bear with them, then forsake your Churches. For if edifiyng the Church, be
chiefly to be considered in this behalf: surely then in leaving the Church,
we shall more destroy it, then in wearing apparel. And where there is no
impiety, nor the conscience is not offended, there ought we not give over our
vocations, although there be some kind of servitude thereby laid upon us. And
in the mean time, it may be a question, whether we may rightly comprehend the
matter of apparel under the name of bondage, in respect that it serves for
comeliness and order?

Whether the prince may prescribe any thing touching ceremonies, without the
will and free consent of the Clergy? I answer. That if the prince should
always tarrye for the consent of the Clergy: perchance those most wise and
godly kings Iosaphat, Ezechias, Asa, and Josias, with other good princes,
should never have brought the Levites, and Ministers of the Church, into good
order. Albeit I would not wish in any wise, that Bishops should be excluded
from consultations concerning matters of the church Neither would I again
have them challenge unto them selves that power, which they usurped against
princes and magistrate in the time of popery. Likewise I would not have
Bishops keep silence, and give consent to wicked statutes of princes.

The two latter questions touch the ma^ter more narrowly.

Whether it be more conuenien^ to serve in the Church after this manner, or
rather therefore to be deprived of Ecclesiastical function? And again.

Whether good pastors may b^ iustlye put from the ministry, for such kind
of ceremonies? I answer. That if there be no superstition in such ceremonies,
nor any ungodliness, and yet notwithstanding they are laid on good pastors,
which had rather they were not so laid upon them, I will grant in deed, and
that franckly, that there is a burden and a bondage laid on them, but yet I
will not grau^^ (for very good causes to) that therefore their charge and
ministry is to be forsaken, and their place left unto wolves, (as I said
be^re) or to other unmeet ministers: especially, the the liberty of preaching
remains ^ee, and that there be heed taken, lest greaer servitude be thrust
upon them, with such there things of this nature.

Thus have I spoken those things which I thought meet, concerning these
propouned questions, knowing right well that other men according to their
learning, might ^aue discussed the matter much better, and ^arre more
eloquently. But because it was ^our wylles I should make answer, I ^aue done
what I could, leauyng the mat^er free unto other men's judgment and wri^yng.
That which remains, is, that I would not have any man's conscience urged, ^r
snared: but I put forth these things to ^e examined, and I warn al men, that
none ^n this controversy frame him self a conscience, because he will
contend. And I also exhort you al in Christ Jesus our Lord, savior of his
Church, our head and king, that every one of you deeply consider with your
selves, by which of these twain he shall most edify Christ's congregation:
whether if for order and comlynesse sake, he use the apparel as ^ thing
indifferent, which hitherto has not ^ little set forewarde the unity and
profit of the Church: or else whether for a matter of garment, he leave his
Church to be possesse^ if not of wolves, yet of very unmeet an^ naughty
ministers. The Lord Jesus grau^^ you grace to see, understand, and follow th^^
which tends to the setting forth of h^^ glory, and the Churches peace and
tranqulitie. Fare ye well in the Lord, with all oth^^ faithful ministers. We
will pray diligent^^ unto God, that ye may think and do the things which are
wholesome and holy. ^^ Gualtherus commends him most hearti^^ unto you, and
wishes you all prosperity, (...) do also the rest of the ministers.

From T^gure the Kalendes of May. The year of o^^ Lord. M.D.Lxvj. Henry
Bullinger, M^nister of the Church at Tigure, in Maiste^ Gualtherus name an^ his
own.

Doctissimo viro. D. Martino Bucero, Theologiae in Academia Cantabrigiensi
professori Regio, Thomas Cantuariensis.
AFter my hearty salutations, right well-beloved Master Bucer, I have read that
book which ye have sent to Doctor Peter Alexander, concerning the
controversy betwixt. M. Hoper and the Bishop of London: in which book, many
things are learnedly declared, and largely disputed. Wherefore now I pray you,
that ye would send unto me your judgment of these questions expressed, with as
short brevity of words as ye can.

Whether without the offense of God, it may be lawful to the Ministers of
the Church of England, to ^se those vestures which at these days they
wear, and so be prescribed of the magistrate.

Whether he that shall affirm that it is unlawful, or shall refuse to wear
this apparel, offends against god, for that he says that thing to be
unclean that God has sanctified: and offend against the magistrate, for that
he disturbeth the politic order.

To these questions, if ye will make most brief answer, and send unto me
your judgment as soon as ye may possibly, you shall do me great pleasure. God
be with you. From Lambeth the second of December.

The answer of M. Bucer to the foresaid letters.
AFter I had received yesterday toward night, the letters of your most
Reverend fatherhood, immediatlye I applied my mind to answer, bearing in
remembrance what I owe unto your fatherhood, especially in such a matter, as
is most agreeing to my ministry. Your fatherhood requires of me, that I would
write my sentence with as much brevity of words as I could, to the questions
proposed unto me.

I must needs confess that I am very hardely brought to utter my judgment
to particular questions in ye restitution of religion, specially such as be
intricated with great controversies amongst godly men. For as the holy
scriptures and daily experience teaches, Satan procures all that he can, to
set them together at variaunce with bitter contentions in the articles of
doctrine and discipline of Christ, especially such men who be godly stirred
to receive, and to restore the kingdom of Christ: whose godly endeavors he
labors, if he can not make them quite frustrate, yet by his sleyght to
hinder them, whereby they should not attempt a perfect restitution of the
Church, if they joined together with their uttermost power. God requires of
us that we should worship him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with
our whole power, and that we should at once take upon us the sweet yoke of
his son. Therefore now he calls upon us by the terror of his judgment,
where he has sent so great light of his truth, as at this day does appear,
whatsouer untoward wylles men have, that they can not plainly withdraw^ them
selves from his commandments, and utterly to reject the yoke of his son.
Which matter Satan understands well enough, and he is not ignorant how
feign we would be gods by our first corrupted nativity, and how we would
gladly temper all religion to serve our lusts and affections, thereupon he
would persuade men to go in a certain mean (where as none can be in deed)
that is, that men may refuse and do some things at their pleasures to serve
their only lord God, which things yet he reputeth not so acceptable in them
selves, nor man him self thinks his affections to be brydled by them: bu^ in
such things wherein the whole worship of God does consiste, and our whole
salvation does stand, our flesh being the very lump of sin and perdition,
is wonderfully crucified, for that he can not make him self God, qualifiyng
and moderatyng Gods eternal precepts. With this crafty sleyght, has that
ancient enemy driven miserable Germany unto these present calamities,
wherewith they be now oppressed. God forbid, Christ Jesus I say our only
Saui^ur forbid, that he preuayleth against England with this crafty
sutteltie. But now to the questions according to my duty.

Concerning the former, this is my sentence, which I believe I have learned of
the holy Scriptures. First, I would not impart my aunsweres to any ministers
of the English Churches, but to such as be the true and faithful dispensours
of all the mysteries of God, such as do labor to deliver unto the people,
with great fidelity, the whole gospel of Christ, his whole doctrine and
discipline, and labor to instyll it and beat it into their minds. They that
be such Ministers of the Churches of England, may, as I think, we^re with
Gods pleasure, those vestures which be at this day in use: and they I think
shall do so much the better after they hau^ preached the clear doctrine of
Christ our s^uiour, with the detection and detestation, a^ well of the whole
Antichriste of Rome, a^ of any other adversary to Christ: If the^ then
profess by the wearyng of these ga^mentes, to have no purpose at all to
stablish any wicked devises that Antichriste has obtruded to the people: Nor
that Priests be ^ them selves more holy, or more able to pacify God, then
other Christian men be: No^ that they present Christ to the father in the holy
communion (as they use to affirm) o^ that they can apply his merit at their
pleasure, by the virtue of the work it self to any man, more then he does
receive by his own proper faith, of the words and sacramente^ of God. So that
also he professes, that he thereby do not mean Aaronicall rites to be
restored again: but that he does by his fact, perform only his obedience to
the Kings Majesty, and to such whom God has appointed to determine of these
external rites of the Church, with common consent by the word of God, to
this end, that all offenses of disorder, and breach of public consent, may
be avoided: And also to protest that every creature of God is good to Godly
men, yea also for signification. And therefore all true Godly men, may godly
use those rites, which wicked men have abused, howsoever ungodly.

And furthermore, to protest that they, neither the Kings majesty, nor the
great council of the Realm, mean to retain or to cherishe any superstition
in vsyng these vestures. But forasmuch as the use of these vestures, has been
practiced godly of the right holy fathers, before the Pope was Antichrist of
Rome, and may at this day serve to ye setting forth of the holy ministry, and
of the whole Christian profession, to the instruction of the younger and
simpler people, so that there be a godly signification joined thereunto, and
the same also godly taught. And that they declare, that the rulers would not
remove these vestures, whereby they might give occasion to the weaker in the
faith, to despise or contemn the true ministry of Christ: or else to give
them any suspicion by so doing, as though they were led with a certain
irreligious leuitie, to overthrow and abolishe al things used before in
religion, yea of those things which may serve to some good use.

And further, they may protest, that the people ought, in beholding these
vestures, to have their meditation upon no other thin^ but upon the heavenly
purity and bryghtness^ and of the apparrelling of all good vertue^ which be
both set out, and also be exhibit^ to all true beleuers, by the holy
ministry ^ the Church, and that both they and their mnisters would labor
withal diligence ^ attain to that brightness and comlyness^ that al at
length may shine in the vestures ^ righteousness and salvation. And it behoue^
ministers to use some garments, not only ^ cover and to defend their bodies,
but such as may also have some signification, an^ may admonish them of some
thing.

Now therefore, forasmuch as it is thoug^ good to the Kings Majesty, and to
the chie^ council of the Realm, to reteyne the use o^ these vestures for this
present, they ought to change the wicked abuse of the papists, i^ these good
creatures of God in them selves, to some godly use, both to the glory of God
and to the honor of the Kings Majesty, ^ so openly to declare, that all
things to hol^ and good men, are holy and pure: And tha^ they be truly
sanctified by the word and pra^er, so that neither devil nor man can defy^
any creature of God, but that godly me^ may use them godly, and to the glory
of God yea even for some use of signification, not only in the fruition of
their natural effects. For all creatures may admonish us many ways to
consider the creator, both of them, and of our self, and of our gratitude
toward him, beside the consyderation of his large liberality, in respect of
their natural effects: And to these admonitions, they may and ^ught publicly
be used. Which sentence of mine, I might justify with diverse Scriptures,
besides the example of the Apostles, which did so long use Moses ceremonies,
without any impiety.

As concerning the second question, this is my sentence, gathered, as I believe,
out of holy Scripture. They which do say that it is not lawful to use the
apparel that is in question, in any manner, yea in that manner which I have
described: I say, that they be at the least in error, for that they deny al
things to be holy to them that be sanctified.

The same do I affirm of such, which for the same cause will not wear those
vestures, forasmuch as the use of them is received, neither upon superstitious
or light cause: but by the public law of the Realm, and by the consent of
the Churches. In deed the use of these vestures may be forced by such
superstition to pleasure the Roman or any ^ther Antichrist, as it is now in
Germani^ that it can not be godly admitted of the go^ly ministers of Christ.
For I must need^ say, that they take from the godly Magistrate their due
honor, which does deny that the judgment ought to be followed in these
ma^ters. Romans 14. for that they do declare the v^ of these garments to be
observed of that consideration, which I have a little before descr^bed.

I trust your most Reverend fatherhoo^ will bear al these things well in
worth. F^ to answer to briefly and to grossly, I though^ it a great offense,
especially for that I see wit^ what art Satan does resist, lest that at once
the whole religion of Christ should be restored amongst us (as were
necessary) and as all godly Kings has done their diligent labor, according
to Gods precepts, and examples which he has declared by Moses* and Christ
his son, whiles Satan goes about to stir up so many pernicious contentions
of all the circumstaunces of our religion, as well in doctrine, as rites. For
surely, except that we remove so horrible and manifest sacrileges and
dishonoringes of God whereby the whole kingdom of the son o^ God may be
received, and we lowly submit ^ur necks to his good yoke: O how intolerable
wrath of god shall be kindled against this Realm. The Scriptures be full of such
^xamples, as he does now show most terrible unto Germany. Our Lord Jesus
Christ ^ssist the Kings Majesty with his holy spi^ite, and be present with
you the head fa^hers of the Churches, and all the nobles of this Realm, that ye
may both knowledge and embrace duetifully in time the days of your wholesome
visitation, and all other such things in the which only stands the peace and
health of this Realm. God preserve your fatherhood.

At Cambridge, this tenth of December.
To M. Martin Bucer, doctor in Divinity most worthy, his reader and master
most reverend.
GRace and peace from the Lord. etc. For what cause I am now in trouble (most
Reverend) ye shall understand it by this messenger, in writing. I pray you
that you would vouchsafe ones to give it the reading, and if that ye shall
espy any error therein, I desire you to signify it unto me by your ^etters.
If any thing has been uttered to ^arkly, and with fewer words then the cause
requires, I pray you, that you would set it out in the margent, with more
light and ap^er words. If ye see the cause just, and meet ^or a godly
minister, subscribe thereunto in ^he end I heartily pray you. I send you also
that I have written before three years ago, upon the.x. precepts, that your
worthynesse ^ay know what my judgment is in the cause of divorce, I pray you
vouchsafe t^ read it, that if I have erred in this part ^^ humane oversight,
I may be advertised your learning and fatherly admonition, an^ that I may
refourme the same. I pray you^ fatherhood therefore (and I doubt not but ^
shall sone obtain) that you would help t^^ Church in her conflict, by the
great and m^^ notable gifts of god undoubtedly bestow^^ upon you. I require
the same of M. docto^ Martyr, to whom (after your sentence a^^ prudent
judgment is known) this m^^senger which I send, shall repair. T^^ Lord
Jesus long preserve your worthyne^^

At London the.xvij. of October. 1550. Yours in heart an^ prayer all whole John
Hoper.

To the Reverend and learned father, John Hoper Bishop, his good Lord. Grace
and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Right Reverend, and in Jesus Christ most dearly beloved, I had purposed to
answer before this time unto the letters which of late I received from you:
but I was so let with wayghtie and sundry busi^esse, that I could not before
now accom^lishe either mine own will, or your expec^atio^ in this behalf:
wherefore I beseech you, ^ccordyng to your accustomable gentleness and wisdom,
to take in good part this my delay. What ye have written of the controversy
which is risen between you and the ^ight reverend Lord. B. of London, as
tou^hing the apparel of ministers, I have both ^ead it, as your request was,
and also consider ^t as attentively as I could for the shortness ^f the time. I
say shortness of time, because I ^ould not retain with me your writing but
only one night. For the messenger who ^uered it unto me, set forth the next
day ea^ in the morning toward Cambridge, w^ther ye wylled me to send it (being
once re^ by him, unto master Bucer: Which thin^ did, both diligently, and
without all dela^

In that little time that I had to peruse y^ writing, I comprehended so all the
matter, t^ even at the first I conceived no small io^ your singular and
earnest study, in that you^ your endeavor that Christ his religion ^ be brought
again unto a chaste and sin^ purity. For what should be more de^ of all
Godly hearts, then that all thing by a little and little, should be clean taken
aw^ and cut of, which has very little or noth^ in them that can be referred
wholly to ed^catio^, but rather be judged of the godly to superfluous. For to
speak of my self, I ^ hardly drawn from that simple and purestome, which ye
know they of Argent^ have used ever, from the time that they refo^med their
Church, where diversity of app^rell in Church ministration was abolis^ For I
have always allowed that pur^sage that originally had imitation of th^postles
Church. And I beseech GOD mortal, that this manner may both ther^ ^uer
continue, and also that wheresoever Christ his Church is reformed, it may at
length be received. You see that in the sub^taunce and chief point of the
matter I ^issent not from you, nay I desire with all my heart, that that thing
which you go about to bring to pass, may take place. And the most especial
cause why I do so ^esire, is, partly for that I would we should ^ome, as nigh
as might be, to the holy Scriptures in rites and ceremonies, and ^olow the
example of the Church, when it ^as in best case and state: partly for that I
^erceaue that those that be given to papi^rie, do go about with these relics
to maynteyne at least a little spyse of Mass, and ^o be given to them, more
then the nature ^f indifferent things do require. Notwithstanding, yet the
consideration of these matters do not so far carry me, nor the reasons
alleged by you so persuade me, ^at I should affirm the use of such ve^ures
to be pernicious, or of their own nature contrary to Gods word: For I do
^terly think it to be a thing indifferent. and I am not ignorant that such is
the ^ure of indifferent things, that at one ^ure they may be used, and at an
other time refused. To eat that is strangled, of self is an indifferent
thing: yet it is mee^ sometimes to refrain from the use thereof, sometimes to use
it most freely. And in this respect, though I have said this diuersit^ of
church apparel is not to be retained: n^uerthelesse, it to be wicked, I never
so judged, that I dare therefore condemn any such whom I see use it. For if I
had been ^ persuaded, I would never have commun^cated here in England with the
Church where such a choice as yet is reserved. For although as I said, I do
very little allow ^ nevertheless I see sometimes in these ind^fere^t things that
some of the^ although the be grievous and burdenous (in that it is n^ lawful
to do otherwise) must be patiently suffered, lest if men should strive for the^
more bitterly then it needs, that it wou^ be a let to the advancement of the
gospe^ and also that those things which of their own nature be indifferent,
through our heat ^ contention, should be taught to be mere w^ked: Which two
things, except I am dece^ued, bring with them great and greeuo^ discommodities.
For if we could be conte^ to suffer the Gospel first to be spread and dep^lye to
take root, without all doubt, m^ would better and easlier be persuaded to
r^moue away these external rites. A man, so long as he is sick, or is in his
recovery, oftentimes is much grieved that certain small and tryflyng things
parteynyng to his meat and drink, should be debarred from him, which yet
afterward when he is fully restored unto his health, by him self and of his
own accord without any other man's counsel, does renounce them, as unmeet and
unprofitable. Wherefore, let England be first diligently instructed, and
confirmed in the chief ^ most necessary points of religion: then afterward
by my judgment, the Church shall not be much offended to have these things,
somewhat superfluous, to be removed. But now where as alteration in the most
necessary points of religion, is labored for, and that with so much
difficulty: if now we pronounce those things to be wicked, that be of
themselves indifferent, so much would the most part of men's minds be alienated
from us, that from that day they would not find in their hearts, ^uer after
to hear with a good will at our ^andes sound doctrine, and instructions of ^ery
necessary matter. Surely, England ^ much bound unto you, in that ye have
^boured more then a great sort has, in preaching and teaching. Likewise, in
England you alredie have obtained much favor and great authority, whereby ye
shall be able to do much good to the advancement of Gods glory. Ye must
therefore take heed, lest ye stand in your own^ way, contendyng to bitterly,
and all out of time. Yet would I not have you hereby gather, that my mind is,
that a Minister of Gods word should never contend for the maintenance of
the truth and principles of Scriptures, I make no such assertion, who daily
as well in public as in pr^uate disputations, in weighty controue^sies, do
take a part against the adversaries for true religion. But this I say, we must
take heed, lest these things which be of less importance, through our
strife, may be the means that those things which should be esteemed of
greater force and value, either can not at all be brought into the Church,
either if they be once brough^ in, ca^ not be established with continuanc^
Again, if we hold on in dissuading t^ these indifferent things, as
pernicious, altogether wicked, we condemn with very many Churches which have
receau^ the Gospel, and blame to bitterly innumer^ble, which a great while ago
were counted worthy of all praise. Neither am I ignorant, that the authority
of Churches that be now, or has been, ought not to bear such a sway, that
thereby the authority of Gods word should be trod under foot: Which
(although the whole world should run to wrecke) ought to remain without
touch of breast sure and unviolable: yet for all that I judge we must take
heed, lest that for things indifferent, either we condemn such Churches as
be now at this day, or think not well of those that have been long before our
days. And for because I perceive that ye suppose these things not to be
indifferent, peradventure it shall not be amiss now for to examine the
reasons that so led you: and that (as you do) I may do it in few words, I
reduce ye chief matter to two chief points. First of al, ye say that the
Priesthood after the order of Aaron, is not to be restored, whereunto these
diversities of vestures seem to parteine. For seeing we have Ghrist to be our
Priest, Aarons ceremonies be vt^erly abrogated, and therefore they cannot ^e
called again of those that mean well ^^d godly. The second foundation of your
reasons, is, that these diversities of vestures were invented of Antichrist:
therefore we ought not only to forsake the Pope, but all his inventions. Beside
this, ye would have all manner of difference of vestures and apparel of
Ministers to be taken away. Wherefore, seeing these two be the chief strength of
your arguments, I will first entreat of them. Afterward, I will add
whatsoever it be, if I can call to my remembrance any other thing, brought in
of you to confirm your opinion.

In Moses law or Priesthood, after Aarons order, there were sacraments, with
the which it pleased God to confirm (as I might say, by putting his seal to
them) the promyses made of Christ coming. I knowledge and do grant, that all
these things be abrogated, never to be brought in again: for we believe that
Christ is already come, and not that he will come. And we have other seals in
scripture delivered to us of Christ him self in the Gospel, bread, wine, and
water: therefore we need not call again signs for this purpose used in the
old Testament. There were also in that law other signs and actions so
o^deyned, that they could not be properly called Sacraments, and yet they had
some respect to comeliness, to order, and to some commodity. And these I
judge may be restored and retained, as things agreeing to the light of nature,
and inducing to some profitable use. Who does not see that the Apostles, to the
intent they that believed might live more peaceably and quietly, did command
the Gentiles to abstain from blood and strangled: And yet these things,
without all doubt, were fetched from the order of Aaron, if ye will comprehend
generally all things which was in the old law. And there is none of us
ignorant, but that the tenthes was fetched from thence, which now in our days
be appointed to find the ministers of the church thorowout Christendom. You
cannot well prove by the scriptures of the new Testament, that psalms and
hymns were song in the church at public service, which thing yet appears
most plainly to be done in ye old Testament. I will here omit that S. Ambrose in
his exposition upon the.xiiii. Chapter of the first to the Corinthians says
most playnelye: that the manner of prophesiyng which Paul teaches, was derived
out of the Synagoges, into our Churches. To these I could bring forth other
things, and that not a few in number (if time suffered me to consider
diligently the matter) which our Church have borrowed out of Moses decrees. And
that I may speak only of holy days, which we keep in memory of our Lord^^
resurrection, birth and death of Christ, and Pentecost: should we therefore
abolishe them, because they be the relics of the old law? You see, as I
suppose, by all these things, how that not all that parteyned to the Priesthood
of Aaron, is so abolished, that nothing of it may be retained or used of us at
these days. Nor here ye shall not by and by say, that this is nothing else but
to open a window to all abuses, as to holy water, sensinges in the Church, and
to infinite such other: For the adversaries will straight shape you this
answer. First of all, that there must be limited a measure in any case,
as well of those that b^ reserved, as those that shall be brought again into the
Church. And secondarily* that no opinion or virtue of religion is a^ all to be
attributed unto them, contrar^wise to that we see is done of the Papiste^ in
their holy water and sensinges. Last o^ all, there must good heed be taken,
lest our Christian liberty be brought into some danger, which should be, in
case if that such things as be reserved or restored, be appointed necessary
means for to obtain salvation. For so are such things to be brought in
again, or to be tolerated, that they be laid away when they appear not to
be put to good use. And so it seems to me, we must do at this time with this
diversity of apparel, according as I declared my mind before. For I would,
and now wyshe, that they were laid aside: but for so much as yet hitherto it
has not prevailed (until better may be) I think we ought to bear the^. And
if it pleased God, I would that the Churches of Germany might redeem their
liberty with this one inconvenience, although I wyshe by all means, that no
superfluous thing should be forced upon them. But let us consider your other
argument, that is to say: It is not lawful to use these kind of vestures,
because they were invented of the Popes tyranny. In this point I do not well
perceive how it may be affirmed for a surety, that we can use nothing that
perteyned to the Pope, and is used in popery. Truly, we must take good heed
that we bring not the Church of Christ into such bondage, that it may not use
any thing that the Pope used. It is very true, that our forefathers took the
temples of Idols, and turned them into holy Churches, where Christ should be
worshypped: And they took also the salarie and revenues consecrated to the
Idolles of the gentiles, to their wicked shows and plays, and to their holy
votaries virgins, and transposed it to find the Ministers of the Church: And
yet al these things did not only service unto Antichrist, but unto the devil.
Yea the holy Ecclesiastical writers, did not stycke to take the Vearses of
Poets, which had been dedicated unto Muses, and to other diverse gods and
goddesses, for to be playde in plays, and spoken in shows, to obtain the
favor of their gods: I say they did nothing stick or fear to use them, when
it seemed to them convenient, imitating Paul the Apostle, who stock nothing at
al to rehearse for his purpose Menander, Aratus, and Epimenydes, and that he
did in entreating the holy^ scripture, applying profane words, to se^ forth
Gods religion. We read also how that Wine was consecrated unto Bacchus, Bread
unto Ceres, Water unto Neptune, oil unto Minerua, letters unto Mercury, Song
unto the Musis and unto Apollo, and many other things Tertullian rehearses in
his book, entitled, De Corona militis Christiani, where almost he entreats
this self same argument. Yet for all that, we stick not to use al these
things freely, as well in holy, as in profane uses, although at one time or
other before, they had been consecrated to Idolles and to devils. Howbeit, I will
not grant, that these diversities of vestures have their begynnynges of the
Pope, Eusebius. li. 3 Cap. 31.
for so much as I read in the Ecclesiastical Historye, how that John the
Apostle wore at Ephesus, where he dwelled, a Bishops apparel, tearmyng it,
Petalum, seu lamina Pontificalis. As touching Saint Ciprian the holy Martyr,
Pontius the Deacon writes, that a little before he should be beheaded, he gave
unto him that was appointed to behead him, his vesture called Birrus, after he
had put it of, and to the Deacons he gave his other vesture called Dalmatica,
and so stood in linen. Chrysostom makes mention of the white vesture of the
ministers of the Church. Moreover, the ancient writers declare unto us, In
Mat. cap. 26. Hom 83. et ad po. Ant. Ho. 60.
that Christians when they came first unto Christ's religion, changed their
apparel, and for a gown, they did put on a cloak, for the which cause when
they were mocked of the Gentiles, Tertullian wrote a very learned treatise, De
Pallio, that is to say, of a Cloak Neither, as I take it, you be ignorant,
that a white vesture was wont to be given to them that were baptized Wherefore
it appears that before the Popes tirannye overwhelmed the Church, ther^ was
some manner of diversity of apparel^ in the Church. But be it so, let them be
the invention of the Pope, as you would^ have it: yet notwithstanding, for the
respect of the papisticall invention in them, I can not be persuaded so much
impiety to be therein, that whatsoever it touches, it does by and by so infect
and corrupt, that it can not be lawful for good and godly men to use it godly.
I suppose, ye understand what my judgment is, either in reseruin^ or bryngyng
in again the Moisaicall (...) papisticall rites.

Now that I have breefelye gone o^^ these two chief points of your reasons I
come unto that which ye also grant: That al things invented by man, be not
forthwith to be rejected and condemned. For what is it else but man's invention,
that we communicate at the Lords table, tather in the morning, then when we
have dyned? It was also devised by man, that the value of such things as was
to be divided in the primative Church, were laid at the feet of the
Apostles. I grant with you, that these choyses of apparel do not of it self
edify: And yet for all that, other men will judge it expedient that they be
tolerated for a time, as though paraduenture by that means, these contentions
will be avoided, by which it is in hazard lest greater benefits and more
ample commodities be hyndered, and (as we see it falls out) lest men's minds
be withdrawn from the Gospel. I will not here say, that they which stand
to the defense of this matter, may pretend some honest and just signification
of the apparel, and that not dissentyng from the word of God, which is this.
The Ministers of the Church (as the prophe^e Malachie witnesses) be Angels
and Gods messengers: but Angels for the most part appeared, being clothed in
white garme^t^ I pray you, how shall we debar the church of this liberty,
that it can not signify some good thing, in setting forth their rites and
ceremonies, especially being so done, that no manner of Gods honor is
attributed unto them, and that they be in sight comely, and in number few, and
that Christian people be not with them over burdened, and matters of greater
importance be omitted. Peradventure you will say to me, Let Ministers of the
Church declare them selves to be angels, and not represent angels by
signification. But Paul the apostle might so have been answered, when he taught
the Corinthians that it was meet that a woman should have her head covered,
and a man his head uncovered, vrgyng it only in respect of signification. For
some man of the Church might have answered him, saying, Let a man declare him
self to be head of his wife, and let a wife declare her self to be subject
unto her husband, not in signs, but in deeds and conversation. But yet Paul
judged it a meet and a profitable thing, that both of them, as well the man as
the woman, should be monished of their duty by such a sign or action. For by
such signe^ and means, we be stirred up to do our office and duty, for they
bring into our minds that which is decent for us to do. And if hereby the
weakelynges take an occasion of error, let them be monyshed that they be but
indifferent things, and let them be taught, that no part of Gods honor and
religion is placed in them.

Now, whether the eyes of them that be present, be turned clean away from
thinking of serious matters, because of the diversity of apparel,
peradventure every man will not grant it. First the adversaries may answer,
that this shall not follow, if such apparel be appointed that has no
gorgeousness, but is plain, and used before in the Church: For no man
maruailes at those things that be daily used, and of small value. Nay it is
more like, that men being stirred with the reverence of them, shall have their
cogitations more attentively upon serious things: for the external parts of
the sacraments, seem to be instituted to this end, that we even of the very
sight, and of our externe sensis, should be inwardlye moved to have
contemplation of divine things. Neither suppose I by and by a tyranny to be
brought in, if any thing that is indifferent should be received into the
Church to be done, and that many should constantlye observe the same. Now a
days we do minister the Lords supper in the morning, so that we will not
receive at all after dynner in the public congregation. But who will say that
this sauoureth of any tyranny, which we all do with one will and consent?
Truly it would please me rather, (as I have oftentimes rehearsed) that we
should only do those things that Christ did, and Paul delivered: but if
there be some indifferent things added, I would not now therefore greatly
contend, especially forasmuch as we see that they by who^ the light of the
Gospel is much advanced in England, and daily may be more advanced, do take
part against us. I grant with you, that al which is not of faith, is sin:
Nevertheless, that which is written of S. Paul to Titus, seems greatly to
serve for to ease and quiet the conscience, Tit. i. d.
that is: Al things are clean to the clean. And to Timothy: 1. Tim. 4. a
Every creature is good. For it is not necessaryly required that we should
prove every particular thing which we use, to be expressly mentioned in the
Scriptures. It is enough generally to know this faith: That indifferent things
can not corrupt those that be of a pure mind and sincere conscience in their
doings.

These things have I briefly gathered together, as touching the controversy
which ye proposed unto me, out of the which, I beseech God with all my heart,
that ye may shift your hands well of. And I desire you to take in good part
that I have written: for if I could have answered either more substantially,
or more plainly, I would have satisfied your request to my power. But for
because it is not granted to every man to write handsomely and redyly of these
matters, you must needs pardon me. And assure your self further of this one
point, that I am ready now and at all times to believe the truth, when I shall
be otherwise instructed. In the mean season, think ye not that this
judgment which here I have declared unto you, was but now first persuaded
unto me. For even from the beginning, since that I applied my self unto the
Gospel, my mind was, that this difference of vesture should be taken away, but
yet so, that I did not judge it of their own nature either wicked or
pernicious. I beseech God almyghtie to preserve you safe and sound, with all
your householde, through Christ Jesus our Lord.

Farewell. At Oxforde, the fourth of November. 1550. Yours both in mind and
spirit wholly, Peter Martyr.

Amplissimo domino and Colendissimo Symmistae Ioanni a Lasco. The Lord grant
unto us in these troublesome times of the Church, to begin and finishe al
things, that offenses and dangers be not increased, Amen.
THe more diligently I weygh and consider, both what fruit we may gather by
this controversy of vestures, and also what Satan goes about thereby to
work: I would have wished before the Lord, that it never once had been spoken
of, but rather that all men of our function had agreeablye and stoutly gone
forward and continued in teaching true repentance, the wholesome use of all
^hynges, yea in commendyng and puttyng ^n the apparel of salvation. I see not
in ^ few (alas I say) I see marvelous diligence in abolyshyng Amelech,
concerning stones, stocks, vestures, and those things that be without us:
when in their deeds and whole life they most stiflye retain the whole Amelech
still. I know also some that help foreward this strife, so that in the mean
time the chief and most necessary points are less regarded and called
upon, that is: of remouyng sacrilegious persons from spoylyng of Churches: of
prouydyng fyt ministers for every parish: of the restoring of discipline
again. As for my part, if I thought those ceremonies and vestures were impure
of them selves, I would not take upon me in any wise the office of a Bishop,
until by ordinary authority they were taken away. etc. But to the purpose.
I think it not impartinent unto this matter, that we all be admonished to take
heed of Satan's accustomed sleyghtes, whereby he leads us away from the care
of necessary things, to the carfulness of those things which may be well
let pass, and from the searchyng out of the true doctrine of Christ, to induce
to us those things, wherein few can consent a like, and finally, by the which
he kindles in diverse men a zeal to purge those things which are without us,
thereby to neglect our inward deformities. And seeing whatsoever we do either in
word or deed, both privately and publicly, we ought to do it in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks by him to god the father: Surely it is
our duty, no less circumspectly to beware that we neither do nor leave undone
any thing, whereof we have not sure or certain authority out of Gods word,
touching our actions and matters domestical and Ecclesiastical. It is always
and in all things sin, whatsoever is not of faith of the certain word of
God.

But to consider this question in it self, I have, according to my gift,
weighed your reasons, and yet I can perceive no other, but that the use of all
external things, as well in holy ceremonies, as in private matters, ought to be
left free to the Churches of God. I call that free use, wherein godly men use
things created of God without any superstition, and to a certain edifiyng of
their faith in Christ. I verily (as I have confessed unto you, and have
declared in deed unto our countrymen) had rather that no kind of vesture
which the papists used, were retained amongst us, and that both for the more
full detestation of the Antichristian priesthood, and also for playner
aduouchyng of Christian liberty: yea and to be short, for the auoydyng of
dangerous contentions among the brethren, (though notwithstanding I would
have the Ministers of Churches to use sage vesture, and such whereby they might
be discerned from other men) but chiefly I would all the discipline of Christ to
be in force among us: Yet I can not be brought by any Scriptures (as far as I
see hitherto) to deny that the true Ministers of Christ's Church, may use
without superstition, and to a certayn^ edification of faith in Christ, any of
those vestures which the Antichristians abused. For what should let, but that
the Churches may use that white vesture, or more vestures, to monishe us
precisely of that divine benefit^ which he by the holy ministry of the church
deals unto us, the benefit I say of the light and dignity of that heavenly
doctrine: and by the which also the Ministers them selves may be the more
myndfull of their office, and had both for it, and by the admonishment of that
outward token, in greater reverence of the common people of the church.
Whether we will or nay, we are compelled to confess, yt the ensigns of them
that bear public offices, help some things to retain and increase the
authority of Magistrates and public power, if other things want not, by
the which the true reverence is given unto them. For if these things be not
joined with those ensigns, they induce not a veneration, but rather the
singular detestation of them, who unworthily use these notes of virtue. Signs
in deed are signs, and not the things: yet how much they are able to
admonish and move the mind (God giving the increase) he that observes, will
wonder.

Wherefore, whereas otherwise the true dignity of Ministers is evident, and if
any particular church by public judgment do consent upon the retaynyng of
certain vestures, only for the commending unto us of the gifts of god, which
he gives by the ministry of the Church, and for to put the younger and ruder
sort in mind, without all superstition: Truly I can not see why such use of
vestures in such a Church, may not serve to some commendation of the holy
ministry, and so consequentlye to the edification of faith. For what let is
there, but at this day they which are endued with the same spirit of faith,
may use a few signs as godly, as the ancient holy men have used many? They had
(you will say) express writing concerning the use of their signs. I grant,
and in deed it made much touching the true use of their signs. But in that God
did command the use of those and many signs, we certainly learn, yt the use
of those signs may serve (he geuyng grace) to promote true religion, and that
it has none uncleanness in it self, or superstition: neither can be by the
abuse of the wicked so polluted, that it can not be healthful to godly men
using it godly. Now when as god by his word has sanctified al things by our
prayers, and has made all things pure to the pure, what cause can we allege
out of the word of God, to deny that God will not bless such use of signs
(whereof we speak) that it should not be effectuous to that Church to some
commendation of the ministry, and thereof also to some edification of faith?
For how can it be, but that he which promised to bless all the works of our
hands which we take in his name, will deny his blessyng to these signs,
seeing he has no where forbidden such a use of the^ as we have expounded, and
has made us Lords of the Sabbath, and all other things of this world?

But if we grant that these things which I have spoken concerning the use of
such signs, may be: it is surely the part of brotherly charity, commanded
us by God, to leave such use of such signs in such a church, free, to the
judgment and conscience of that congregation, except we see an open abuse,
either of superstition (as if these things were used as containing in
themselves some part of godly worship of themselves) or of contention (as if
they displeased the greater and better part of the Church) or of gettyng of
good will of some men, whom in these things we ought not to gratify, because
they thereby go about to bring a servitude, unworthy for Christian men.

It was evident at saint Paul's time, by the most clear Scriptures of God,
that the use of days, meats, and all other externe things, was made free, and
it was a sure token of infirmity in faith to doubt thereof: yet the holy ghost
pronou^ceth, that such weaklings ought to be received, not to the troubling of
their cogitations, and not to be contemned of the stronger in faith, and that
in these things it might be granted to every one to be sure of his own
sense, seeing that the Lord had received these weaklynges.

Now if the holy ghost would have men to yield so much to them which were in a
manifest error, inasmuch as they depended upon him in the chiefest and
necessary parts of sincere religion: what ought to be granted to these
concerning ye free use of external things, whom we can not convict of any
error by Gods word? For howsoever I examine and expende those your two
arguments (that is: They are the imitation of the Aaronicall priesthood, and
the marks of Antichrists priesthood, and therefore ought to be eschewed of
the^ that love Christ) yet that thing which you would, is not hereby
concluded. For to imitate Aarons ceremonies, is not of it self vicious: but
only then when men use them as necessary to salvation, or to signify that
christ is yet for to come to take flesh upon him.

For if by no means it be lawful to use those things which were of Aarons
Priesthood, or of the Gentiles, then is it not lawful for us to have Churches,
nor holidays. For there is no express commandment by word in the holy
Scriptures of these things. It is gathered notwithstanding, from the example
of the old people, that they are profitable for us, to the increase of
godliness, which thing also experience proves. For any thing to be a note of
Antichriste, is not in the nature of any creature in it self (for to that end
nothing was made of god) but it hangs altogether of consenting to
Antichrists religion, and the professing thereof. The which consent and
profession being changed into the consent and profession of Christianity,
there can stick in the things them selves, no note or mark of Antichrists
religion. The use of Belles was a mark of Antichristianitie in our churches,
when the people by them were called to Masses, and when they were rong against
te^pestes: now they are a token of Christianity, when the people by them are
gathered together to the Gospel of Christ, and other holy actions. Why may it
not then be, that the self same garment may serve godly with godly men, that
was of wicked signification with the ungodly? Truly I know very many ministers
of christ, most godly men, who have used godly these vestures, and at this day
do yet use the^: So that I dare not for this cause ascribe unto them any fault
at al, much less so heinous a fault of communicating with Antichrist, for the
which fault we may utterly refuse to communicate with them in Christ. The
Priests of deuyls did celebrate in their sacrifices, the distribution of bread
and the cup, as Justinius Martyr, and Tertullian make mention. What let is
there, why we may not use the same ceremonies also? You will say, we have a
commandment of ye lord touching this ceremony. Very well. And by the self
same it appears, that same thing to serve among the children of god to the
service of Christ, which the wicked abused in the service of Deuyls, if the
commandment of Christ be added thereto. But it is the commandment of
Christ, that in our holy actions we institute and use al things, so as
comlynesse and order be observed, that faith may be edified.

Now if any Church judge and have experience (such as I doubt not there are
many this day in Germany) that the use of such vesture brings some
commendation to the holy ministration, and thereby helps somewhat in the way
of comlynesse and order, to the increase of faith: what (I pray you) can be
brought out of the Scriptures, why that Church is not to be left to her own
judgment in this matter, neither therefore to be contemned, or to be called
into question for her judgment sake? That Church verily will keep in these
things a mean agreeable to the Cross of Christ, and will diligently
attend, that no abuse crepe into it.

If therefore you will not admit such liberty and use of vesture to this pure
and holy Church, because they have no commandment of the Lord, nor no
example of it: I do not see how you can grant to any Church, that it may
celebrate the Lords supper in the morning, and in an open Church, especially
consecrate to the Lord: that the Sacraments may be distributed to men kneeling
or standing, yea, to women as well as to men. For we have received of these
things, neither commandment of the Lord, nor any example, yea, rather the
Lord gave a contrary example. For in the euenyng, and in a private house he
did make his supper, and distributed the Sacraments, and that to men only, and
sittyng at the table. But it will be objected, that in England many use
vestures with manifest superstition, and that they do norishe and confirm in
the people superstition. Even so (it may be answered) very many abuse all this
whole Sacrament, as also Baptism, and all other Ceremonies. Therefore let us
withstand this mischief, and vanquishe it utterly. Whereunto though it may be
that the taking away of vestures may help somthyng, yet to drive away all this
mischief, it will not suffice. Nay the Priests themselves must be first
removed, and in their rooms placed faithful ministers in the kingdom of
Christ, such as be learned in deed, and godly affected. To this therefore,
to this I say, must we chiefly endeavor our selves, that the hearts of the
people may be purged by faith, which faith is first begun and increased by the
hearing of the word of God: this hearing is brought by the preachers of the
Gospel. Such therefore let us call for, and that there may be store of them,
let us be earnest for reformation. Let there be a visitation of the
universities, whence many fit ministers for Churches may be gotten. Let us
never cease to cry out against that Sacrilege, that ye fattest benefices are
granted to unworthy men, in respect of their worldly service: that the
parishes are so miserably undone through papistical sleyghtes and violence.
These, these I say, are certaynely papisticall factes, against these ought we
chiefly to bend our force: but to be stout and earnest against stones,
stocks, vestures, and such other things, which of them selves neither bring
gain, pleasure, nor honor, it is a very easy matter to the hearer and
speaker, especially those that be discharged from papisticall superstition, for
by the shaking of such things, great men's stomakes are not offended. But to
remove Church robbers from the spoils of Churches, and to do all things
possible to this end and purpose, that every parish may be provided of
convenient ministers, and that Curates may have sufficient for their
sustentation, and to aid them to the full restitution of Christ's discipline:
This is a thing of great moment: This is a hard thing to all them which are
not able to say with saint Paul: Phil. 1. c.
For Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage. And again, God
forbid that I should rejoice, saving in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
wherein the world is crucified to me, and I to the world. It pleases me right
well, that al Antichrists irashe should be removed away, as far as might be.
I mean not only his ensigns and marks, but all his steps and shadows in
what thing soever they seem to stand, whether it be in stocks, stones,
garments, or whatsoever other thing else it be. But let us endeavor our selves
to banishe first the body and substance of Antichrist, and then after, his
ensigns, steps, and shadows. The body and substance of Antichriste,
consists in the wicked destroyers and spoylers of Churches, by whose means,
not only Christ's discipline, but also all the whole doctrine, is oppressed and
put out of place.

When I consider these things, and again look back (as I ought to do)
toward the precepts of the Lord, and his examples: I wyshe with all my heart,
that as many of us as will be Christ's folowers in deed, that even so we
earnestly go about to restore hi^ kingdom, as the Lord himself went about to
begin it, and that we seek it before all other things, and let the preachers
in all doctrine and discipline instruct the people, and be su^^ who for our
Lord Christ's sake and the preaching of the Gospel will be ready to leave al:
that by these men's ministry we bring the people to the kingdom of Christ,
and let v^ appoint to every flock their own faythfu^ shephearde, who may
labor no less to cal^ again the true notes and marks of Chri^stianitie, as
to abolishe utterly the marke^ and notes of Antichristianitie, which I would
wish so abolished, that there remained no^ so much as the memory of them in
any men's hearts. But seeing that this thing can not be brought to pass,
unless Christ's kingdom be fully received, I would wish that all we should
to that end bestow all our strength, unto the which work, for as much as we
need many workefelowes, I would^ wish (with all such as truly love the Lord
Jesus) that we set apart all dissension, and join in one perfect concord, to
endeavor our selves to set upon the common aduersari^^ We see now, being taught
by ye experience o^ so many years, that the Lord grants bu^ to a few, to
depart from that sentence which they have once fastened them selves in,
specially if they have also contended for the same: so that we shall be enforced
either to dissolve christian Communion with many whom the Lord has received,
or else we must give place one to another, to the intent that either of them may
rest in their own judgment, though the other dissent. It is a very hard
thing in deed, yea to most holy men, to deny them selves, and he is seldom
found among men, which would not be content rather to yield in his
patrimony, then in the opinions of his wit. Now then whereas we see
almyghtie God to bear this our infirmity in us so mercyfully, fie on the
hardness of our hearts, if the example of our Lord and God can not incline
and mollify our hearts, to the like mercy and patience. Wherefore I conclude,
that we ought to take great diligent heed: first, that we take not upon us
strayghtway, to determine al questions as they rise, yea, let us stir none at
all which thoroughly tend not to the kingdom of Christ. Let us acknowledge the
weakness of our wit and judgment. Let us stand in fear of our natural
arrogancy, and our peuishe selfewyll in our own inventions. All things
necessary to salvation, are set forth unto us openly, clearly, and plenteously
in the holy scriptures, and in the study and perfection thereof, every one of
us wants very much. Let us labor then to fulfill, and once to make up our
imperfection with godly studies. Of al other matters, let us dispute most
warel^ let us define most slowly, or never, let us ch^tende at no time. If at
any time through the craft of Satan, and our own negligence, variaunce shall
rise in these things, let us betyme leave of from the same as soon as we can,
by whatsoever way we may, or else let us make some truise in them. Seldom^ is
there any victory obtained: yea never wholesome victory gotten.

Hereby (most godly sir) you see undoubtedly what is best to be done, both in
this controversy of vestures, and also of the liberty of other ceremonies. I
had rather then much goods this question had never ben moved: but now seeing
it is moved, I wyshe it to be given over, and deferred to some other times.

These your two arguments: It is a piece of Aarons Priesthood, and therefore
contumelious toward Christ now exhibited, ^^s then glorious, when he was to be
exhibited. Secondarilye, These are notes of Antichristianitie, and therefore
not to be used of men given to Christianity. These reasons (I say) conclude
not in my judgment, that which you took in hand. For we borowe many things
godly from the orders of Aarons Priesthood, to the glory of Christ now
exhibited. So many things which the Antichrists have made marks of their
impiety, may be tokens of the kingdom of Christ, as the signs of bread and
wine, the water of Baptism, the laying on of hands, preachynges, Churches,
Holidays, and many other things. Also these places of Scripture are of a
great scope. The earth and the fulness thereof is of the Lord, not of the
devil, not of Antichrist, not of the wicked. And again, The son of man is
Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. xii. a. Mar. ii d. Titus.i. d. i. Tim. 4. ^
and the Sabbath is made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: And all things
are pure to ye pure: And every creature of God is good, nor can be defiled to
good men, by ^he abuse of evil men. The word of god must be followed in all
respects, as well in our private actions, as public. For all things are to
be done in the name of the Lord Jesus, and to the glory of God. Then such
liberty as we grant to our selves in our private use of external things,
let us not deny in public. The true spirit of Christ, going about to
overthrow Antichriste, overthrows first those things which are chief and
peculier unto by m^. For first the spirit of Christ endeuoryng the restitution
of Christ's kingdom, restores first doctrine and discipline, which be the
chief and peculier points of Christ's kingdom.

This colorable craft of Satan also must be taken heed of, by the which he
brings to pass oftentimes, that either we reckon those things sins which
are no sins, and those that be sins in deed, we seem not to regard them in
our selves: Or else against those sins which our conscience define to be
sins in deed, we use no such soueritie as we ought.

The Lord grant that you, right worshypfull friend, may religiouslye weygh
these things. I know you seek the glory of Christ, and I have heard of you,
wherein I rejoice, that you are careful of your judgment, so that you dare not
straightway reckon the same for sure and certain, though you seem to follow
playwelye the word of God, thynkyng with your self that you are a man, and
that you may slide out of the way.

Therefore I desire and beseech you by the cross of the son of God, by the
salvation of the Churches which are at this day overwhelmed with calamities,
by the desired consent that we should seek to reign in all Churches, by the
peace that is in Christ Jesus: Again, I desire and beseech you, that you do
nothing rashlye in this question of ceremonies. You have seen weak members in
the Churches of Saxony, you have seen also many things for the which you
give God thanks. Let no man therefore, except it be upon great necessity,
cast of those, whom the Lord has so notably taken to him. O would to God the
state of the Churches of France, Italy, Poleland, were brought to this point.
Let us in this Realm take most godly heed, that we further not unawares the
devils intentes, who throws in among us sundry questions and controversies:
lest we should take in hand to handle the question of setting forward the
doctrine of the Gospel, and restoryng of discipline, and thereby to remove all
Drones from Ecclesiastical and scholasticall ministeries. This Satan, when he
can not retain the order of Bishops wholly in service unto him, he goes about
utterly to abolyshe this order, and by that occasion so to spoil the
Churches, that whiles due stipendes want, the holy ministry may be committed
to the vilest of the rascal people. Let us take heed of these cogitations of
Satan, and let us withstand them as much as we can, by the power of the
Lord, and by no means unadvisedly to help them forward. Few we are which
sincerely profess the Lord Jesus, and none of us there is, which is not
oppressed with much infirmity: therefore let us receive one another, as the
Lord has received us. Let us yield mutually one to another, as the Lord has
yield to us, which sincere and duetifull love, if it bear stroke among us, we
shall be able with one spirit, and one mouth, and with our whole might, to
discomfite the body and substance of Antichrist. And so afterward without any
offense of the good, and with certain edification of faith among the children
of god, we may bring to pass the utter defacing of all the marks, steps, and
shadows of Antichrist.

O Lord Jesus, thou our only peacemaker, as well with the father as betwixt
our selu^^^ ^annishe out of our minds whatsoever draws us in sunder,
whatsoever darkeneth the clearenesse of judgment among our selves, whatsoever
by any way hyndereth the absolute concord in thy ministers in defense of thy
kingdom, and in destroying the tyranny of Antichrist. Power into our minds
thy holy ghost, which may lead us into all truth, who grant us to see and
take in hand al one thing: but first of all that which is cheifest, whereby
the strength of thy kingdom may be restored unto us, and al things parteyning
to Antichrist, may clean be blotted out of all men's hearts and memory. The
goodness and love of the son of God, for his infinite loves sake toward us,
vouchsafe to give us these things, to the glory of his name, to the salvation
of his elect, and that the wicked say not still, Where is their Christ? Amen.

Deditissimus tibi in domino Martinus Bucerus.

Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge Printer to the
Queens Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


