An answer FOR THE TIME, TO THE EXamination put in print, with out the
authors name, pretending to maintain the apparel prescribed against the
declaration of the mynisters of London.

Phillip. III. As many as be perfect, let us be thus minded but if you be
otherwise minded, god shall reuele even the same to you.

M.D.LXVI.

TO THE PLACE ROMANS xvi. which the examinar addith to the title of his book
and alledgith it vntreuly, for it is Romans xiiii.
1 Ibesech you brethren marlze them which cause division:

I beseech you brethrene mark whether part causith division, they that in the
lest matters show the^ selves to be faithful, yet not co^de^ ninge other, or
they that for so small matters cut of so many learned, ancient, and godly
Ministers, whom they are not able to charge with any fault in doctrine, or
conversation.

And give occasions ofeuyll:

ANd whether they give offense, which to avoid offense are content to sustain
so great lose and troble.

Contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

And whether it be contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, to abstain
from all show of evil, when you have learned that all the leven of Antichrist
is evil.

For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellyes.

Consider whether they serve there own bellies, and not the Lord which to serve
the Lord purely and sincerly are content to depart with all there worldly
lyuings and preferme^ts to such as now do use them.

And with svveete and flattering words deceive the hearts of the Innocents.

And whether they deceive with sweet and flattering words: which if they would
flatter and dissemble, in these small matters, might retain their promotions
and lyuings.

Thus has the examinar uncharitably alleged this text of holy scripture, to
have it applied (but untruly) unto us, for this place both touchith doctrine,
wheti^, he knowith that we do agree with the church of England, and also by it
are notid such false apostles as cople corruptelie the Gospel and ceremonis
together. Who are gilty herin let the church judge.

To the place of S. Augustine cited by the Examinar.
IT is manifest that S. Augustine spekith of things mearlie indifferent, as
apperith by his examples of communicating on Sunday or Saterdaye, etc. or
orders which every church had diverse, being grounded upon the scriptures, and
differing in manner of using: and not of admittyng Ceremonies, and orders of the
gentills, Iewis, or heritikes: and therefore nothing pertaining to this cause.

Augustine consernig Jewish ceremonies, Episto. 19. Therefore as you on the
contrary part say and although all the would (as you say) be against us, you
do frelie pronounce that the ceremonies of the Iewis, are petnicius and deadly
to Christians and whosoever shall observe the^ ayther Iewor Gentill, that he is
thrown down into the diuils dungeon: so do I confirm this saynig of yours,
and add, that whosoeuar Jew or Gentill shall observe them either in deed, or
else but in show, that he is throun down into the diuills pit.

Augustine conserninge gentil orders, Episto. 73. THe supersticio^ of things
which the Gentills tied about them among the which, earings of men, hanging on
the tips of their ears, of one sid, is accounted worthy to be detested, it is
used not to please men but to serve diuils. But who can find out in scriptures
the particular forbidding of wicked supersticions whereas the apostole does
generallye say. I will not have you partakers of diuils: and again what
concord is betwixt Christ and Belyal? vnlese parauenture because he named
Belial, and forbad generally the society of diuills. Is it laufull for a
Christian to sacrifise to Neptune, because we find nothuig perticularlie
forbidden as conserning Neptune? In the mean space let the wrettchis be
warned, that if they will not obey whole some doctrine, yet at the lest wise that
they defend not sacrilege. But what must we do with the^ if they be afraid
to lose their eaerings, and are not afraid to receive the body of Christ, with
the badge of the diuil.

Augustine consernig the Ceremonies of heritikes, Epist. 86. TO fast on sondaie
is a great offense, especialy since that detestable heresy of the Manichies,
which is directly against the catholic faith: and holy scriptures, was
openly known: which Manichies did apoint that day to their auditors, as
laufull to fast in. by the which that fasti^g on the sunday is accounted more
horrible.

Here might we also add Chrysostoms sentens: but to avoid prolixitie we
refer the reder to the first homely against the fast of the Jews.

TO THE PREFACE.
IT is an easy matter for a Rhetoricia^ or sophister having auto ritie on his
side to florrish and flaunt, as though he hadd gotten the victory, when in
deed he darenot ons Join the battle: wherefore passing over his exordium
commune, we desire the redar to way this man's writing with the epistels of
Bucer and Martyr, annexid to the end. And to indg wether the same spirit be in
them both. They bear with the things tolerable for a time, wishing the utter
abolishing of them. This man defendith them as good orders, profitable to
edify, and therefore mete to be retained still. They esteem the resisters as
godly brethren, he condemnith them as scismatikes, belly gods, deceuers,
flatterers, fools, such as have been vnlernedlie brought up in prophan
occupations: Puffed up in arrogancy of them selves, chargeable to vanities of
assertio^s of who^ it is feared that they make post have to be Anabaptists, and
Libertines: gone out from us, but belike never of us: differing not much
from, Donatists shrinking and refusing Ministers of London. disturbars
factious wilful, entanglers, and encomberers of the conscie^ ^es, of their
herers, girders, nippers, scoffers, biters, snappers at Superiors, having the
spirit of Irony, like to Audiani, smelling of Donatistrie, or of Papistrie,
Rogatianes, Circumcellians, and Pelagians. But conserning Salomons counsel we
might perchance, turn it against the examinar, if we knew him which although
we do not, yet we may be bold to put him in mind of the counsel of Christ,
Matthew. 7.
Nolite iudicare, etc. and he that says thou fool etc. and yet he callith his
brothere fool.

And the counsel of S. Paull, 1. Cor. 3.
let no man deceive him self, if any of you seem to be wise in this world: 1.
Cor. 1.
let him become a fool that he may be wise: desiring him also to remember,
that God has chosen the foolish of this world to confound the wise.

To the Christian reader.
If for any occasion the counsel of Solomon, contrarious to it self at the
first sight, may have place to be alleged out of the xxvi. Chapter of his
Proverbs, that is. Ne respondeas stulto iuxta stultitiam suam, ne efficiaris
ei similis, (And again) Responde stulto iuxta stultitiam suam, ne sibi sapiens
esse videatur, Aunsvvere not a fool according to his foolyshnes, lest thou be
made lylze to him. And again: Answer a fool according to his foolyshnes,
lest he may seem to himself to be wise: It may now of good congruence be
uerified in the cause uttered in question for order of ministers appareill. It
is not vnlznovven what arguments and conclusions, what letters and
vvrytynges have been used and tossed from man to man in secret sort, for these
two or three years, to disprouue the liberty of the children of God in the
use of externe things, to conuel the obedience that true Subjects should
perform to the authority of their Prince, and to the laws of the Realm
established, to the discredityng and condemnation of such which in a whole
conscience thynlze it lavvefull for them to wear, and yet charitably beeryng
with the vvealznes of such whose consciences are entangled with fearful
scrupulositie tovvarde the same.

IT is well known, that the matter was not handled so secretly these ii. or
iii. years but openly setforth in the pulpit these seven years: without any
great contradiction: but it may be said, this is your hour. We may look for
great truth in the body of your discourse, when your begnnyng is so farced with
lies. This cause was not taken in hand, to disprove your liberty, but rather
to prouue that your liberty should not be made necessity: as the lettar of a
certain bishop written to a noble man witnessith. And to teach you to use your
liberty to profit, and edification, according to those sayings: all things are
laufull for me, but all things do not edify. Let no man seek his own profit
but an other man's: neither to conuell (for so you term it) the obediens to the
Prince, and her laws: but to teach chief obedience, to god and his word: nor
to discredit and condemn them, that can away with them for we allwais judged
of them as S. Paull willith, they stand or fall to their Lord for if we had
condemnid them, we would never have communicated with them but to discharg our
own consciences and to labor for the synceritie, as well, in rites, as in
doctrine. As for the charitable bearing which you speak of, does litill appear
in these sayi^gs, subscribe, or be deprived, wear or preach not. This is but
small bearing.

The small weight of their reasons and arguments so set out, their cause so
hard to defend vvithlearnyng (so many grave vvryters of judgment against
them) the matter sullye debated by the best learned men of the Realm of late,
with thorder of the counsel talzen in the time of blessed memory King
Edward, and fully concluded: caused diverse men (being yet offended with
such unadvised vvrytynges) to hold their pens, without more confuting or
disprouyng the same, as was easy for them to do: partly stayed by the first
part of Salomont counsel: Ne respondeas stulto iuxta stultitiam suam, ne
efficiaris ei similis. Yea moreover, charity borne to the aucthours of such
vvrytynges, moved some men to lzepe patience, and the counsel of S. Paul
held others in silence, vvheras he charge his scholar Timothe thus: Stultas
and ineruditas questiones respue, setens eas parere pugnas: porro seruum Domini
non oportet pugnare, sed placidum esse erga omnes propensum ad docendum,
tolerantem malos cum mansuetudine erudientem eos qui obsistunt, si quando det
illis Deus ^oenitentiam ad a gnoscendu^ veritatem, and resipiscant a diaboli
laqueo, captiab eo ad ipsius voluntatem. Foolyshe and unlearned questions put
from thee, remembryng that they do but gender stryse for the servant of the
Lord must not strive, but must be peaceable unto all men, and apt to teach,
and one that can suffer the evil in melzenes, and can infourme them that
resist, if that God at any time will give them repentance for to know the
truth, that they may comme to them selves again out of the snare of the
devil, vvhch are now taken of him at his will.

These be words of course, common to all them, that go about to ouertrhow any
cause, which because they are brought in without prose, we may stand to the
denial. The arguments wear more weighty than you cold avoid: and when you
have by Gods word confuted them than you may more justly call them weak. The
cause so easy, to defend with lerning and scripture, that you neuar durst
assail it, so many grave writers against you: the matter neuar fully debated
by the best learned in this Realm but of necessity enjoined them caused you to
stay your pen until now: their necessary defense, caused you to write
so^thing least you should be thought to have nothing.

If the rule of S. Paull had been kept, this question of popish Ceremonies had
not been thus earnestly moved, nor so sharply folowd. But Paulls place is
wro^glie alleged by you, for that he meanith questions of genelogyes, etc. which
pertayne nothing to doctrine, nor disceplyne in churchs of Christ. The question
of rites and ceremonies you know Paull him self, and the writers both old,
and new have diligently handled, and therefore may not be thought a foolish
and unlearned question.

To enforce this text at this time in the particular appliyng thereof, shall be
spared yet, for hope of their amendment uuho hauer disorderlye behaved them
selves. To exagerat the matter against them, with much alleging learned
men's judgments, many dead, some yet alive, otherwise then to in struct the^
by a fevv reported, shall also be spared, as it would have been vvyshed, the
matter vvhooly might rather with scilence have been still buried. But now the
provocation of a treatise so solemlye aduouched, so confidentlye affirmed, of
very late so publicly by print diuulged and dispearsed, has made this
vvryter now to thynlze it high tymn, tocall to remenbraunce the latter part
of Salomons fentence: Respo^de stulto iuxta stultitia^ sua^, ne videatur sibi
sapie^s, Not yet profossyng by this examination to say half so much as might
he spolzen in the comprehension af the cause, nor talzyng so much advantage
against that inconsiderat vvrytyng, as it might deserve to be charged: but
briefly to put to the aucthours consideration the vuealznes of the reasons,
the sophistication of the arguments of that discourse, unuuorthy of it self,
to say (ihe truetht) to be once aunsuuered, as being so uuritten, as every
man, but such as be either to parcially bent to the cause, or for lalze of
learning can not expende the substance of the Vurityng, may perceive that it
must needs fall to ruin and decay of credit of it self, though no man
should bend any force at it, and houu soever (in the heat uuich is nouu
talzen) thought to be nuittyly, gravely, inuincibly uurytten, but uuorthy in
deed to be put out in the name of such, uuhom it uuould speciali defend.

A good divine should spare at all times, to enforce textes of scriptures, which
he ought rather rightly to apply, according to the meaning of the holy ghost.
As you deligiht in ynkehorne terms, and borrwed spechis, as exagerat, diuulged,
dispensed, comprehension, expend, concor de, infarce, expect, i^timate, etc. so
sometime you use them as one not well acquainted with the^. When you say
publicly diuulged, Non loqueris vulgo. you speak not to the common people. you
can speak twice as much, as you do: O noble rhetorician: you willnot take so
much advantage against the inconsiderat writing it is not worthy any
answrere: it will faull to ruin of it self. Now would to god you would have
writ as muchas you could and are hable.

If ye aslize me uuhom I could thinlze to be under the protection thereof:
Surely I can not see, that diverse such as be learned, and commonly judged to
be amongst this number, can much joy to fight under that banner, or o run
uuith them to that marlze they shoot at. For it is certain, that many uuho^
this small route, named London Ministers, uuoulde have joined uuith them for
their more honesty, be far from their determonations in this question,
neither so handling it, nor so uuolde conclude in this cause as they do: Who
houusoeuer, some of them, do yet a little stay at the using of this apparel in
themselves, yet be not of their judgment to condemn the things of
uuyclzednes, nether in them selves, nor in the use of them, as the Ministers in
this Church of England be caled no uue to uueare them. And therefore
houusoeuer they uuoulde uuyshe a liberty to their ouune consciences reserved,
till they may see more in the cause, yet be they far of to condemn their
brothers, uuhose consciences can serve, them for obedience salze to use them.

You would feign persuade me^ that no learned men, are of our judgment, but we
kowe that the gretist part of the best lernid, yea of them that wear them,
were of this opinion. No man to our knowleg co^demnith the things nor the users
of them of wickedness. And you your self in your examination often affirm that
we grant them to be indifferent.

And therefore I must needs uuype a great many out of their brotherohed, in
their singularities enteyned in this last uuriting, and say: They be but a ueri
feuue in them selves, other then such as have been either unlearnedly brought
up, most in profane occupations, or such as be puffed up in an arroganere of
them selves, peradventure chargeable, to such vanities of assertions, as at
this time I uuyll spare to charge them. God grant they do not by this degree,
fall to the sects of Anabaptists, or Libertines, uuhere unto some uuyse and
zealous men of their ouune friends and Patrones, fear they do malze post
haste, one day, openly to profess.

If you with all the learned of your side would procure us a free and a general
disputacion to have the matter quietly debated, and indifferently judged, you
should se a great number ready to defended our cause, with their tongs whom
you now blot out with your penn: for it is well known that not only a few
unlearned brought up in profane occupations, as you uncharitable and
slau^deruslie report: but a great number of wise, godly, and lernid men, such
as have been and are the eldest prearchers in England neuar stained with any
recantacion, or subscription, brought upp in all kind of lerning, both of arts
and toungs, such as have the name not only at home but also in foreign
nations, to be in the number of the best learned in the realm, agree with us, in
this cause, and of them partly have we lernid this judgment. Wherefore you have
lost more credit with all indifferent men, by this your slanderus defacing of
us, then all your examination is able to pourchase to your cause. Of the same
spirit it procedith that you charg us, with post have toward the sects of
Anabaptists, and Libertins, which ar fo far from such detestable heresies as
you are, from christian charity, so to judge of us. As ar the arguments of
multitude customs orders, and lerning, are fet from the schole of papists whom
by this kind of reasoning, you more confirm in their error, than stre^ghthen
your cause, or weaken ours. To be called from an occupation to the mynisterie
of the church, is no more reproach now, to men mete for that function, then it
was to Petar, Paull, and the rest of the apostoles. If they were unmeet than
the Bishopes are to be blamed for admitting them and most of all for retayning,
and daily multiplyng others, whom nothing else but a capp and a Surples do
make commendable.

VVhereupon the aduersaires af true religion can uuinne no great rejoice at
these men's ouersightes, as being but a uery feuue, and counted in deed none of
the sincere and learned protestauntes, houusoeuer for a time they seemed to be
amongst us. For though they be gone out from us yet they uuere belylze never
of us. So that the adversaries shall have the uuhole state of the Clergy in
place and reputation, for learning, uuy sdome, and gravity, concordely joined
to be uuholy against them, to defend the sincerity of the Gospel, though a
feuue of these malze such adoo in our Church, as stories malze mention, uuas
ever uuont some to rise in sundry times to trouble the state of their Churches,
uuhere they duuelt. And good it uuere that these Englis he Louanistes, did no
to much delight them selves uuith any hye reioysinges, as though the Prince
uuoulde for disprouyng of a feuue counterfaites, dislylze the uuhole state of
the rest of the Clergy, uuho shall by Gods grace be able enough to defend
the true religion of the Gospel, uuhiehe they may hear houue the Prince does
profess daily and openly, to maintain and defend to the uttermost jot of
the uuorde of God, uuith renoncing asuuell all forrayne authority, as all
forrayne doctrine, not surely grounded upon this stable roclze of Goods uuorde.
Their faunuing flattery prefaces, their greatly conceived hopes, their busy
dispraisyng of better learned then them selves be, can not so be uuitche uuise
men's heads, or hearts, but they ca^ discern truth from falsehood, devotion
from superstitio^papistrye from the Gospel, tirany from discipline, Christ
from Antichrist. And therefore sirs, if ye lzneuue houne feuue these are, by
uuhom ye delyght to slander the learned, honue little uue thinlze the rest of
the Apostles discrepited, though Judas fell out from them, and houue these be
regarded and accounted of, so long as they thus continue, and finally, houue
little uue shall joy of them, and use them, to take the Gospel in defense
against you: Ye uuoulde not be so busy to infarce in your boolzes the reproach
of these men to lade other uuith envy, the breath of uuhose penues, ye shall
never be able to aunsuuere, say and uuryte uuhat ye can. yourboolzes so fast
and hastyly sent oner in great numbers, being not much feared for any
substance that is in them, may for a time relieve you to your sustentation,
may be gaineful to your Printers and Pedlours, may peradventure ieoparde your
friends uuithin this your natural Country, for reading and cherishing matter
against their ouune surety, and against the state of Realm. But truth is to
hye set, for you to plulze her out of heaven, to manyfestlye lznouuen eo be by
your papers obscured, and to surely stablished to drouune her in the myrie
lalzes of your Sophistical licorous uuritinges. Houusoeuer ye embosse out your
glorious styles, they be but, Superuacaneae co^flictationes hominu^ me^te
corruptora, 1. Tim. 6.
quibus ade^pta est veritas, qui existima^t quaestu^ esse piet. uuith the fore
part of the text there expressed, that is, but superfluous brauulings of men
perverse in heart, Psaal. 2. 1. Tim. 3.
from uuhom the truth is uuithdrauuen, uuhich thinlz that lucre is godlynes,
etc. Ye uuere best to understand, Quod qui habitat in coelis. etc. irridebit
omnes Ianes and Ma^bres, qui resistu^t veritati. homines me^te corrupti,
reprobi circa fide^, sed no^ proficie^t amplius: siquide^ ame^t ia istoru^
euide^s erit omni bus que^admodu^ and il. He uuiche is in heaven, shall deride
all Lannes and Mambres, uuhich resist the truth, men of corrupt minds,
reprobate in the faith, but they shall preualye no longer, for their madness
shall be utterly lznouuen to all men as theyrs uuas. Ye should do uuell to
remember, Quod Dominus est qui custodit veritate^, Psalm. 145. 3. Ese. 4.
and quod veritas magua est and fortior prae omnibus veritas enim manet, and
inualescit in aeternu^. and viuit and obt. etc. hat it is the Lord uuhiche
preserves the truth, for the truth is of great force, and is stronger then
all other things, for ueritie uuill remain, uuill preualie for ever, and
uuyll live and hauo the uictory, uuorlde uuithout end.

Yt wear to be wished that the aduersares of true religion, had not causeto
rejoice at these your ouersightes: who being not many, if men many be
measured, by there judgments, do so boldye pronounce of the rest of your
brethern: that they are not of the sincere and learned protesta^tes: that they
trobell the church that they be contrefaits: that you shall litill joy, and
use us in the defense of the gospel against them: that we are like Judas, who
yet god be praised, neuar fell from Christ, with that traitor, but justly
depart from you, yet but in a Ceremony: and that we are gone from you,
for that belike we wear neuar of you, etc. who are you that we were
neuar of you? By the exemple of S. Paull we may say thus much for our
selves: you ar Christians? so are we. you are ministrs of Christ? so are
we. you have suffered for the Gospel of Christ? so have we. That which
you contend so much for, when you have defendid it to the vnttermost: is but
the ordinance of man.

And will you say that we are gone out of the church of god as heretics
and Antichristians, because we dissent from you in a tradition. Thus in your
heat, to deface us, you wring and and rack S. Ihon. And as for the defense
of religion, God chosith his avvne cha^pions as plesith him. Other wise it is
neither lerning, nor wisdom, nor gravity, but the lord Jesus with the breath
of hs mouth, that ouerhro with Antichrist. And yet if you had the spirit of
meake Moses, you would rejoice in the number of Prophets: and if you wear
obedye^t to christ, or had pitefull, bowels, toward the nedie people, you
would pray the lord of the harvest, to thrust out more workmen into his harvest:
and not thrust any out of yt for such tradicions.

But to drauue to and onde, and to say some thing to these upon uuho^ this
labor is bestouued, uuho most glory of this gaye boolze of theyrs. I shall
vvish them to have a respect^ to their former calling and profession of the
Gospel. And as love of grace and truth (I trust) did first induce them: so
God grant that they do not finally fight against this grace received, and
uuylsullye peruerte the true sincerity of the Gospel, by treading not aright,
overcome by human cogitations, as uuas Peter for a time, till Paulle did
reprehende him

If your dissimulation wear not to manifestest, you might easelie disceaue us,
with your fair words and sugered speech. Eue^now we wear Anabaptists,
Libertines, Iudasses, and conte^nid in the chirches: yea such as were neuar
belike of the Church, now you trust the love of grace and truth did induce us.
Call you this plain dealinge. we thank god, that he has given us grace,
rather to sustain such reproach at your hands, and what so euar else laws
and magistrates shall lay upon us, then to pervert the synceritie of the
gospel, by mynglyng of it with the leven of Antichrist: so may we call them,
though the name be changed for it is well known that changing, of names changith
not the thing. As for example of Peter's reprehension, makith altogether
against you: for Petar offendid by dissimulacion, and myngling the gospel with
the leven of the Jews laws: which thing either ignorantly you omyt, or else,
maliciuslie dissemble.

Trustyng that they uuyll so advisedly expende the earnest counsel of these
two notable Fathers, Master Bucer, and master Martyr, in this their purposed
discussyng of the caase, that they uuyll finally rest in quiet, praysyng God in
truth and ueritie: forsalzng error covered uuith zealous persuuasion to the
saving of their ouune souls to the rejoice of such Christians to uuho^ they
have been teachers: as good subjects ought to do: to the glory of God. To uuhom
be all honor and donanion for ever. Amen.

To the epistlles of Bucer and Martyr, we aunsweare, that what so euar seemed
to them tolerable for a time, is not to be enforced as a perpetual law.
Their epistls and censures to the contrary are to be showed. And even in these
epistlls which vow bring they grant all the minors, which you deny: as in the
table following does apere. You go far in judgment. Can you make this
controversy a damnable errore? and a matter of saving and loosnig soul les? so
you do pronouncing seuerlye against us. God be to you a more merciful judge.

The examiner. AS you pretend in your preface that fear lest the Ministers of
Gods word should be brougth into contempt, was the cause of the vnoderly
pubblishing of these your smalreasons: So it is well known, that the great
care which the chief governors of this Church of England takes, to
preserve true and faithful Ministers from dispite and reproach, moved them to
retain and set forth these orders, as whereby (their hope is) Gods diligent
servants, accomplishing also other parts of their vocation, might recover
again the ancient dignity of their forefathers, and that Gods holy Word and
Sacraments now (by the craft of Satan) somethyng basely esteemed, might also
have there due reverence and honor, herein they followed the steps of wise
Princes rnd good Fathers, who thought it their service not only to estably she
sound doctrine in matters of faith: but also to redress and ordain rytes for
discipline and public quiet, as in the godly counsels appears, Nicoene,
Calcidon, and others.


The aunsuuersr. It is well that we agree in this poyncte that the ministers
of gods word ought not to be conde^nid we diffar only in this, which way
they may be brought i^to good estimacio^: we say that they are worthy of dobell
honor that rule well, as the scripture teaches: this though you deny not yet,
you appoincte the the retainynge of the prescribed apparel as a garment
wherbye the ministers may recover the dignity of their forfathers. The true
honor should de given to good government and gotten by it. But now experienc
teaches, that an ass, a dissembling papiste, a dronkard, a Swerer, a
Gamester, so he receive your apparel, may have the honor of retaining his
living: but qui optime pr^sunt they that rule never so well, and are comendable
in all poinctes, that S. Paul requirith in a perfect good minister, for only
refusinge the apparel are thruste out, as men vnworhy of any honor dew to a
minister of Christ. Of forfathers we say that the Apostolls, not Pharisees
the Apostells, not Prelates: The Apostells (I say) which did not seek dignity
by apparel, as these did, a^ our forfathers. God his word bideth us take heed
of the Scribes and Pharisees that love to go in long robes, and to have
salutacions in the maiket, and highest seats in the sinagoges, and chefest
romes in feasts. And those things which they do, do you not, says Christ,
they do all things that they may seem to have reverence of men. And if it be
not lawful for the disciples, to get reverence by Pharisaicall apparel, much
less lawful is it for to get reverence by papisticall apparel. Moreover if it
be true that you say, that the retainyng of these orders, was to preserve the
true and faithful ministers from despighte, it is much to be marueled, that
now when all men do see the contrary effect follow, they are not utterly
abolished, for these ministers that are m^ made instruments to e^force these
things, are coumpted Tirauntes and Persecuters, those that refuse to receive
them, ar judged to be rebels, and those that receive them are rekened
tourncotes, flatteres, and waueringe weather Cocks. If therefore none other
thing wear sought but that which you pretend: these things ought spedilie to
be taken away. Touching the Sacraments we think thee institution of them to
be perfect that no honor is to be sought unto them by man's inuentiones, much
less by such apparel, as they have been most dishonored and defaced withal,
by the Papists. God his word and Sacraments in in the Apostells time, when
all things werpuer and nothing corrupt with ma^s traditions: when simple
apparel was used in the ministry, were better esteemed than now. If any
reverence be gotten, it is this, that the ignorant people is made believe that
the old Mass and the Communion are all one: and so it maintains the error of
the dignity of the popish sacrifising prist hode. And where you say you follow
the examples of the fathers in Niceane and Calcedon counsels, you are not able
to prove, that they busied the^ selves about suich trifing matters, but raither
about the electiones of good bishopes and Ministers, excommunications of
backesliders and correction, of other vices.


The Examiner. But in your considerations how smally you have regarded your
duty in this common we alth, on this manner to make the world wonder at your
factious wylfulnes, before your superiors (if you think herin you have any)
read over your reasons, it is rather tobe lamented, and prosecuted with
tears, then to be blased abroad in words, and uttered by pen. Surely it
may be true here: Nostalem consuetudinem non habemus nec ecclesiae dei: 1 Cor
11.
we have no such custom, nor the Churches of god. Leaving then to the
judgment of others, whether your run not headlong the ready way to make your
selves justly, and the ministry also evil spoken of, by not seeking the
peace of the Country where you dwell, and by not obeyng and following, Hier: 29,
but breakyng and forsakyng those variable orders and manners, whereby worldly
quietness at the leastis gotten and mayntayned, iuit: Dei C: 19 c. 17.
which (as S. Augustine says) is not the usage of the City of God, touching
manners, laws, and ordinances, whereby the religion of the living God is not
hurt: Leaving (I say) this, and your consideration to the judgment of others,
it shall be sufficient at this time to weygh the grounds and reasons, which
you use in refusyng to wear apparel and garments, not now of the Popes
Church, but of Christ's Church in England.


The Aunsvuerer. The name of peace is very beweifull, but then it is truly
beneficial, when the agreement with god and his word, is the fundation of our
peace. If the things in controversy were nothing else but variable orders, and
manuers, (which petition of principal none of us will grant you) we might
ealselie and would gladlye admit your peace and worldly quietness: not whith
standing being such as they are: if you would suffar us quietlye to dischar ^ge
our duties according to our calling, there should be small contention on our
part, and therefore you do unjustly charge us whith factions, wilfulnes and
contempt of superiors, whom we know and acknowledge as our Superiors in the
lord unto whom we have always been ready to render our reasones.


The examiner. It shall not be unnecessary to advertise the Christian reader,
that in the declaration there are much pains bestowed of these discoursours
(were as very little needs) to the intent (peradventure) other to advance
them selves in their knowledge of Gods word, or to nip and taunte their
fellows and betters as unlearned and fools. For where as few or none are
ignorant, that all things should be done to edify, no offenses should justly
be given, and Christian libettie should always be defended and such like: Yet
in co^firming of these undoubted truths many words are spent, when as little
or nothing is said of that which in this cause and many others contains the
controversy, that is of the Minor or next proposition. As whether these orders
do edify, do offend, or hurt Christian liberty?

Wherefore think not much, if diverse sentences of scripture tendyng to
stablishe one truth not denied at this time be briefly collected and
answered together. For those things ought and shall be expended, which make
any thing at all to the pithe of these matter.


The aunsvverer. Let the Christian Reader be advertised, how so euar this
Examiner now grauntith the Majors to be undoubted truths, that before this
time, he or they of his side would not so receue them, As this that all order
ought to serve to edification, they would bring in instans, of the stoles, and
pewes, in the Churchis, expounding the sayng of S. Paull, let all be done to
edefinge, not to be meant of domme things, but things that wearred spoken or
song: therefore was it necessary to prove them out of gods word
Substanciali^e. Where you say our Minor is not proved. although, we are men of
occupation, yet we understand that a universal minor negative can not be
well confirmed. Yet our particular minors they are al ready touched in the Table
and herafler, as you give coccasion, shall be particularly proved.


The examiner. The first discorse here, is of edifiyng or buyldyng the Church
of Christ, which all faithful Ministers do acknowledge to be their bounden
duty and service, according to the graces of God bestowed upon them, and
never to hinder and pluck down awhit: whereof much more might be said then is
here rehearsed, if it were needful to wade further in so worthy a matter.

Herewithall in textes and expositions, you would not greatly have enlarged
your book, Ephesians. 2.
if it had not ben to make al gods workmen saui^g your selves suspected to the
world, as pluckers down and destroyers of Gods most holy Temple, Fphes. 4.
builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: when as through
the grace of God workyng in the^ by true and sound doctrine in this apparel
and orders, many earnest laborers of the lords, do travail to bring his
people to the full knowledge of Christ, houesoeuer you have entangled and
accombred the consciences of your hearers.

So then to the two first places, that be out of the second and fourth Chapter
to the Ephesians, no more needs to be spoken, but that all the careful
buylders in this Church of Christ, which have other commanded or received
these lawful orders, first (as they have before time, so do still take pains
to amplify and beautify the spouse of Christ, with the precious jewels of
spiritual wisdom: And secondly do utterly forsake vain, ungodly, and
unprofitable inuentio^s of man, which two things you seem to require by your
note in a true preacher, and can not deny them (if you be not wylfull) to be
in very many vsyng this apparel.


The Aunsvverer. You confess it is the duty of ministers allwaies to build
and neuar to hinder or pluke down, but hear of our text and expositiones you
would not have judged so rashly if you had remembered what our Sauioursayth
Nolite iudicare, Mat. 7.
etc. Judge not. We do not affirm that they are all destroiers, and pullers
down of the Temple, that wear the paparell, but we may well say that all the
destrioyers and pullers down, are glad to be couerid in this Apparel. And
that the Ceremonies and apparel tend not to edification, but destruction, for
that no man by them is directed to Christ, and the sincerity of the Gospel,
neither yet, provoked to amendment of life, but to Antichrist, and the
remenbraunce of popery. Calvin says that al Ceremonies are corrupt and
hurfull, except men be directed by them unto Christ. And for these Ceremonies
that are used in papacy, they are separated from doctrine, so that they keep
men in signs lacking all fignifications, thus fare Call. Inst. li. 4, cap. 10.
sect. 15. Secondly whether they refuse all vain ungodly and unprofitable
inventions, which receue this apparel, must be tried by the conclusion of the
matter. Yet we are not more to be accused ffor condemning the receuers, then
you for condemninge us the refusers, agreing with the most excelent reformed
Chirchis, of France, Germany and ^cotland: and will you, see, how you have
setforwardes gods building in the City of London? Did you not in one day
unfurnish and quite dispatch of work men all the placis in the City whereas
any great bildinge was? and have you not heitherto kept back those workmen
ffrom there work? And have you furnished these places with such diligent
laborers again? and what can this be else but to stay hinder, and pluck down
gods building?


The examiner. Upon this vniuer sall sentenc: That Christ's Ministers must
huilde up and not pull down, you determine that Vicars, Curates and parish
Priests ought to admit no orders which may not manifestly appear unto them
that they do edify: Giving eueri man in his paryshe an absolute authority,
much more then they had before the prophecy was fulfilled: Kings shall be thy
Nursefathers, Esa. 4^.
and Queens thy Nurses.


The Aunsvuerer. We suppose that every pastor ought to be so far lernid, that
he may judge of such matters, or else we think him not worthy to be a
minister: and what inconueniens commith of this affirmation, we do not yet
see: forasmuch as S. Paull willith every man to be certenlye persuaded, in his
own mind, whether it be lawful or no, though the matter be neuar so
indifferent. For he that doubtith is condemnid, because he wantith faith: Esa.
49.
and that which is not of faith is sy^ne. Werfore when the scripture biddith all
things to be done to edesie. A good pastor should admit nothing, but that which
he is persuaded will edifi^. 1. Sam. 14.
And of this judgment is that reverend ^father Peter Martyr in plain Words,
who putting a difference between Ecclesticall and polliticall laws says
Spectanda est in in Ecclesiasticis* Eutaxia, in politicis autem parendum est,
quamuis tu eam euxtaxiam non videas: In ecclesiastical laws good order must
be considered, but in polliticall laws thou must obey, allthough thou see not
that good order, But where you name vicars, curats, and parrish prests, whereof
we made no mention in our declaration, leuing out Archibishopes, Bishopes,
Deanes, Archedecons, Prebendaries, Cannons, and Parsons: we marnell what you
mean, unless you think none of them so mad as to join with us, in this cause.
Isa. 49.
Yet shall she porest mynisters, even every vicar, curat, and parrish priest,
(as you call them) have as great authority, in the ministration of the word,
and Sacraments, in his Church, as any of these prelates: whom you spare to
name. We confess that kings and Quees, should be Nurcies of the Church but not
Lords of it, not of our conscience, which the words immediately following in
Isaye does playnlie declare: bownig down there face to the earth, they shall
worship the and lick the dust of thy fet. The authority that princis have
over the churchis, is a service to defend it, and to seek the profit thereof,
raither then a prerogative to burden it with superfluus, and hurtful
Ceremonies, at there pleasure.


The Examiner. Yet you fearyng the inconveniences that must needs follow so an
absurd an opinion, remember your selves in the next lines and say: That if
you might but conceive an hope, that the use of these things might help
forward the Lords buyidyng, you would not refuse them. So one time, all
orders not manifestly edifyng, must be condemned, another time if you may hope
that they will do well, you will admit them. This your chaungeable opinion well
weyed, differs not much from that strange saying of the Donatistes, August.
Epist. 119.
of who se number one Ticonius said: Quod volumus sanctum est. What we will is
holy.


The Aunsunerer. We fear no such inconueniens, and therefore your rack our
words as plesith you. Thear is no chaungeable opinion to be gathe red of our
Words: vnlese you are more like the Donaristes, which for so small a fault, cut
of your brethren, from you, if it wear any falt at all. And the sayning of
Ticonius may be more justly applied to you, for what popish Ceremonies you
reject, they are vnhollye and what you will receue, that is good and orderlye.
you reject the vestement, and rerayne the Cope, you reject the Albe, and
retain the Surplese, you reject the stole, and retain the typpet, you reject
the shaven crown and retain the square Capp. And yeat these, and such like,
are in one predicament. Why you should keep the one, and refuse the other we
knon not, but by this rule, Quod volumus sanctum est.


The Examiner. If you had beni^ S. Epla. 119,
Augustines time, when the Church was burdened with human presumptions, so
that the condition of the jews was more tolerable (as he witnesses) then the
state of Christ's Church in those days: belike you would not have continued
preaching and ministering as he and other did, because those burthen^. Were not
at the syrst dashe clean taken from your shoulders. But he learned and taught
other that: Multa toleranda vbi facultas non datur resecandi: Many things
must be borne, when orderly meenes do not serve to cut them of. Yea, he tried
by experience, than some times profitable alteryng of such things as were long
accoustomed, bread trouble in the Church by newnes of change, as these his
words testify. Ipsa quippe mutatio consuetudinis etiam que adiuuat vtilitate,
Epla, 18.
nouitate perturbat: For the very change of custom, as it may do good for the
profit thereof so it may make much troble for thee w^es thereof. The this
learned father would have men to expect in alteration, done by public
authority, convenient time and season, in matters that might he tolerated
without Gods heavy displeasure.


The Aunsvverer. Saint Augustine him felse was not burdened with those human
presumptions, that he writith of, neither does he counsel his friend January,
to bear with them at all. If we ad been in his time we would not only have
lamented with him: the intolerable burden of Ceremonies, but also have labored
to have them utterly abolished, as he him felse giuith counsel which arguith
that we would continue preaching, and ministering, which is the chefest way to
deface them. yt is a pleasant jest for you to say, we refuse preaching, whem
you forbid us your felse which would be content to be with out the living, so you
would give us lyberte that way to discharge our conscience. if we had been in
S. August. time, we are verylie persuaded that he would not have put us from
the ministe rye, fynding none other fault with us, but that we refuse upon
good Conscience, that which he upon good consideration, thought mete, to be taken
away. His iudgmentwas, that such things, as have not authority in scripture,
nor are concluded in counsels, nor confirmed by custom of the universal
Churchs: but are variable and of a doubtful beginning: Vbi facultas tribuitur,
sine vlla dubitatione resecanda. Epistola 119. 1. Sam. 14.
Martyr also says, that Ceremonies are so long to be suffered, as they make to
order, and to some profet of the Church: but when they are no logger
profitable, then with out all stick^g and dout, ^. Sam. 14.
they are to be taken away.


The Examiner. Here before you show what ruin and destruction of gods
building these few orders law fully enjoined do make: frankely you grant, all
these things refused now of you, to be of their ownn nature indifferent, and
that they may be used, or not used as occasion shall serve

It is hard to say whether this be the mind of all the shrinking and refusing
Ministers of London, who are known herein not to be of one judgment: yea it
is affirmed of you a little after in your declaration, that they be monumentes
of idolatry and so to be utterly destroyed: Heb. 10.
that they be contrary to Scripture, and so also not be received, though
Princes command them.


The Aunsvverer. We are not so frank in granting, but you are more frank in
receiving, of that which no man grantith. When we grant them to be
indifferent, we speak of the substans, matter and creature, we grant not,
that they are indifferent, in every kind of use. And wha^ we affirm them to
be monumentes of idolatry: we affirm that, which you cannot deny: therefore
are they to be banishedowt from true religion. And as they are monumentes of
idolattie, and slombling blocks to the weke, they are no to be received,
though all the Princis in the world command them.


The exammer. A man might ask of you what use that is which causes these
things noune not to be indifferent? the use that has been, or the use that
they are now appointed unto? If the indifferency of these orders hang upon
the use: then we must look whereunto they are ordained, and not wherein they
were before abused


The aunsuurer. Aman might answer you, that both the use that has been, and
the use that now is, causith them now not to be indifferent for that which has
been abused, and is not necessary, nor profitable, to be retained, is clean
to be abolis head and changed only in things profitable, and necessary, the
abuse is to be clean taken away: and the thing it self to be retainid.

Neither must we look only to what end they are retained but what end
folowith the retayning of them. We deni not but that they are reteynid of a
good intent, but we see that an evil end does follow of the restoring of
the^. Namely the popish preistes which are the greter number of the clergy
use them for the same end, they did in popery. And that the ignorant people
can conceue no other thing of them, but that the seruis of god has great need
of them. Therefore for both the uses these are not now indifferent: giving
manifest offense to the weak, open incorragment to the Enymie and ignorant.
Conserning the former use Musculus says afler this manner (afler he that shewid
potestaem liciti) But theare nedith diligent discretion in this cause, that a
Minister accopt not those things indifferent, which ayther because they are
against gods word or else for superstition, and wicked seruis: do deserve just
abomination. Cap. 5. ^radi.
Conserning the latter use Musculus also says to conclud, I think that
altradicions, are to be refused, which are against the word of god, which are
idle, vain, and unprofitable, which are dishonest, and uncomely, which have
but a show of supersticion, which are greuus and burdenus, etc, But Martyr
grauntith in his epistle, that these as they are now commanded, in that it is
not lawful, to do otherwise, are greuus, and burthenus: and that therewith
Papists go obout to mayntay ne, a litill spice of their Mass: therefore are
they by Musenlus judgment to be refused. As for the other properties in their
place, they are or shall be showed to ly in these things. If any such new use of
old superstitius garments, had been necessary, or comendable, the Earings,
Baalls vessels and the brazen Serpent, might so have been conserved and
conuertid, which Jacob, Josias, and Ezechias, destroyed whose godly zeal we
think our selves bound to follow, raither, then your new application.


The Examiner. Now are you come to thee hiefe point of ^he first argument,
which is as you say, that Christ's Church is not edisied by these garments:
Which assertion you go about to per swade two ways. First, because the simple
Christans are grieved, and are ready thereby to fall from Christ.

These whom you term simple Christians, are those, who (as may well appear)
persuade themselves to have deep knowledge in Gods word, to have grown to so
certain a perfection, that they can and will sodeynlye judge of all men, and
of all doctrine, and they think them selves to be setteled and quieted in
greater matters then these. They see weyghtyer things in the Church (if they
see any thing at all) whereat they may be grieved, as other good men are, and
yet must be contented, till God grant fit and orderly means to remove them,
with charity to bear, lest the unity of Christ's Church should be rent upon
every light offense, and horrible scisme for trifles be brought in


The Aunsvuerer. The asscrtione is well proved. That does not edifi^, which
does destroy, that which greuith the simple Christians, does destroy
therefore, it does not edify. This reason you grant, but you will needs
persuade them, that it does not grieve them. Because they are persuaded in
greter matters. So might the uncharitable abusers of there liberty among the
Romans and Corinthians, have answered Saint Paull, for they that were grieved
with meats and drinks, had received the faith of CHRIST: but all men have not
knowledge, though, you will bear them in hand that they have: for allthough
they see: and are grieved, to behold greater matters unreformed: yet that is no
cause why these thi^ ges should be with charity borne withal. Lib. 3. ca. 19.
s. 13.
Ler ne that of Calvin, as our liberty says he, must be in fesus Christ, to
charity, so charity, must be subject to the purity of faith. Bucer not oneli
in private lettres but also in public come^taris, in Math. 18.
agreith to the same. Vnde nihil dicunt. qui perpetuo iactant maiora esse quae
vrgeri oporteat, quam reformationem ceremoniarum, in Antichristi reliquii;
patrocinantes, ceremoniae en^m testes religionis sunt, etc. wherefore they say
nothing that continualli bost, that there are greter matters to be urged then
the reformacion of ceremonies: herebi defending the relikes of Antichrist: for
Ceremonies are witnessis of religion, etc. But by the way we pray you remember
tw things first that you confess these to be weighty: Seco^dlie, that among
so mani waightier things you reform none which causes us to be less willing
to ioync with you in this.


The Examiner. But the simple in deed, Heb. 5:
who are yet to be fed with milk, who have not through custom their wits
exercised, are sore grieved, and that iustlye, seeing you not receive
indifferent and comely orders: Of which sort, thousands are driven back, by
such kind of disobedience as yours is, whiles you wylfully withdraw your
selves from your duties and charge of Gods beloved children and the dear
flock of Christ: wherein if you have taught your Nouices that shese
ordinances, and such other, are superfluous, idolatrious, and superstitious,
when they are for decency and order sake by lawful auchoritie thus left (upon
which teaching their offense may arise:) you ought now on gods behalf
otherwise to infourme them. But if they be taught to ^ake these things as
Gods word does prefuribe, then your wearyng shall not be the woundyng of their
consciences, neither by Gods grace shall you need to fear the heavy curse of
God, whereof you write.

I pray God it be not (as at S. Augustines time) that this troublyng of the
weak, Epi. 1.8.
come not by the contentious obstinacy of some brethren, as is before said.


The aunsuuerer. 11 The simple hauenede to be feed with the pure milk of the
gospel, not myngled with the poison of Antichrist, lest it bread such a
disease in them, as when they are old, they shall be scarce albe to shake of
Christ blys his his babes, from such milk: which S. Paull ne uar dreamid of.
If Irenae were alive he would say as he thought of victor, that you make the
horrible schism which for trifills, as you term them, do thrust your brotherne
from you who be fore lived and labored in loving consent with you. If
thowsands be grieved when we do our duties, sincerlie, we will aunsvvere be
fore the judgment seat of Christ of a good conscience grounded upon gods wor
de. Our savior Christ biddith us let them alone with their blind guids. For
they they pretend most grief are papists, and no Weak gospellars. And
conserning offense, which is one of the thechefest causes whi we refuse this
apparel, they are most offended that are best pleasid with it, for they are
confirmid inther supersticius opinion, of these things, are boldned by example,
to do that, whereof there consciencis doubtith: and is not enstructed by gods
word. And this is also the sentence of Bucer, in the place before alleged.
Infirmorum rationem ita habebunt vt ni hill temere, nihil importune saciant, sed
cum summa mansuetu dine, docebunt infirmos, sapere fortius, tamen and exemplis
pro uchere illos dabunt operam neque paucorum qui antichristi ce remoniis aequo
adictiores sunt and fortasse non ueri fratres morabuntur cecitatem ut plurimos
interim infirmes alios offendant quibus nunquam ista cogitatio non in animo
uersatur: si ista ta mala essent, abolerentur si tam bona opere ea cuncti
presertim qui christi uolunt haberi amplecterentur:

They shall have such respect unto the weak that they do nothing rashly,
nothing out of season but with great gentillnes they shall teach the weak to
wax strong in understanding, and yet by examples shall labor to set them
forward, neither shall they regard the blindness of a few, that are to much
addicte to the Ceremonies of Antichrist which peradventure are no true
brethern, in the mean while to ofend many other which, have allwais, this
cogitation in their heart, if these things were so evil, they should be
abolished: if these things were so good, all me^ specialli, they that be
accounted of Christ would embrace them in work. But because your fay rest
color is order, and decencye: may it plese you also to here the censors of
diverse learned fathers, plainly declaring that this your apparel, is neither
orderly, nor comely. first Peter Martyr 1. Sam. 14. has these words
handling the common place of the ecclesiastical laws.

Esse tamen opertere aliqua quae faciant ad ordinem, and decori^^ docet Paulus
ad Corint hic tamen ordo non est situs, in magna pompa, in vestibus, in
cantibus, in campanarum and organorum strepitu, sed quae ad modestiam and
grauitatem faciant, qui remoueat lasciuiam, confusionem, and barbariem.

Yet Paulto the Corinthia^s teachiht, that so^ti^hgs must be had which serve
for order, and co^lynes but yet that order is not placid in great po^pe, in
garments, in singing, in the no is of Bells, and Organes, but such as makit to
modesty, and gravity, which remouith wantonness, confusion, and barbarusnes.
Calvin in the 4. book, Cap. 10. and 29. division of his Inst. writith thus.

Similiter ordinem non constituemus, in nugatoriis it^is pompis quae nihil
habent prater auandiem splendorem, sed in ea compositione, quaeomnem
confusionem, barbariem, contumacia^, turbas omnes and disci^iam tollat.

Likewise we will not place order in these triflinge pompes, which have nothing
but a vanishing show, but in the composition which takith away all confusion,
barbarusnes, stubburnes, all troble and dissension. Thus much for order now for
comlynes. Docter Rydlie callith them fowlish and to fond for a vice in a play.
His fellow, docter Tailor, callith the^ apish toys. Docter Poynet late bishop
of winchest. in his admonition to England liknith them to a porters weed of
bill in sgate. Lib, 4: cap: 18 (...) 29
Calum in his institutions

Decorum ergo non u^cabimus in quo nihil praeter inane, oblectamentum inerit,
quale exemplum uidemus in illo theatrico apparatu, quo utuntur papistae in
sacris: ubi nihil quam inutilis elegantiae, larua and luxus sine fructu
apparet.

Therefore we shall not say, that comlines is wherein shall be nothing but vain
delectacio^ne such as we see in the playerlye like apparel, which the
papists use in their service, where apperith nothing else, but an unprofitable
visar of gains. And excess with out fruit. Peter Martyr upon this text,

Omnia ordine etc. sed recte intelligenda est ea particula, Decenter, ne hoc
decorum situm putemus, in scricis uestimentis aureis and argenteis vasis,
gemmatisque poculis, nolarumstrepitu and luminarium fulgore, haec qui iactitant
vt decentia, in paralogismum incidunt, quem Aristateles secundum quid ad
simpliciter vocat. decentia haec esse fatemur: sed oculis corporis sen sui,
carnis mu^di and iudicio, que not poti': abnegare debemus qua^ sequi: decorum
quod in his requiritur, constat mortificatione sanctitate, modestia contemptu
mundi and potissimum edificatione.

But this word decently must be ryghtlie understood, lest we should
think that this comlines is placed in silk garments, godlen, and siluar,
vesseles, cups, set with stones, noyes of Bells and bryghtnes of Candelles.
These that bragg of these things, as decent, fall into A paralogisme, which
Arist. calls from that which is after a sort, to that which is simply. we
grant, that these things are decent, but to the eyes of the body, to the
sens of the flesh and judgment of the world, which we ought raither to deny,
than to follow. the comlines that is in these words required, sta^dith in
mortification, hollines, modesty, contempt, of the world, and most cheslie in
aedification. Petir Martyr also upon the 1. of the Judges, fol. 33. speking of
popish apparel says procedit sacrificulus ornatus prodigiosis uestibus.

The pressed comith forth deked with monstrous apparel, and in the same place
and leaffe. Interponuntur etiam quidam imo permulti ritus peregrinisigna
ridicula gestus quodammodo flulti and uestes inusitatae There are added also,
Certain yea many strange Ceremonies signs, to be laughed at certain gestures
in a manner foolish and disguised garments.

If therefore fools bables apish toys, porters wedes, disguised garments,
playerlike apparel, monstrous apparel be indifferent, orderly, and comlie, or
else if in Church matters, we must seek to our bodily eyes, the sensis of the
flesh and the judgment of the world, then may you go forward with your
conclusion, but if not, our disobeydiens, (as it pleases you to term yt)
shall not be the overthrow, of thousands, but the confirmacion, and
strenghning of multitudes, in gods truth. As for enforming the people
otherwise, then we, have taught them, unless, you be albe to show us, that we
have informed them with untruths, your request cannot be eselye ybtained, nor
counsaell redylie followed. to your prayer we say nothing but Amen sobeit.


The examiner. Secondly: You vvoulde have us think that the receyuyng of these
orders does not edisie, because (as you imagine) the obstinate papiste shall be
confirmed in his opinion. This thing is easyer and oftener said of you, then
proved as yet. For truelly this may be a means rather to win the adversaries
from their errors, when they see us without superstition or any necessity,
turn those things to good uses, which they fowly abused, and hear us
condemn in open preaching, that which they set so much by. And upon this
cause it seems, the Apostles used long after Christ's ascension the
Ceremonies of Moises, 1. Cor. 9.
and that in the Temple, to win to Christ the obstinate Jews. Note this
place of ^ed. eccl. hist. lib. 1: cap. 30. and expendle his reasons:
The histories Ecclesiastical also have diverse experiences, how much our
ancient fathers increased Christ's Church by such godly policy. Hence it
was, that they plucked not down all the Iewy she Sinagoges and Heathnyshe
Temples, but turned them to the service of God: that they altered their feast
days: Epi: 154:
that they changed their rites to Godly purposes. And that this might be
done, it appears by S. Augustine to Publicola, saying: Cum uero ista uel in
honorem ueri dei conuertuntur, hoe de illis fit, quod de ipsis hominibus, cum
ex sacrilegis et impiis in ueram religionem mutantur: when these things be
converted unto the honor of the true God, it is of them as it is of the
parties them selves, when they were before committyng sacrilege and impiety,
now they be converted into true religious persons. These fathers thought not
the^ selves in such things under the commandment which God gave his people
to practice in the land of Canaan, and therefore durst not with an heroical
spirit destroy all that the Heathen had invented before: Dedoctr: Christ lib,
2 cap. 40.
But did, Vindicare tanquam ab iniustis possessoribus in usunt suum, clarme to
their own right use (as it were) from the iniust ^ossessours, such like
things as you talk of ^n this declaration.


The Aunsvverer. This reason is also effectual that which ^onfirmith the
destroyenge Papists, is not profitable for the building, this apparel
confirmith the Papists, ergo etc. The minor you say wantythe proof, what
better proof, can you have then experiens. Remember what Harding writith in
this matter, in his preface before the answer to the Apology, enquire what
the Papists say abrod, ^f these things be good, all popery, is not evil,
we trust that other things will sollow shortly etc. this argues therefore the
minor to be true, that obstinat Papists are confirmed, in ertos, by retianinge
this apparel. But you will have it a mean to win the adversaries, gods
word teachith us no such way. the comparaison of the Ceremonis of Moses and
Antichrists, are not alyke for the one, were the ordinances of god, and for a
time, might be used, to win the weak as Augustine, Epi. 19:
confessethe that the Iewis Ceremonis when Paul used them were tolerable, but
now detestable and again that the old mother Sinagog must be buried with
honor but no such honor is dew to the whore of Rome: ffurthermore, they were
borne with all but for a time, and then utterlie abolished, but now the gospel
has been long preached and therefore these things ought no longer to be borne
wit hall.

In Augustines time, there were, that for the like policy, would have had
some of the Paganes Ceremonies retaynid: that it might be a means, wherbye to
win then even aaster the same sort, as you would win the Papists. Aug.
tom. 10. Hom. 6.
But he utterly, misliked the policy, answering: quaeritis, etc. do you ask
me houe the pagans may be won? how they may be called to salvation: forsake
their solemnites let go their toies, and then if they agree not to our truhe.
let them be ashamed, of their feuunes. If we could agree: with Augustine and
forsake the popish toys, and trinketes, with in short space no doubt the
Papists which now swerve, would shrink in the wetti^g and wax so few, that
they would be ashamed of their little number. The place of Beda that you refere
us unto, and will us so diligently to way, is an Epistell of Pope Gregory, to
Nellitus. where we learn this policy (how godly, we leave to other to judge)
Not to pull down the Temples of Idols, Id^. 9 ^ (...) dust. 4. E^^. 71.
but to sanctify them with hollie water, Alters and relics of Saints for
he says, Aqua benedicta fiat, in eiusdem phanis aspergatur: altaria
construantur: reliquia penantur.

Let holy water be made and sprinkled in the the same temples, let Altars be
builded, and relickes be there placed. O godly policy: And teachinge
solemnities, where they were wont to kill many oxen, in the honor of Devils.
Yt must be changed to some other solemnity, therefore in the feast of
Dedication, or birth day of the martirs, whose relictes are theare laid let
them make bowers. of grene bows, about the same Chirchis, and so keep a
solemnity (...) holy banketes As for his reasones that you ^ill us to
expende, they are like to the cause ^ich he had in hand, As for Churchis, we
reta^^ not, to allure Papists, to our religion, but because they are
profitable for gods congrega^^ion, to gather together in. And touching other
^lemnities Gregory him self does but tolle^ate them, because he thought, it
impossible ^o take away all at ons. The last reason of changinge sacrifices of
the Aegiptians, leanith upon (...) false ground, for sacrifices were first by
go^es commandment, be fore all Idolatry, and ^herfore not taken from the
Aegiptianes, but ^he old service reduced, and the new law of them instituted
^ffinalie your policy standith ^n great neade of a god Patron, when you
bring in Gregory who first corrupted religion ^n England, through tirannie of
whose legate Augustine the monk 14. hundred religious and learned Christianes,
were cruelly murde^ed, and slain, for withstandinge his deuelish ^ollicie,
But if he will not serve, Augustine shall help. we ausvver that Augustine
speaks of those things, which ar expreslie commanded by god to be reserved,
and such things as serve to necessary uses as vvoodde for the fire, and
vessels, for the sacrifice, And if commandment of god or necessary use, can
be proved to be in or of, any of these things now in controversy, then you
may aplie it. But how far he is from granting of any use of vvncessarie
things, once abused, it may appear, in the last sentence of the same epistell,
wherein he will not grant for the necessary preservation of man's ly fe leave,
no body standing bye no body seeing, that a man may eat a piece of meat,
that he knows has been offered to a^ Idol. As for the other place of
Augustine de doctrina Christiana, serves not to this purpose. Augustine
tellith us what sciences we may use, and if anieh ethen writers have written
any thing well, that we should take it from them, as from unjust possessors
to our own use. This is to far fet to be applied to Ceremonies. You to
maintain the patches of popery recite only pecis of places. For it follows
in the same place, simulata and superstitiosa figmenta, the fained and
superstious inuentiones of the heathen are not to be immitated of Christians.
finalie conserning the policy of our forefathers, so far as it was agreeable
to the scriptures, we embrace it, If they retained any thing that was
necessary, or profitable, so to be judged by gods word, we co^me^d them If
they presumed upon humane reason, with out gods word, we neither defend
them, nor allow them, To the which end Theodore Besza speaks against Baldwin
saing: I will only speak of that, which is out of controuerfsie, that the
most part of the bishopes of those days wear more careful then they ought
to be about inuenting of Ceremonies wether they thought the Paganes might more
easelie by these means, be gained to Christ, or whether they had other causes.
But how unhappy this Counsel was, this one thing does declare, that seeing
the nature of man is such, that it delitith nothing more then in external
worshipping, sodenlie it came to pass, that even while many perceived it not,
that those Ceremonies which they desired to garnis Christian religion, with
grew in to Superstition oppressed the doctrine it selffe. And that this is so
whosoever would diligently read the wrytinges of the old ffathers and the
histories of those times, and consider the beginning of those controversies,
where with at this day, all Christendom is troubled, shald pleinelie
confess. Thus far Beza, to aunswar your Beda as for these that are now in
controversy, they have only a pretense, of profit for order and decencye:
being in deed confusion and vncomlynes, for what order is that, which confundith
light and darkness: and makith no difference between a Protestant and a Papist.


The examiner. Neither did almyghtie God will his people to overthrow the
Cananites images and aulters, Deuteronomy. 7.
lest those Gentyles should be made more obstinate in their false religion
(as you allege the cause:) but rather (as the text declares) lest Gods
servants should there by fall unto their idolatry. For they were charged not
to bring that heathynyshe people to Gods true service: but to rote them clean
out of the land which they had so wickedly polluted. wherefore, you do wrye this
place from his natural sense.


The Aunsvverer. You would feign prove that we wry the text from his sense, as
you do your selffe to often. Yea and in this place misreport us out cause is
uttered in these words: lest they in using any of these things, should give
occasion to the heathen, to think that the god of heaven and Earth, had any
pleasur in these things: or need of the use of the^ in his true seruis. and
this is our only reason which well followith of yours: God willed say you, that
all the Cananites Ceremonies should be destroyed: lest his people by using such
Ceremonies, should be snared ergo, as we say, god by so doing showed he had no
need of such Ceremonies. Neither any pleasure in the^. Thus whilist you have
sought a knot in a rush your cauil is not worth a rush, Notwith standing though
we grant your collection to be true: yet of one thing there might be diverse
ends, one was lest gods people hold fall into idolatrye. And we might hold
also, that this was an other end, lest the Cananites should be more obstynat.
Which we gather of that, that god forbad them to make covenant with them, but
to destroy their Imagis, etc. they were not for bidden to bring them to gods
seruise for Rahab, was received with all her house: but the obstynate were
commanded to be roted out: which thing the Israelites did not perform: and
therefore it may be justly gathered, that God in providence, seeing they would
not do it: gave commandment to destroy they idols, with all their
furniture, lest they which remained should think their religion was in part
allowed, which was not vterlie overthrown.


The examiner. Upon this text you add a note in the margent: That al
monumentes of Idolatry must be destroyed, signifieng what your auditors and
readers should judge of these orders; which yet you your selves sometimes
acknowledge to be indifferent, and may be used when occasion shall serve. If
these things required at your hands, be preciselye under that commandment of
God to his people enteryng the land of Canaan: then is all this controversy
is at an end. Prove that, and al is done.

It would help you very much in this matter, to consider that there is great
difference betwixt those things that were merely invented of the Heathen, to
the worship of Idols, and to maynteyne idolatry: and those that have been
abused of papists, specially these few things, being first institute for no
such intent.


The aunsuurrrer. The mayor you grant, that all monumentes of Idolatry must
be destroyed upon the proof of your minor, you dare adventure your cause. A
monument, is a remnant of a thing that is left or set up for a remembrans:
these be such remnantes and call popery into remembrance, which is Idolatry,
and not only remenbraunce, but some aestimacion: therefore they are monumentes
of idolatry. But you will have them proved preciselie under the Commandment
that shalbie done two ways: first, because not only the image it self, but
all that belong unto yt, even the gold and silver of them is accursed. Deuteronomy.
7. also we must abolish the very names of them Deuteronomy. 12. David also agreith
that he willnot only abstain from sacrificing with Idolaters, but also
denies to take their names in his lips. Psalm. 16. The prophet Esaias speking of
them which are truly conuertid from Idolatry: commaundith them saynig: you
shall pollute the covering of the image of silver and cast them away as a
menstruus clothe, and thou shall say unto it auant, or get the kence. Esaias 30.
according to this meaning did Iehu (whose zeal in this fact the holy ghost
praisith) Not only destroy the imagis of Baall and his preistes, but also
their vestments, which he commanded to be brought out of the vestrie for the^.
And if Ieroboames calves, Balls Imagis, alters and vestements. be under this
commandment, then by Peter Martyrs judgment these things are preciselie,
under the same commandment: who comparith them together as all of one sort.
in these words, Cauere ita debent Lutherani, ne du^ exciderint multos
papisticos errores mitentur Iehum, retinendo adhuc permulta papis^ica,
defendu^t enim adhuc presentiam corporis Christi, realem corporalem and
substantialem, ut loquntur, in pane coenae Domini tuentur imagines, tuentur
vestes: and alia permulta huius generis. Sicut Iehu cum ueri Dei cultu
idololatriam uitulorum obseruat, non est in religione ad hunc modum agendum
tota quippe repur ganda est and ad uiuum emendanda.

Also the Lutherans must take heed, lest after they have cut of many popish
errors, they follow Iehu, by retaninge still many popish things, for they
defend still the real, corporal and substancial presens (as they call it) of
the body of Christ, in the bread of the Lords supper, they maintain Images,
they maintain garments, and many other things of this sort, As Iehu with the
worship of the true god observed the idolatry of the Calves, we must not do
some religion, for it must be altogether purged, and wholly reformed to the
quick. And speking of Elias which repaired the Lords altar, he saithei: fait
etiam hoc quod indignumputet vt Iehouae sacrificium offeretur super altar
Baalis: cum tamen h^ die nonnulli sunt qui in administranda vera Coena Domini,
uti uelint papisticis uestibus and instrumentis.

This also he does because he thinkith it an unworthy thing that he
Sacrifice of the Lord should be offered upon Balls Altar. Whereas there be
some now a dais which in ministering the true supper of the Lord, will use the
popish garments and instruments: and these sente^cies are in the last works
that ever Peter martyr wrote. If you list to cavil of the creatures of god: we
have made aunswrere before, that all things of gods creation are good: but here
al godly me^ may see, how hateful all idolaters usage are, when for their
sakes, the creatures of god are accursed. If you say that commandment
perteynith only to that time, of their furst entry: the saing of David and
Esaias, which the exe^ple of Iehu will confute you. But before we take further
pains in this matter. We think best to demand of you two questions. on
whether you willsta^d to your promise. Prove this and al is don. The other
whether you allue the authority of P. Martyr and S. Aug. for proof. of your
honesty we have good hope: and therefore lose of your fidelity. Of your
judgment we presume, because you alledg^ both the autors as proffes against
us. Now therefore hear Petir Martyr and S. Augustine both at oncs affirming
these and such like things to be precisely under that commandment, upon the 2.
Chapter of the Iudgis fol. 40.

Dubi^um adhuc est an idem a Christianis Deus exigat quod ab Haebreis fieri
uoluit: ut uidelicet idola and superstitiones cum infidelium, tum haereticorum
ui auferant atque comminuant: Si de Principibus ac magistratibus, hoc rogetur
exploratum est illos debere suas ditiones ab iis malis repurgare, atque ad id
gladium and potestatem a Deo acceperunt. Qui uero priuati sunt a ui abstinere
debent cum eis gladius and potestas coercendi non fuerit commissa: Hac de re
Augustinus to: Tomo sermon 6: ad hunc modum respo^dit Ita saciendum esse a
Christianis quem admodum Hebraeis deus iusserat: Deuteronomy: sep: Vbi diserte
praecepit haec tum a Iudeis fieri debere cum terra fuisset in eorum potestate:
Itaque oportet and Christianos idem agere sed in is agris uillis and domibus
quae possident etc.

Yet it is doubtful whether god requirith the same things of the Christians,
which he willed to be do^ne of the Hebrevvs, namely, that with force they
should remove, and break the Idols, and superstitions both of infidells, and
heretics. If this be demanded conserning Princis and Magistrates, it is
clear, that they ought to purge their dominions, from such evils, and therefore
they have received the sword and power of god but they that are private me^
ought to refrain from force, seeing the sword and power of constray ming is
not committed to the^, Conserning this matter S. Augustine in the 10. Tome and
6. sermon answerith after this sort, that Christians must do even so as god
commanded the Hebrews Deuter. 7. were he preciseli commanded that these things
should the^ be of the Jews, when the land was once in there power. Therefore
Christians also must do even the same. but in those feildes towns and howses
which they possess, etc. Now stand to your promise, this is proved, alls is
done. Secondly if that which you say to the contrary, do nothing disprouue,
but that they are under the commandment, then may we say that they are
precisely under the commandment. For your difference makith them to differ
nothing from these. For sacrifice and diverse others customs, were not merely
inue^tid of the he then, to the worship of Idols but taken out of the true
worshipping of God, and abused to idolatry, yet were the sacrifices and
customs forbiden, whereas these things if they had not been inue^tid of the
Papists: yet was their institution superfluus and supersticious: not gronded
upon the word of god. Herto agreith Petir Martyr Iud 1. fol. 32. No^ est
specta^da origo ceremoniaru^ sed an sentie^t cu^ verbo Dei. Not the institution
of Ceremonies is to be considered, but the use whether they agree with the word
of god as the brazen serpent had a good institution, but forth abuse was
destroyed. Moreover if alters superalters, Pixes, Shrins, Censers, rolls of
Wax, Tabernaclls, etc. be nonuments of idolatry, as the Queens Ma Injunctions
say they be and therefore precisely under this commandment: why are not Copes
Surplessis starchbred Cross. cappes, tippets, etc. precisely under the same
commandment. If the former be not under the commandment by what
commandment are they abolished? If they be under it, by what authority are
these retaynid? But the fewnes ^ow think does excuse the^. The lest of the^ we^
to many, if Bucer and Musculus might be hard, for Bucer says, qui sincere
christiani sint: nihil penitus far possint antichisti, Those that are
sincerly Christians can abide notihng at all that which is Antichrists. And
Musculus in his common placis of traditions 6. chapter. Voco autem papisticas
traditiones, quae ut natura sua, nel abusu impietati superstitioni, ac
cacitati, papisticae seruiunt, quas omnes, su^mopere auersa^das esse censeo.
nec est ut fingat sibi ipsi, quisqua^ commodas in speciem interprctaciones, ob
quas illas absque conscientiae suae laesione, seruare se posse putet. I call
popish traditions those, which aither by their own nature orelse by abuse, do
serve ungodliness; supersticio^: and popish bli^dnes all, which I think we
ought most ernestlye to abhore. Neither can any man feine unto him seiffe, any
gentill interpretacion: in outward show, which he can think, he may keep them
with out hurt of his conscience. Thus one of these fathers, would have none of
these abidden: the other would have all, to be abhord. And you think that the
small number can excuse them: as who say they were so few as you, would have
them seem to be. Cope, Surplese, starch btead, gospelers, pistlers, kneli^g at
Communion: crossing at Baptism Baptism of women, Cap, tippet, and gown. Item
by authoriti of parliament, Albes, alters, vestments etc. These few things are
more then may be well borne with.


The examiner. From this argument of not edifiyng (wherein you would have us
rather yield to your saying then be persuaded by your reasons) you fall to
speak against policy without the compass of Gods word, under the which you
would comprise these orders not impius and wicked. And for want of matter,
through your spitite of ironie, you must (as you do to the Prince, the
Counsel, the Bishops, the learned men and wise) give also to the
aduertisementes their gyrde and nip: which (very prudently) thinks it well,
if Ministers receyuyng these orders, teach and protest, for what end and
purpose they take and use the same, whereby others may learn, what difference
there is now when these things are set forth for decency and order, and the
time when such like were enforced as the service of God.

What fault you find with this rule, you declare not. Peradventure you think
those garments yet stained with Idolatry, and therefore not to be received by
any protestation: wherein you are contrary to your selves, to all learned men,
and to the scriptures: Or else you think not this declaration suffient in these
things indifferent, that they be not urged of necessite, that they be only
appointed for decency and order: whereunto you may add more circumstaunces
(if you will) but they are contained under those two: which if the Minister
both hold him self, and diligently declare to other, he may with discharge of
conscience obey his Prince, knowing that comelynes and order, edify the
Church of Christ.

Well, the aduertisements must be defaced with the infamous title of the
invention of man and such like. And upon what reason shall this be done?
Forsooth it is like the wisdom of them, that would have images (you say) in
Churches, to exercise their strength in refrayning from the worship of them,
which thing is against the wisdom of God. Deuteronomy. 7.

You condemn us of the spirit of Irony: But you through your spirit of malice
and uncharitableness, interpret all things as you think best: you say we
declare not, what fault we find, with the rulle of aduertisseme^ts: and yet
the 14. line after, you confess, that we call it the invention, of man: like
to their wisdom that will have imagis to exercise our stre^ghe. The prudence
that you teach the Ministers in making protestacion, whereby others may learn
the difference you speak of. Deceived wise Origin, Venite, says, he, accipite,
non fro^des simulachrorum, sed frondes domini So, our paractysers of pollycie
say: come weer this, not for any religion, but for ancient order, and
decencye. If you object, the place and service are not alike: we answer that
the Collers, and pretencis are like.


The examiner. You should have done the duties of discrete preachers, if you
had uttered this your unlikely likelihood, to them that stand in so fond
defense of images, whereof, what the doctrine of this Realm is, it is
publicly declared. And as for these orders, all obedient men well understand,
that they are not given to try any man's perfection: ^. Cor. 14 ^. Petr. 2.
Mat. 16. ^ Acts 15.
Neither do they pass the wisdom of God, which in the Scriptures wills all
things to be done decently and orderly, which grants the godly magistrate
authority of making ecclesiastical lawcs, which has given also power to
the Church, which promises his spirit to Sinodes, yea for ordeyning rites
and manners.


The Aunsvverer. If your count this a fond defense of imagis, why do you not
show how the comparison is unlike, you say they are not geuin to try men's
perfections, if there be no fear of offens, what nedith protestation: if there
be fear of offens, why are they commanded, you say they pass not the compase
of gods wisdom, because the Scripture willith all things be done decently and
orderly. But this is not proved, if these things are decently and orderly
not whot soever is said to be decent, is comely, nor whatsoever, is
commanded, as good order is good order. In deed when confess the magistrate
ought to set forth Ecclesiastical laws, but vnelie out of gods word, ffor
neither the magistrate nor the church, has any pour but to edify. Where you
promise the spirit of god to Sindoes for ordeyniuge rites and manners we trust
you mean not so but that Sinodes may ere in ordeyning rites and manners. if
they trust to their own wisdone and not to the word of god.


The Examiner. But to beat down this policy of man's brain, you say (very
little, nay nothing at all to the purpose) that in things neither commanded,
nor forbidden, we must not follow our own fantasies, lest we hear: Mat. 15.
In vain do they worship me, teaching doctrines the precepts of men. Hom. 52:
in Mat.


These precepts of men, wherewith the Prophet and the Apostle say, God is
not worshipped, were such (as Chrysostom writes which the seniours had made
new other ways then Moises commanded, and preferved them in Gods service
before the law of the Lord, and added them to Gods word (as iudgeing ir
otherwise vnpersect) for the fa^uation of Gods people. On this manner no man at
this time urges these orders.


The Aunsuurerer. How can you avoid the saing of our fauiour Christ, (whom it
pleasith you to call the Apostel) and of the prophet Esaias, In vain do they
worshp me, teaching for doctrine the precepts of me^: because the seniors had
preferred them in gods service, before gods law? yt may be doubted whether
they were so impudent to say so. But this is out of doubt that they were, as
your are more zelus in observing them, then in keeping gods law and more severe
in punishing the trangression of them, then the breking of gods law. Remember
that before you granted that the Ceremonies now reteymid have so^times been
observed as the service of god and thefore in such realms where popery does
still flourish as much as ever it did in england, these be yet enforced as god
his feruis, In vain therefore do you urge these doctrines of the precepts of
men used and urged of others as gods service, even such as Chrysostom.
mentionith. what pharisaicall opinion the papists have had, and have yet of
this attire, apperith in the constitutions given to england, the pontifical
Hugo Cardinalis, Albert Magnus, Durand, Synod Seronensis, etc. Which opinions
yet are not bloted, out of the hearts of papists.


The examiner. Contra Crescen. lib. 3. cap. 51. Ser 24. dewer. A post. Epi. 48.
That wholesome laws of godly magistrates, which serving God (as S. Augustine
affirms) they make not only for human society, but also for Gods
religion, which further more he truly terms: Clensing instruments of the
Lords barren flower, profitable terrors, commodious admonitions, healthsom
bounds medicine rigt phisical: That these (I say) are not to be thought the
precepts of man, it needs not to call together here all the ancient
fellowship of fathers. Doctror Bucer upon this place may teach you the same,
who most godly pronounces thus: Quiequid homo statuerit, quod quomodoeunque ad
vsum proximoru^ faciat. etc. whatsoever man shall decree, which by any means
may make to the use of his neighbors, for that the same is derived from the
rule of charity, as be laws civil, domestical statutes, ceremonies and rites
which Christian: men use, thereby to reach or hear Gods, word more
commodiouslie, or to pray, and about the Lords Supper and Baptism, yea, and
what soever shall be a furtheraunce to pass our life here more profitablie and
decently: That thing ought not to be esteemed as a tradition or precept of man,
though by men it be commanded, but as the tradition or precept of god. Thus
far Doctor Bucer. Instit lib. 4 cap. 10 par 30.
with whom Master Calvin very well agrees, saying: That which is part of
decency commended unto us by the Apostle, though it be prescribed by man is
Gods tradition, and not man's, as kneclyng at solemn prayers and such like.

So then if you would have rested upon the censures of these godly learned
me^, you should not have needed thus unwisely to have skoffed at this wisdom
of man, containing her self within the limittes of the wisdom of God, as is
before proved, and might be justified by infinite plays of Germane writers,
and by their letters of late sent into the Realm to diverse godly, butfor
prolixie.


The aunsuurerer. That good laws ordeynid by men accordig to gods word, either
to set forth the glory of god or the profit of our neybour were man's
tradicions, no man affirms, but that these laws of apparel serve to the
woeship of god and profit of men, as yet restith to be proved. for Calvin
whose authority you allege, in the division next before, utterly denies,
this popish apparel to be decent and therefore it ser tuith neither for the
glory of god nor profit of our neighor. And in the same place which you alleg
he protestithe in these words, I allow only those ordinau^cis of men which
be both grounded upon the authority of god and taken out of Scripture yea and
are alogether gods own, And Muasculus in his common placis.

Quod noxiae and pernitiosae sunt traditiones quae ex diabolico instituaetur ex
humana praesuptione natae Ecclesiis obtrudu^tur, De tra. thap. 7.
no^ est ut admoneamus. Nemo enim Christianus talibus patrocinari uult.

Houe hurtful and pernicious those tradicions are which springing ayther of
diwelish instinct or human presumption are thrust upon the churchis, we need
not to put you in mind for no Christian man will defend any such.


The Examiner The third maine reason you use, is: That none of Christ's
litleones must be offended: which thing according to your usage, you augment
with sundry textes of Scripture, as if all the men of understanding in this
Realm we^^e yet aslepe, and neither saw nor hard the voy ^^ce of their
master CHRIST and his ^holy Apostle: But you pass over with silence, that
which you should have sustauncially waded through. Vz: That these orders now
taken, do justly offend the weak lambs of Christ's fold. Wherefore to
answer to the general proposition, it is not expedient, seeing at is holden
as most true of all men.

But concerning the offendyng of the weak, briefly: In idifferent things, if
law, for common tranquillity have prescribed no order what ought to be done, a
Christian man ought to have a great regard of his neighbors conscience,
according to S. Paul's doctrine. Romans 14:
But if law foreseeyng harms and providing quietness, have taken lawefull
order therein, offense is taken, and not given, when the subject does his duty
in obedience, so severely enjoy ned him by Gods wotde.


The Aunsuurerer: Yet semith to you a small matter to offend the little ones and
therefore your jest of yt at your pleasur we beleve it were better a milston
were hanged about our necks and we throne into the sea then we should offend
one of thesse litill ones. Your answer is if that lauues in things indifferent,
abridge. S. Paul's doctrine. First remember we never grant the se things in
respect of all circumstances, to be indifferent. Secondly consider how ^ham
fully you do err, as though S. Paul's doctrine wear subject to politic laws.
The holy ghost commands to abstain from meat lawful, for feat of offense,
the pollitycke law commands to eat the same for obedie^s sake, A godly
man in this case will litill doubt to say it is beter to obey god than man,
but you determine that laws pretending common tra^quillitie may prescribe an
order contrary to the ordar of charity commanded of the holy ghost, by his
instrument S. Paull: binding all ages places, and persons. where does S.
Paull, or any part of holy writ teach such doctrine?


The examiner. Notwithstanding (you say) that a wise shipper in sailing, will
not come nygh rocks and flattes if he may, but take sea rowme enough. In deed
the wise shipmen of our Church have spyed the rocks of false doctrine,
fuperstition and error, whereupon mani have been cast away, and to avoid them
have taken row me enough in the scriptures of God. For outward apparel of
them selves, are not such rocks and flattes (as you do pha^rafie) ineyther
ever hard you any of Christ's servants to be in danger of perishing justly
by them, as they be now appointed. Yea, you may behold many a godly passenger
under these orders saylyng with a straight course toward that heavenly Haven,
whereunto he trusteh safeli to arrive. Al these men in this ship of Christ,
taking example by the politic governor S. Paul o^e out aloude and say: No^
omnia papistica aedifica^t: All popery does does not edify, and are marvelous
circumspect and careful, lest any of Christ's dear flock should be offended.


The Aunsvuerer. You say the outward apparel of them selves are not such
rocks and flattes, that any of Christ servants should be in danger of
perishig justly by them. yet S. Paull thinkith meats to be such rocks and
flattes, that many weak brehern be in danger to perrish by them, To. 14.1,
Cor. 8. but you think you escape the flat tes and rocks, if you cry out of
the Ship, no^ om nia papistica aedificant, all popery does not edify. And
we cry as low de, Omnia papistion destruu^t, al popery does destroy, now
whether have more care of offending, against rocks and flattes, let it be
tried, by the chiese governor and shipimaister Christ, by the true compase of
his word.


The examiner. As for the place alleged by you, where S. Paulle forbyddeth
Communion with the ge^ tiles in their idollatricall worsh^ppyng: if you had
applied it, you should have perceived no sequel thereof. For (thanks be to
God) we dwell not among the Babilonia^s and Chaldies we have in our Church no
public worshipping of idolles, 2. Cor. 6
no Heathems he or idolattical lacrifice as were in some place of the city of
Corinth, whose society and co^tagion we ought to avoid. And if there be in a
Church where Christ's Gosp, is pureli preached and his sacram. rightly
ministered, some evil among the good, as in one net diverse sorts of fis^hes, in
one field Wheat and tares, in one barn corn and chafe: yet the good are
not said to communicate or be defiled of the badde, as long as they consent
not to their wickedness, but depart from among them, not by corporal
separation. but by dissimilitude of life and diversity of manners, though they
both yse the same temple, the same table, Con^don: post collaet cap: 5: etc
the same sacraments, as S. Augustine sets out at large. It is one thing to
flee from communicating with open professed idolatry, their profane rites and
deuilis orders, though in heart we worship God: and another, rightly to use
rites and fasions abused, all the abuses being clearly condemned. Of the one
we have an express commandment in Scripture: the other our ancient fathers
have practiced before you, and Gods holy word has not forbidden it.


The Aunsurerer. Your cannot deni vnlese you will be impudent, that we dwell
among many hundred of papists, though by public authority popery be not
maynteynid. Therefore though we have many things of necessity common with
them, as the creatures of the world one table, one temple. Your rites and
ceremonies, which are not of necessity, we ought not to have common with them.
we must be says, Tertulian compossessores mundi, non erroris, we must be
comparters in the world, not in error. ffor if we have then is there some
society between Christ and Belial, which S. Paull utterly denies that it
ought to be. which ancient fathers not only have practiced, but taught before
us. For Belial is Belial whether he be openly or priuatlie professed, and so
Ceremonies are profane and vnhollie, though they have never so fair and holy
a visard. Bucer in Mattheum
for Bucer speking of Ceremonies retaynid in a reformed Church says: Certe vt
nulla est prorsus Christi, and Belial conuentio, ita sincere Christiani nihil
penitus far poterunt Antichristi. Certaynlie as the are is utterly no
agreement of Christ and Belial, so sincere Christians can abide nothing at all
of Antichrist.


The examiner: The fourth foundation or ground that you lay, is That you must
needs cast away and forsake all those things as have been brought into the
Church besides or contrary to the Scripture. This platte you enlarge with a
dosen several sentences, all which pains you might well have saved, if you
had not minded to hane ben bytyng and snappyng (by the way) at your superiors.

This truth all faithful Christians confirm with you: That concerning faith
and doctrine, concerning remission of sins, and eternal salvation, nothing
ought to be taught or received, which is contrary or not grounded in the
Canonical Scriptures. 2. Tim. 3,
For holy writ given by the inspiration of God, is not only a light to our
feet, as David says: Psalm. 119.
but also so profitable, that thereby the man of God may be absolute, being
made perfect unto all good works, as Saint Paul testifies.

And though hit be most true, touching the substance of Christian religion: yet
the manner and order of setting of it forth, is not particulary expressed, 1.
Cor. 14
but generally left to the disposition of Christ's Church from time to time,
accordi^ng to those words of Saint Paul: Let all things be done comely and
orderly. wherein whatsoever shall be lawfully done to those purposes, is not to
be judged beside the Scriptures.


The Aunsuuerer. It wear folly to strive whith you in vain words and
malicious construing, you will needs have the victory. The scripture you will
have perfect, only thouching substans of Christian religion. The manner and
order of setting it forth, is not particularie expressed. But left generally
to the disposition of the church, we grant. but so that this disposition is
barred in, whith many conditions, that nothing superfluus, or superstitious be
brought in, nothing offensive be decreed, all things be order lie, and
directly apoyncted, and that for edifing: which conditions seeing they want in
your pretensed orders, we must needs say ar they beside the scripture.


The examiner. As fro example. Fasting is commanded in Gods word: But what
days we should fast, Aug. Epist: 86
or what da^es we should not, being not there determined, if the Christian
Church decree, it is not besides the Scripture. The ministering of Baptism,
and the Lords super is commanded in Gods word: But what days, what times,
what places, in what company, with what prayers before and after. if the
Christian Church decree, it is not besides the Scriptures And according to
this Saint Augustine, writes, touching the receuyng of the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ fasting in the morning: Epist: 118.
Saluator ideo non praecepit quo dein ceps ordine sumeretur, vt Apostolis per
quos Ecclesias dispositurus erat, seruaret hunc locum: Our Savior therefore
has not commanded in what order (the Sacrament) should be afterward
received, because he might reserve this place to his Apostoles, by whom he
would order the Churches. Thus also the preaching of the Go spell is
commanded in Gods word but how to do this office in Pulpit or otherwise, in
morninglor after noone, and so forth if the Christian Church decree, it is not
besides the scripture. The like may be said concerning laws politic of
Princes, affairs and traffike betwixt man and man, whose grounds and rules
are in Gods word: and yet the particular circumstaunces in practicing them
being diverse in sundry Countries, according to the judgment of magistrates,
are not besides scriptures when al those diversities have Gods word for their
general rule and end.


The aunsuerer. So supersticion be away, and other condicio^s observed, a law
may be made off fasting, provided all wais that by no human constitution
whichis besidethe word off god, men's co^scie^cis be e^ta^gled, which
wereco^trarie to the word of god. Remember what August. writith of the fast of
the Maniches, which you may se in the begini^g of this book, wherbie we
gather this general rule alwais i^ this controversy to bemarkid: that no
Ceremony is to be borrowed of the adversary. Homel. pri: ieun. Iud
And also co^sidere the sayning of Chrysostom, conserninge the fast of the
Jews. Tell not me (says he) they fast, but show me that they fast according to
the will of god, which if they do not, then is their fast, more wicked, then
any dronkennes- Likewise for ministri^g the Sacraments, order may be taken by
the curch, so it be most to edification, according to the time place and
compagnie. Touching the tradicion of the Apostles that it is necessary to
receue the Communion ffasting, if you dare defend it by saint Augustins
authority you may. we suppose you will not defend all the doctrine that was
commonly received in his time, and by him thaught much less, all rites and
ceremonies. To be short the scripture has lefl nothing so free or in different
to man's laws, but it must agree with those generalle conditions before
rehearsed, and such like.


The Examiner. And blessed be God, our times are here such, Deuteronomy. 24:
that no man in our Churches presumes to add to Gods word, as acknowledging
the perfitnes thereof to our salvation: And that our governors in the fear of
God, Romans 15:
eschew Saules disobedience: and by righteous clemency flee the tirannie of
Reboam: and through the direction of Gods spirit, walk zelously in the paths
of Godly Ezechias, in all those things which they find written in the book
of gods law, to appertain to his true service and worship, not so much
weyghi^g the displeasures of worldly potentates, as the curses that the most
mighty God powers upon all such as truly and sincerely regard not his
religion and glory.


The Aunsuuerer. We give thanks to god for our good gouerners, desiering him
to encresse in them, those god qualities which you commend, the perfect
obediens of David, to hate the very name of Idols, the righteous clemency of
Salamon, to maintain the godly, and punish the wicked, the godly zeal of
Ezechias, to break the brazen serpent and do all thing according to the
precise rulees of gods word.


The examiner. And blessed be the name of the Lord for ever that has stirred
up such Bishops and preachers among us, which neither have, nor do flatter
Princes, to set up their pleasures above the will and commandment of God,
though some surmise the contrary: As Audiani, Epi. lib. 3: Tom prim.
certain sectaries lay de to the Fathers charge of Nicaene cou^ sell, that
they took an order in the troublesome dissension for keeping Easter day, to
please and flatter Constantine the Emperor, whereas they did it upon just
consideration, and to avoid scisme.


The aunsuuerer. God be praised for allgood Bishops and preachers which seek
not to plese men, but to show them selves the servants of Christ which for the
more detestation of Antichrist, and clerer attestation of Christian liberty,
and for avoiding of strife and dissension wish and labor to abolish all
remembrancis of Idolatri. As for the sectaries called Audiani, they misliked
the fathers of Nicean counsel, for that they would not keep Estar at such time
as the Iewis kept their passover, and therefore they are more like unto them
then we, that carenot how like they seem in outeward rites unto the papists.


The examiner. Surely the examples which you bring in, of wicked Kings and
false Prophets, might have well at this time, in this cause ben pretermitted,
as which concern matters expressly forbidden or commanded by God, but that
you would intimate to some not well stayed, that the Prince in these things
suffers them contrary to Gods word and her lawful authority: which
(thanks be to our heavenly father for his abonndaunt blisinges most richly
powered upon her) is altogether otherwise, or that all preachers and subjects
obeying so orderly demau^des, are but false Prophets and flatterers. This is
very sore judgment, to condemn all your brethren for manpleasers, that obey
their supreme governor under god in matters indifferent: of whom (as you
know) a great number, when flaterie was much more gaynefull, refused to do
it, with no small danger


The aunsuuerer, If nothing be expreselie forbidden by gods word, but that
which is expreselie named in gods word, the Mass, the Pope, Purgatoire, with a
thousand monsters be not expressly forbidden: and thefore may be named things
indifferent: but if all that, be contrary to gods word, which is contrary to
any general rule of holy Srripture, we have showed before that these things
are not indifferent: because they are the glorius badges of the enemy, with
whom we may not in any such thing communicate: they offend the weak, grieve
the godly, confirm the obstinat, aedifie not, maintain supersticion, make
contention are uncomely etc. To answer your uncharitable surmise of our
indgment, were nedles, because it bewrayith it selffe. yet to uncover your
Sophistry, because of the simpell it shall not be amiss. All though we
affirm, that these things suffered, or set forth by the Prince are be sides
gods word, but being persuaded by you and such as you are, that they may stand
with gods word. your Sophistry is ab ignoratione elenchi, or, a non causa
procausa.


The examiner. Epi. gene
And if you mark your note well: Flattery has not ben always the sure mark
of false teachers. For your shall read S. Jude foretell of some that should
despise them that were in authority: Aug. Epi. 48.
You shall read of the Donatistes, Rogations, Circumcellions, and Papists,
that are rather disobedient to just and good laws of Princes, for that (as
they sey) they see not in the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles any
such example.


The aunsuuerer. None despise them that be in authorite, more then flatterers
which speak fayer to their faces, and condemn them in their hearts The
Donatists, Epi. gene. Aug. Epla 48.
Rogatians, Circumcellians, and Papists, have all wais been flaterers, where
they have hope to be entertained. To such disobedient parasites you do unjustly
and vngentlie compare your Brethern.


The examiner. Now for the manner and condition of true Prophets, Eze. 13.
which (you assure us) is, to aduouche always: Haec dicit dominus, Thus
says the Lord: It is marvel you remembered not, in what things that was
then necessary, and wherein it is requiered now. Trueli you are not so
unskillful, but that you know sundry several things to be left to their
judgment, who may for the more handsome feeding of Christessheepe, 1. Cor 11.
and not for their own purse, belly, or kitchen, say with S. Paul: Other
things when I come, I will set in an order. Al rites and fashions which every
nation believing may stablishe and use, are not distinctly rehearsed in
Scripture, that the minister may say of every one of them: Thus says the
Lord. It is sufficient in such things, if they truly serve to EVTAXIA, that
is, seemly order, to retain the which, the Church has power to abrogate old,
and make new laws. wherein (says Doctor Peter Martyr) these conditions
must be observed: First that they be not contrari to Gods word: Then, that
justification and remission of sins be not sought for in them: Thirdly, that
the multitude ouerwhelme not the Church: Fourthly that they be not decreed as
necessari and not to be changed: Last of all, that they be not so urged, as if
he sinned dampnablie that sometime omitteth them without offense or contempt.
Such laws then albeit they be not in plain terms and words mentioned in
the scripture, yet having these properties, they are not to be rejected, as if
they were by no manner of means in the word of God.


The aunsuurere. It is nedles you think, in orders and Ceremonies to say hoc
dicit Dominus. Thus says the lord, because saint Paull says other things
when I come I will set in order. This is neither good logic, nor witty
Sophistry: what a consequent is this. S. Paull will set things in order when
he comith. Ergo he will not, or need not set them in order according to the
word of god. S. Paull is wont to give warning, wha^ he spekith of things whereof
he has no commandment of the Lord. Thus say I and not the Lord. 1. Cor. 7.
That I speak I speak it not afler the lord. 2. Cor. 11. But when he prescribed
orders to the Church of Corinth. co^serning the reverent use of the Sacrament:
he says, that which he delivered he receyuid of the Lord: condemning all for
disorder that was not received of the Lord. The same night he was betrayed. You
will cauil of the time place and company. We are not so ignorant, how foeuar
we have been brought up in profane occupacions, but we can distinguiss he
and make a difference of things done at the institution of the Sacrament that
some pertain to the Sacrament as the bread, the wine, the sitting at the
table, the blissing, the breaking the delivering, the receiving, the preching
of the Lords death. In the which action we think nothing was omitted that
served ayther for reverence of the Sacrament, or for decent and orderly
mynistri^g of the same. Therefore what so ever is addedor changid for these
causis at the lest, we think it superfluus, if it be not presu^ptius, to seem
more wise in these poyncts then Christ. And his Apostells that were contented
with this pure and innmingled institution. Other things there were in the
institution that were no part of it, nor pertaynid to it, as the time: at
night, after supper, the place, a parler, the certain number 12, and, such
like. These are indifferent: for we reed in the scripture that all these
circumstancis, were changed. And of such are the rules of D. Peter martyr, to
be understood: which if they were observed we should not long be trobled whith
these matters.


The examiner. It is a pitiful case to see how you trouble your selves in
comparing Christ preaching the will of his father, and the Phariseis teaching
their own traditions: as if any man inforceth now man's law, as part of Gods
divine service: or as if these orders upon necessity of salvation must be
received, ^d Cassul.
and Gods blessed word trodden under foot. Yet saint Augustine is thus bold,
touching the observation of profitable rites in Christ's Church, that he
thinks the contempteus breaker of Ecclesiastical orders, to be corrected as
transgressors of Gods laws.


The Aunsuuerer. It is a pittefull case to see you so stoutly maintain
precepts of me^, against the word of god, as though all precepts and tradicions
(unless they be enforced, as a part of gods dyuine service, or upon necessity
of salvation) are to be received. What can the Papist say more in defense, of
men's traditions. The Pharisees as is touched before, made not much more of
their tradicions then the tradicions of their elders. though they were as you
are (more) zealus for them, then for gods law. And as for S. Augustine his
rule, first prove these to be profitable, and then use then and spare not.


The examiner. The Apostles (you say) preached not the dreams of their own
heads: Ast. 15
and yet for all that, they made orders for the Church which continued their
times and season, whereof we read not their particular commission. 1. Cor.
^^.14.
True it is (as you report) that S. Paul willed not men to follow his
devises, neither preached he him self at any time. What then? Did he not
appoint temporal rites in the Church, which he had not Verbati^ expressly at
his masters hands and which now cease and are not in use? Ephi: lib: 3: Tom:
1^
the like is said of such doings of the other Apostoles, whose constitutions
were altered after their death.


The Aunsuuerer: You shall never be able to prove, the Apostoles made any
orders or constitutions, but they were agreeable to the general rules of
Scripture: before often rehearsed.


The Examiner. You conclude thus: because these things have no commandment
nor ground in Gods word, therefore you refuse them.

First special commandment needs not in this part of Ecclesiastical
discipline. The edification, order decency, authority of supreme magistrates
have ground sufficient in the new Testament and old. Last of all, you should
have proved that they had no ground in Scriptures: But that thing you never
once touched, but rannea rouyng upon the Mayor, to bleare the simple Christians
eyes, as if you had said much of the matter, when you never come toward it.


The Aunsvverer. It is true all edisication, order, and decency and authority
of magistrates have grounds in the Scripture: but your apparel has not any
aedification, dece^cie or order, nor lawful authority, for we have no power
but to edify. Thefore it has no grownd in the Scripture: and all this has
been spoken of before.


The Examiner Passing from this fourth reason, you frame an objection unto your
selves, as it likes your selves, and answer unto it as you list. Your
objection is: That the Prince commanding a thing indifferent (and profitable
for the of the Church may be added) must be obayed. whereupon (you say) it
must follow, you disobeyng therein, must both your selves offend, and be a
stumblyng block for others.

In aunswrere hereunto, how sclenderly you excuse yore selves and avoid
blame, how daungerously you pass over other matters, it had not ben greatly
amiss to have quietly left: but that this place as well as others, would have
something spoken of it.

The authority (you affirm) of a Prince in these things indifferent, is to
command their good use, and forbid the contrary. Upon which your resolution,
a man may reason with you thus. The good use of indifferent things is gods
commandment, which a Prince must execute: But this may be a good use of
these orders now taken, as the contrary is not proved by you, and so
consequently the magistrate may call upon the execution of the same. Touching
the Minor, this much we have of your grant, that a time may be, when these
things in Christ's Church may have their good use: But whether that time be
now or nay, there are preiudices against you of the like time heretofore, of
the wholle parliament, of the Clergy, of the most part of protestants and
papists.


The aunsuuerer. The answer to the objection is better, than you can take
away for all your glorious words, remembering the former protestation, that
we never granted these things to be indifferent, in their use: then admitting
they were never so idiffere^t yet aedificatio^ must be sought in them.
Christian liberty must not be infringed for the^. etc. This is our answer to
the obyectio^. But your fine reason may not be omitted. The good use of
indifferent things is gods co^ma^deme^t. Which the Prince must execute, but
this may be a god use of these orders now taken, therefore the magistrate may
call upon the execution of them. First you crave no less then two principalls,
to help your weak cause, the one that these things are indifferent: the other
that there may be a good use of them. Your Minor semith to bring a fallaci
whith yt there may be a good use of things: ergo there is a good use. And this
is called a posse ad esse, from that which may be to that which is. But you
say we grant your Minor, that there may be a time when these things in
Christ's church may have there good use. If this had been granted you yet you
rune into a another fallacye, by abusing, and stretching the grant, a dicto
simpliciter ad secundum quid. These orders may be used of some whose
consciences are not entangled, ergo of all contrary to their judgment and
science: or these orders may be used at some time, and for a time: ergo. at all
times and al ways. you are not ignorant, that the circunstances of persons
and times vary the case, But you say there are preiudicis against us, of
what? of the like time before? King Eduardes time is not like, for the gospel
has been longar preached. of the whole perliament. you know what the Papists
au^swer to this. of the learned and godly? They wish their abolishing with us.
of the most part of Protesta^tes and Papists? we are ashamed to hear a
Protestant allege such popish praeiudices, prescription of time, of council,
of clergy, of multitude, of Protestants and Papists.


The examiner. As for that power which (you expound) God has given to
Princes, whether it contain all their authority and jurisdiction, as you
rehearse it, it shall not be narrowly scanned at this time. Neither (thanks be
given to God) does the Prince of pleasure, but for furthercommoditie of her
subjects, require this subjection of yours, which how lawfully you withdraw,
God knows and will judge. verily this your declaration in that day, 1. Cor. 4
will not be your defense, when the Lord shall lyghten things that are hid in
darkness, and make the counsel of the hearts manifest. Also we all nkowe, or
ought to know, in what cases we should put in use that saying of S. Peter: we
ought more to obey God then man. And therefore we stike not in these things to
show grateful hearts, as of those men, who acknowledge them selves by the
means of such a Prince, delivered out of those miserable cases. We are
affraide to strive contentiouslie about the variety of king Salomons wives
garment (things outward) lest we should hurt her inward beauty as S. Ad cass:
Augustine thinks to become servants of the Church, a Queen so pearelesse.


The Aunsuuerer. We must all apere, before the judgment seat of Christ were
the thoughts of our hattes shall either accuse or excuse us, where howsoever
our Declaration defend us. Your examination shall not rondenne us. Whether the
Prince of pleasure cequire these things or no, you confess that ye receive
them to pleasure the Prince: ffor your words are, that you stick not in these
things to show grateful hattes to the Prince. And also we a^ at the Princes
commandment body and gods, whith thankefulnes, our obedience to god and his
word all ways reserved. As for saint Augustines allegory we have little to
do whith it, but if you like it, then must you like ii things in that place,
first that it may please you to suffer the Queens garment to be cha^geable and
not to rent the cote of Christ whith contention, for lack of conformity:
secondlye that you will consider that there is no comelines of the Chirch in
outward shows, for as he says Omnis pulchritudo filiae regis intrinsecus,
all the beauty of the Kings Dawghter is inward


The examiner. The bonds and limittes which you appoint for true obedrence of
subjects to their princes, are very narrow and dangerous. For oftentimes the
Subject ought to obey in things not forbidden by God, and commanded by law,
though he do not plainly perceive either for what good end they are required,
of to what end they will come: as daily experience in common wealths do
show. But (belike) you will have every man to understand as much as the
Prince and council knows and intends: or else you will set the subject at
his choice.

Moreover, here is perilous authority granted to every subject, to determine
upon the Princes laws, proclamations and ordinances that when they shall see
them (many times otheruayes then they are in deed) unprofitable then shall
they, nay they must not do and accomplish the same. If you restrain this to
matters Ecclefiasticall, you help your selves never awhyt: For every Minister
there has not full power to make and abrogate Ecclesiastical laws, nor yet
knowledge well to judge of them.

This is therefore scarce to give example of true obedience to God and man. For
in not obeing man in such things indifferent, whose use you can not show now
to be wicked, you obey not God, whose minister man is. But I omit here longer
to recite your writing in this point for good, considerations: Which I think,
your self better advised hereafter, will expende.


The aunsuuerer. We will give as large lymites of obeydience, as the scripture
giuith. And so far there is no danger. we grant that often times the subject
ought to obey when the Prince do the evil to command: but this stretchith no
farther then temporal matters. As if the Prince exact an vnreso^nable tribute,
the subject is bound to pay it. As for matters ecclesiastical every minister
though he make no laws, yet oug to have knowledge, that he may judge of laws
made, wheather they stand with gods word or no. And thus thinks Peter Martyr
(as is before alleged) making a distinction betwixt Ecclesiastical and
polliticall laws. You think it dangerous for subjects to restrain the
Princes authorities, to bounds and lymites. we think it as dangerous, toin
large the Princes authority beyond the bo^des and lymites of holy scripture,
but you omit upon considerations, to rehearse more of our writing. You never
omit upon any good consideration, to charge us with false and uncharitable
suspicions, which we would wysh, you had uttered playnelie.


The examiner. The fifth and last reason general, that moves you utterly to
refuse the receiving of apparel yet continued and declared, is the
consideration of Christian liberty, which thereby (you think) should be
manifestly infringed, and so forth. And here you triumph in your textes: how
Christ has delivered us from the bondages of ceremonies and law.

As touching Christian liberty, the faithful man must know, that it is
altogether spiritual, and parteyneth only to the conscience, which must be
pacified concerning the law of God, and nerte well stayed in things
indifferent. This liberty consists herein, not to be holden and tied with
any religion in external things: but that yt may be lawful before God to use
them or omit them, as occasion shall serve. This persuasion a godly man must
always retain and keep safe in his mind: but when he comes to thee use and
action of them, then must he moderate and qualify his liberty, according to
charity toward his neighbor, and obedience to his Prince. So though by this
knowledge his mind and conscience is always free: Calvin
ye his doing is as it were tied or limited by law or love. Hereupon a well
learned man says: It is sufficient in Christian liberty to understand, that
before God it is no matter, what meats, or what clothes thou use, Pet: Mar^:
though in thy whole life thou never eat flesh, and though always after thou
use in apparel one color, and fassion. So has another: Quod ad sensum et
doctrinam, semper profiten dum, adiaphora esse libera, non quo ad vsurpationem:
A Christian man must always profess, that indifferent things, as much as
appertains to understanding and doctrine, are free, and not touching their
use. Now then forasmuch as these garments are among things indifferent, we
may easilye know how they are free as parteining to our conscience, and yet
notwithstandyug we may be obedient to laws without impairing of Christ's
liberty. But to the weighing of your reasons.


The aunsuuerer. Saving our former protestation, concerning the indifferentie
of these matters, we allow well the sentencis of Calvin and Martyr but your
applying of them never a dealle. You misconster D. Martyr, and clean wrest a
wrie his distinction he meanith that such things are free in opinion, though
thouching the actio^ and use they ought to serve to charitable aedification you
contrary wise, not only use the^ frelye and frankly your selves, but
constrain others to do the like, with out, respect of charity, or
aedification. Charity is the rule in scripture, for the use of indifferent
things. Against charity, no Prince has authority to make laws. The
ceremonial law of god, gyuith place to the law of charity. Christ touchith
the lepor, which the law forbad. It is a godly harmony when the Princes law
and charity agree and a great disordre wha^ they Iarr. Therefore in things
indifferent we must not only have our own consciences free, but also take
heed, that we give none example, wherbye they that have not knowledge, have
their consciences entangled.


The examiner. First, the Lord God be praised, the religion of Christ stands
in no such danger as you bear men in hand it does, by putting men in mind
to try those constitutions, that the wise men of the whole Realm have well
hoped, will serve to some good purpose in this congregation of Christ.


The aunsuuerer. what danger the religion of Christ stands in, let the
reioysinge and triumph of the Papists, for the executing of these
constitutions testify. what danger also hangith over the Church for
receauinge these Romish rites many wise men lament to see. If a surplefe may
be worn why not an albe? if a Coape, why not a vestiment? stole funell and
chesseble? if Cappe, tippit, and gown, why not a shaven crown, affriers, a
monks, a Chano^s weed, why may not all the Ceremonies of popery be received
there end being changed for order and decensie, etc. If we receue one, we
see not, how to stay our consciencis from the rest. Therefore it is a manifest
danger that hangithe over the Church, by receiving any of these. It is an
old verse and true: Princ cipiis obsta. If you object that the Prince will urge
no more. yet the inconueniens is never the less, which we may not admit, to
give so evil a president to our posterity.


The examiner. Then, no wittye or Godly man can justly judge our religion to be
but Princes pleasures, if Princes through great deliberation make laws for the
Church, and call upon the practice of the same. You are not ignorant what
this smells of, that is either of Donatistrie or Papistrie: which sects
think always the true catholics to give to much to Princes and Magistrates,
when as by Gods word they acknowledge them to be supreme governors not only
to see laws, framed by the Clergy, put in use. but to disanul the naughty,
and to decree good and godly.


The Aunsuuerer. If any thing be admitted for Princes pleasures, which is not
permitted by gods word, many must think that some part of our religion,
were nothing but Princes pleasure. we neythet take from Princes authorities
with Donatistes, and Papists, nor add unto it with Clawbackes and
fflatterers. But give unto it as much as gods law allows it, you are not
ignorant it smellith raither, of Donatistrie, to reiecte your brethren for a
trifling and pre^ended matter as you call hit: and of papistrie, to defend
popish tradiciones, against the simplitie and sincerity of gods word.


The examiner. Thirdly, he has traueiled but simply in Scripture, who
reasons from the abolishing of Moses ceremonies, to the plucking of all good
orders out of the Church. For though Christ, being the body of all those
shadows, has fulfilled them, so that we need not to fear the curse
pronounced upon all them that do not abide in all things that were written in
the law: yet we are not forbidden to use some one of them if it might edify
the Church of Christ. And if they be by all way: forbidden: yet no learned
man will gather tha: no decent fassions are needful in the Church.

Last of all, who sees not that these few orders, now to be observed, are not
joined as figures or shadows of any thing to come: but as some means (if it
might be for a time) to set forward the building of God.


The aunsuerer. He has well traueled in the Scriptures, that reasons from
the abolishing of Moses Ceremonies, to the abolishing of all Popish
Ceremonies. For those ye mean by your god orders.) And so Calvin A man, no
simple scollar in Scripture, has traueled, to reasone as aperithe, cap: 13,
u: 3
in his exposition upon the Acts of the Apostles. Nunquam satis constat tales
ceremonias nec vela esse, nec sepulchra, quibus tegitur Christus. sed foetida
potius stercora qui bus obruta est syncera fides and religio. Qui promiscue
faciunt liberu^ earum vsum long plus Papae arrogant, quam Deus legi suae
concedat. De Missa and similibus spurcitiis quae manifesta^ in se idololatria^
continent, dicere nihil attinet. That is. now seeing it is sufficiently known
that such Ceremonies are neither vayles nor sepulchers, by which Christ is
covered, but raither smelli^g dou^g by which the sincere faith a^dreligio^
has been ouerwheli^ed. They which make the use of them indifferend to be
ffree, arrogat much more to the Pope. the^ God grau^teth to his own law.
Co^serning Mass, and such like filthiness, which co^teynith in the^
manifestest idolatry, it is no need to speak. This is Caluines mind. And the
Churches which were reformed by his advise, were never so wise to make good
ptositable orders, of the stinking Doung Hills of Popish Ceremonies. And Peter
Martyr one that has somthinge traueled in Scripture, is of the same Judgment.
Answeringe the objection of the Nicodemia^s Concerning Ieuish Ceremonies saing
they are not to be compared whith inuentiones of man as are popish Ceremonies
and therefore not for any time to be retained Iud. 1. f. 34.


The examiner. The end of these grounds is this: That you feari^g these
garments should be thought ^ecessary, you utterly refuse to admit them. This
opinion of necessity (which you fantasy) neither was annexed to these at the
beginning, neither any wise or learned man in this Church maynteineth it,
neither is it now by any means confirmed: but plainly the contrary is
protested, taught, and done.


The aunsuuerer. Our ffeare is not for Wise and learnid me^ but for our
posterity, which shall be confirmed by our example, in the opinion, of
necessity that they have before, or may herafter conceive of them.


The examiner. How unnecessary soever you would make men believe that
uniformity in outward apparel among Ecclesiastical ministers were, Of out
vuard apparel.
as by the which you would prove they can not be known yet you can not be
ignorant, but that such things were under Ecclesiastical discipline: whereof
(even touching apparel and ornaments) Ciprian following his master Tertullian
says, after great commendation thereof: Hanc sectari salubre est, and auersari
ac negligere laethale. Ter: de vir vela:
To follow this discipline, it is a healthsome thing: but to turn from it and
neglect it, is as dangerous as death. In this time Tertullian sharply
reprehended a Bishop that suffered a widow to sit without a veil in the
Church among other widows. Niceph: lib. 9. cap. 45. To. pr. con Sin. Gang.
Eulalius also a Bishop did cast Eustachius a Priest out of the Church,
because he used an apparel: Qui sacerdotem non deceret. which was not comely
for a Priest to wear: The which Eustachius after ward was condemned of the
council in Began gra, fordoyng many things otherwise the the order of the
Church was, and for alteryng his apparel. I leave here to reharse the seventh
general council, with the decrees of sundry good Bishops, that have taken
order for their Cleargies apparel, because this thing only is intended at this
time, to show how little the examples brought by you, conclude that thing
which you would.


The aunsuuerer. Allthough uniformity in outward appaparell wear necessary,
yet it follows not, that it is under the Church discipline, to appoi^t us the
apparel of heretics as though there were, no uniformity but in popery and
no honest tailor to shape the Church a Coat but Antechrist. we wysh for that
discipline which was in Cyprianes time, and which he does comend, As touching
that women should wear vaills or couerings, on their head, it is the doctrine
of S. Paull, and not of Tertulian only. But hereof shall be better occasion to
speak afterward: As for Eustachius which was cast out because he wot
apparel, that became not a Pressed. it makith not against us. for we would not
have a minister, go like a serving man, or a mariner, but in honest and sober
apparel, mete for a man of gravity. And whereas he was condemnid in the
counsel of Grangra, you cannot prove: In prohem. c^n: gang:
that it was for leauinge the distinct apparel, of Prestes, but raither the
commune apparel, and inuenting a strange and a new apparel, for he was
accused, Adhuc etiam vestibus communibus spretis, nouas and in solitos habitus,
assumpsisse. Moreover despicinge commune garments, to have put on new and
unwonted attires. The apparel he left is called comune apparel, not proper to
preistes, that which he took on new and unwonted habites, which is not like to
be the commune apparel of grave honest and lernid men. you think you have to
do with Tinkers and Coblears, and men brought vpin profane occupationes, that
neuar red the general counsels, when you speak of the seue^t general council,
which we are not ignorant was the 2. of Nice, the synagoge of Satan, wherein,
the use and worshipping of imagis, was confirmed no meruail if such a counsel
made laws for the apparel of Priests.


The examiner. Saul (you say) did ask Samuel where was the Seers house, ^.
Reg: 9:
vhen as Samuel himself was the Seer or Prophet. As if Samuel might not have
on him the apparel of a Leuite, though Saul thereby did not know him to be a
Prophet. If God stirred up a Prophet among the Levites, as Samuel was: we
read not therefore that he altered his apparel. This seems rather against
you thus: That Samuel though a singulier Leuite, yet in the number of them that
went alyke, was not known to have that gift he had.


The aunsuuerer. We say truly that Saul knew not Samuel by his apparel to
be a Prophet, and you say untruly that Samuel was appateled like a Leuit.
As though the Levites did wear other then commen apparel, except only when
they did their ofice about the Sacrifice, and in the tabernacle where learned
you that else they wore their lynnen Ephodes? for where it is said that Doeg
slew 85. Priests that wore a lynnen Ephod, it is not meant that they wore it as
a garmente to be known by, but only in service of the Tabernacle. and Though
Samuel ministered before the Lord in a Ephod: yet when he departed from Saul,
he took hold of the lap of his Coat, not of his Ephod, and when the witch.
Raised him up (as she thought) Saul knew by his manttell that he was wont to
were, that it was Samuel. 1. Sam. 28. where you say if that Samuel a singular
Leuit, in the number of them that went a like, was not known to have the
giste he had: Makes not against us, for we would not have men's, gistes known
by their apparel, but by well vsinge of them.


The examiner. Touhing Elias, whom Ochosias servants meetyng knew not to be
Elias the prophet: It makes nothing against this, 4. Reg. 1^
but that the Levites might have and use a distinct apparel: Yeat it appears
rather that Ochosias the king did know him, hearing the description of his
apparel by his servants. And what a kind of reasonyng is this: Strange
seruingmen did not know Elias to be Elias when they met him: Ergo he was not
apparelled as othets Ministers: Or Ergo his apparel helped not to make him
known? Garments make not the person known by name, but his common function,
not his particular and special gift.


The aunsuuerer. Is it all one to say they did not know him to be Elyas the
Prophet, and to say they knew not Elias to be a Prophet, by his apparel. what
child does not see your cauilling in this point. we say, his commune function
was not known by his garments. you say his person was not known by his
apparel the servants of Ahaziah knew him not to be a Prophet.


The Examiner. What need you to bring in S. John Baptist, Matthew. 3.
who as he was singulerly called to prepare the way of the Lord, so had he his
meat, diet, and garments singular? This is wonderful shift, to seek out
extraordinary persons, and leave the ordinary state of Gods ministers: to
search what was done in troublesome times of the Church, and leave the
peaceable government of the same: to allege what a prophet being persecuted
did wear, and so necessarily infer what we may do in quietness and peace. But
from S. John Baptist doings, one might, as your common kind of reasoning is,
reason against that you defend, thus. S. John willing the Phariseis to repent,
never mentioned the casting away of their supersticious apparel, Ergo abused
apparel may be retained still.


The aunsuuerer. In Ihon Baptistes apparel there is no more but your ye, and
our Nay you say his garments wear singular, we say thy were co^ mune such
as were communlie worn, in the fforrest or wilderness where he dwelled, and
witnesses with us ar Calvin Musculus. if you and have better authority and
reasones then they, we would be glad to hear them. But of Ihon Baptistes
doings, we have heard say, that one did reason: he forbad not the Pharisees
apparel: Ergo, abused apparel may be retained. we reason not ab authoritate
negatiuae, which being the authority of man and not of god, is against the
rule of reason and logike. As though a man would thus dispute: S. Ihon did not
command the people to take heed of the leue^ of Pharisees: Ergo, they need
not take heed.


The Examiner. But Peter's example (you suppose) helps your matter much,
Matthew. 26.
who was known in the high Priests hall by his tongue, and not by his coat.
Neither did Peter preach after the ringing of a bell: naither said any
service appointed: neither made sermon in Church or pulpit and yet for all
that, you and godly men will thus do. Truly there was then no law of any
godly Magistrate to induce Peter thereunto. If it had been so weighty a point
of religion to differ from false Christians in outward apparel (to the which
end all your force is bent) it is marvelous that we have no such example in
the Apostolic Church.


The Aunsvverer. Peter's example prouith that it is not necessary for ministers
to be known by their apparel, ffor if it had been, Christ would have
prescribed apparel to his Apostoles, or the Apostells to others. Tertulian
does so frame his argume^te in his book de oratione. Quod vtique etc. which
trule if it ought to have been done, the Aposteles which do theach of the habit
of praing, would have comprehendid it. Christ only and not godly Magistrates
must apoincte what is necessary for his ministers, if it had been necessary
to diffar from false Christianes in apparel, you marvel why there is no example
in the apostolic Church, nay rather if it had been necessary that ministers
should have distinct apparel from other me^ (whereof only we speak now)
we marvel that there was neither Commandment nor example of it in the
apostolic Church As for your marueiling may be staide, if you, will
remember what Christ said to his disciples. Take heed of the Scribes and
Phariseis that come to you in long gowns, etc.


The examiner. Here next are brought in of you two women, Hie. Epi.
living solitarily in a kind of banisheme^t, to confirm what the public
state of the Clergy either might or did wear. Hierome (you say) did council
Eustochium a virgin to wear apparel, Nulla diuersitate notabilis, notable by
no diversity. Might not this virgin notwithstanding wear the attire proper
for virgins, though she did not differ notably from all other virgins? Tert. de
vel. virg. Amb. de virg.
If this Eustochium were a maided that publicly in the presence of the Church
took upon her to keep her vitginitie (as diverse then were persuaded to do) then
had she the veil: But if she for to avoid the continual troubles of those
times, minded to live sole, and in a solitare place, she might wear as best
liked herself.


The Aunsuuerer. Here your think scorn, that two women should be brought in
to show, what the publiq^ state of the clergy should wear, and yet you your
selffe, a little before bring in one widow that was reprehended of the Bishop,
to prove how necessary uniformity in apparel is for ecclesiastical
ministers S. Ieromes counsel is that she should have no notable diversity of
apparel, lest men that pass bye should poinct at her with their singers,
wherein he semith not to allow the coustome of the Church, in veiling of virgins
of a singular facion unless you think Eustochium, was so fond to, devise an
apparel that none other women used.


The examiner. The like may be answered of Marcella and those worthy queers of
Munkes singing in their own language at Jerusalem in those wretched days:
Aug. Epi: 76. Can: 4: h 2. Tom: pri. Ha: 63
of whom there was none a minister in the Church of Christ, as far as can be
gathered. For Munkes in those days were none of the Clergy: And yet in some
places Collegiate Munkes had their habit, as appears in the council of
Chaldedon, and in Epiphanius.


The aunsuuerer. The words of Marcella, conserning the Quiers of singing
monks at Jerusalem (as your call them) prove, that it is not necessary, for
Ecclesiastical men to wear distinct apparel, Epist. ad August. 11, 17, 18.
And where as you deny that any of those Monks was a Minister in the Church
of Christ, you seem to forget that S. Iherom was one of them there and yet he
was a Minister in the Church of Christ.


The Examiner. Now follows somevvhat that seems to touch the Clergy,
that is: That the Clergy of Rauenna (as you report) writ to Carolus Caluus,
that they should not differ from the people in apparel, but doctrine. etc.

First (yfyou will) let these words be referred to the first auctour thereof,
that is, to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, as you partly grant, and then consider
now they furthet your purpose.

Celestinus, about the year of our Lord 430. writ to the Bishops of France,
against certain that brought in upon superstition, Nouitatem vestium contra
morem Ecclesiasticum, New kind of apparel, contrary to the Ecclesiastical
manner, following the outwar de letter of the Scripture, that is, they would be:
Amicti pallio, and lumbos praecincti: Covered with a cloak, and girte about
their loins. which things because you spied there, you left out these words
betwixt your two sentences alleged: Nam si studere incipiamus nouitati,
traditum nobis a patribus ordinem calcabimus, vt locum superuacuis
superstitionibus faciamus: For if we begin to study upon novelty, we shall
tread under foot the order delivered unto us from our fathers, and so make
rowme for superfluous superstitions. Now if you will set together all these
circumstaunces, you shall perceive all to make against you.

First. Celestinus meaning is of them that would serve God rather in garments
then with purity of heart. Then he speaks against those that coming out of
the Laity, will use still lay apparel. Last of all, against those that seek
innouations in such matters, contrary to loug prescribed usage and order.
Read his words in his Epistle, and you shall not deny this.

If it please you to urge the words, that we are to be discerned from the
people nor by apparel, but by doctaine, you will remember that here is such a
comparison as this: Non misit me Christus baptizare, sed Euangelizare: Christ
has not sent me to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: and yet Paul
baptized. So they might be separate from the people by apparel: 1. Cor 11:
but chiefly it would be done by doctrine and purity of life.

Why you fled to father these words upon Celestinus, but rather to have them
appear to be the Cleargies of Rauenna, which was 400. years after Celestinus
was dead: some may think that you feared to put men in mind, that order in
outward apparel was so ancient: or that you would have no help at the
Popes hand: or that you well knew that the place made altogether against you.


The Aunsuuerer. We are neither ignorant nor unwilling to confess that these
words of the Church of of Rauenna were taken out of the epistle of Celestinus,
but because the Chirch of Rauenna did alleadg them we raither bring them out
of their epistell that was later, to show that this opinion of the necessity
of distinct apparel, is not so ancient as is pretendid. As for the
circumstances make nothing against us but, raither for us. first Celestinus
meanith those that would raither serve god in garmente the^ with purity of
heart, And we see now that garments are made greater matters then purity of
heart, or body either. For Papists and Drokerds are not deprived if they
receive the gatmentes. Secondly he speaks of them that came out of the
layetie, and will use still lay apparel. How prove you that, it seems other
wise by his words. Dicimus quosdam Domini sacerdotes superstitioso potius
cultu inseruire quam mentis vel fidei puritati. We have learned that certain
of the Lords Priests, gave head raither to superstitious apparel, then to
purity of the mind or faith. Might he not think you, say so to many english
Priests? He speakith of Priests that are alredie, not of lay men coming to be
Priests. The text is plain a against you: Non discernendi sumus a plebe. These
superstitious preistes would not have lay apparel as you say: But be discerned
from the lay sort, but Celestinus forbiddith. This therefore might be well one
of M. hardingsgessis: Last of all he spekith of them which seek innouacions,
contrary, to thold order, but this prouith not that they had an old orders for
distinct apparel of priests from lay men: else he would have said, we are
sufficiently distinct allredy in apparel from the Layitie: let us now be
deserned by doctrine: but he says we must be discernid by doctrine and not by
garments, by conversation, not by apparel, by purety of mind, not by attire:

But these words you at loath: to have urged saying, they are spoken in a
comparaison like the words of saint Paul: Christ sent me, not to baptize but
to preach, that is raither to preach then to baptize: A proper shifte at a
pynche, you check us after your manner for leaving out these words: Nam si
studere etc: but if you would have put in these words that follow next after,
all men should have perceived that your slender shifte can not stand, Rudeser
go fideliu^ mentes, ad talia non debemus inducere, docendi enim potius sunt
quam illudendi, nec imponendum est eorum oculis, sed mentibus infundenda
praecepta: that is. therefore:

We ought not to induce the unskillful minds of the faithful to such things,
for they must raither be taught then mocked, neither must we deceive their
eyes, but pour precepts into their minds.

Celestinus plainly denies that the unlearned minds of the faithful should
be moved with such things, counting it but a mocking and deceauing of their
ieis.

Then if the former words were spoken only in comparaison, the also are in
the same phrase, so by your exposition, though we must chiefly theache them,
yet we may laufully mokthe^ though we must raither fill their minds whith
wholesome precepts yet we may also deceive their eyes, this were in deed a toy
to mock an Ape. Yet the invention to you seems very Witty and leaned.


The examiner. After this you bring in a patch of Gratians decrees. Cau. 21, 94
Cause. 21. quest. 4. that godly men in old time went in base and vile
apparel. This is a Non sequitur. But see what small help you have at Gratians
hands.

First, all that tract is against the gorgeous, costly and light apparel of
the Clergy, which all godly men deteste in all kind of appares. Can. 27.
Then, the place you recite, is referred to the Propheres times, and
thereabout, as appears in Basil.

Thirdly, there is this decree of the. 7. counc. Nullus little qui. etc. Let
none of them that are numbered among the Clergy have any unseemly apparel,
whether he live in the city, or walk on his journey: But let him use the
stoles or side garments which are granted to Clerks. You may read there
also the decrees of Zacharias and Leo, very ancient Bishopes of Rome, that
none of the Cleatgie should wear the apparel of lay men.


The aunsuuerer. Yt is like we were afraid to seake help at Celestinus the
Pope when we are not afraid of Gratians decrees, which prove sufficiently,
that it was not thought necessary, that ministers had there distinct apparel,
but commune and base garments. To say the truth the authority is not worth
the contention. But to your first answer if it were, spoken against gorgius
costly and light apparel, how can you defend sarcenet typpets? Secondly that
Gratian refered it unto the time of the Prophets, is not proved by Basil. for
if you have studied Gratiane he pachith many auctorities together having
regard neither to time, place, person, nor matter. Thirdly for the decre of
the seventh council our answer is before for the decses of Zachary, and Leo
(if they were not countrefaile as you and we justly think they are) prove not
that, it is necessary to have a distinction in outward apparel.


The examiner. Last of all, Bah, tom, 2
how far Basilius Magnus was from your mind in this matter, though you
allege his name here, it appears in many places of his works, but specially
in the answer to the 22, Interrogatorie of the longer rules, where after
discourse he has these words: Ex quo quidem illud continget. etc. when upon
this shall come to pass, that we shall have a common fashion among us all in
our apparel, and that thereby the Chrestian may have a singular and peculier
lesson Yea a little after he says, that it shall be to them, Velutipedagogi
disciplina, as the discipline of a scoolmaster, to withdraw men from some of
their wicked deeds.

Thus then, neither Samuel, nor Elias, neither John, nor Peter, neither
Hierome, Celestine, nor Basil, make any whit at all against uniformity of
outward apparel in Ecclesiastical persons, howesoeuer you do abuse their
auctorities: but raither stablis he and confirm the same.


The aunsuuerer. This place of Basil is directlye against you Ex eo autem
sequitur vt ex habitu inter nos co^municemus, and velut proprium quendam
characterem ex vestitu habeat Christianus: Hereof it shall follow that we shall
all go appareled a like, and that the Christian shall have as it were a proper
mark by his garment. You denied before that a Christian should be discerned
from a Papist by apparel.

Saint Basile speaks not here of Priests, but of parfecte Christians, that
in all poinctes would frame them selves, according to the most perfect rule
of the Gospel, whether they were Priests or married men, neither does he speak
of the fashion of there garment, but of the baseness, and use, which was for
grauiuitie, and necessity, and not for vanity and curiosity, such as should
serve them, both day and night: But hit is a sport to see your inconstancy:
when we bring in the quier of monks at Jerusalem, they are none of the
clergy: Neither does the example of solitary men, confirm the public
state of the Clergy:

When you bring in saint Basiles: Monks, in the desert of Pontus, or
elsewhere, they are of the clergy, and this example seruith to prove, the
apparel of the public, clergy: but how well, let the readers judge. Thus
the examples of Samuel, Elias, Peter and, John, with the auctorities of Hierom,
Celestine, and Basil, declare sufficiently, that it is not necessary for
Ministers of the Church, to have a distinct apparel to be known from other.


The examiner. Before answer be made to the four things that move you
against the ministering apparel, the reader may be admonished to behold what
rehearsal you make of superfluous apparel, and other superstitious things,
which ought not at this time to be in any question, for that upon just
grounds, god by his magistrate has delivered us from them.

First of all then you judge, that because these two things that remain, come
from the Jews and Gentiles (which yet you do not fully prove) they ought
utterly to be refused.


The aunsuuerer. It greueth you to hear the rest, of the popish apparel that
is abolished, rehearsed with that which is retained: because no man can se a
Just cause why the one should be received and the other refused. But as God by his
Magistrates, had delivered us from those: so we trust he will deliver his
Church from these.


The Examiner. And yet for all that S. De vnico bapt. contra Pet^l. cap. 9:
Augustines saying is in these things true: Regula verissima and inuiolabilis
veritatis ostendit etc. The most true and inviolable rule of truth, does
show, that in all men) meaning of heretics) that thing is to be improued and
amended, which is false and vicious, that is to be acknowledged and received,
which is true and right.

But let us weye this reason futher, that would persuade us to use nothing,
that was invented by wicked and unbelieving authors. You yourselues say out of
Polidor (we know) that God took from the Egiptians linen vestures, abused of
them, and appointed the same for his own service: and we understand, that the
Church of Christ before the tirannie of the Bishop of Rome, did chose certain
rites and orders from the Jews, whereupon it may be truly thought, that it is
no great matter from whom that thing first comes, that serves to godly use.
Moses appointed tenthes, though Hercules had his tithes. Christ appointed it
memorial to be kept in bread and wine, though bread was offered before to
Mithra. Who brought in marriages to be celebrate in Churthes? a Bishop of Rome.
who used the ring ging first in wedding? Ter: de pre: aduer: Her: Ter; de Ido;
Aug: epi: 118:
the Heathen. Whence are tihes taken up till this day? from the Jews, whence
were Seniours in the premitiue Church and yet still? from the Jews. Easter
day and whitsuntide, general counselles took from the Jews. Besides Sundays,
Hie. in Gal, cap. 4 Eus. lib. 5. cap: 18, hist. eccle, 1. Cor. 10.
our fathers feared not to decree certain Holidayes, though the Gentiles had
their solemnities. Times of fastinges are appointed, though Martian the
Heritike made laws thereof. But what need long searching in this matter, when
Saint Paul institute a feast in Christian Churches about the Communion time,
though the Getiles there away had their SYSSYTIA common banketes in their
ydoles temples. And the Gown that you your selves would so gladly minister in,
seems to come either from Turks or Papists. It is like the age was never
before this, that men made them selves scrupulous, whence that thing was taken,
which might serve in common wealth or Church, to some profitable end.


The aunsuuerer. Saint Augustines rules make nothing ffor you, except you
prove your garments to be true and right. But where you do slander us, to
have said, that God did take from the Egyptians linen vestures. We would you
kne we that we are far from that blasphemy, either to tinke or say, that
God learned of idolaters to set forth his religion. He took lynnen vestures
that were his own creatures: he borrowed then not of the superstition of the
Egyptians. Then what reasoninge call you this. God instituted his service of
such things as had be^ abused: Ergo man may apply to Gods service what
soever has been abused, having a plain commandment to the contrary:
according to the customs of the Gentiles ye shall not do, you shall not do so
to the Lord your God what the Church has decreed withowe the warrante of
Gods word, is no prejudice to us. The mystery of iniquity wrought before
the full age of the beast. Look over your Chronicles, whether of Moses or
Hercules was thelder, and see whether took of others. Abraham is the first that
paid tithes, that we read of Christ took no example of Mithra, ffor your
self confess that bread only was offered to Mithra: And why not rather
from Melchisedech? if you had fette hit from the commune usage of the Jews,
you had gone nerar the mark. Marriages were celebrated openly before the
Congregation, before the Bishop of Romes time. As for the wedinge ringe, if it
came from the heathen (as you say) let it go to the heathen again: it is not
much matter from whence hit came, fith hit came not from Christ. And for
tithes at this day, Calvin thincketh that they at taken of a politicque law,
of Princes and not of the Jews: for the Roman Emperors had them before they
gave them to the Church. Although in that they served for the necessary
sustenance of the Ministers of the Jews Chirch, they were politic; not
ceremonial. We know not what Seniors you speak of, if you mean thelders or
Ministers, the Jews had none such: but if they had any thing that was
neither Ceremonial nor superstitious. We may well learn hit of them. As for
Sunday the Apostolicque Church changed hit, from the Jews Sabaothe what a
btoyle was in the Church, abowte the celebration of Easter, all learned men do
know. At the last that time was appointed so that it should not be like the
Jewish passover: as for other hollidays besid the Lords day we have littill
occasion to commend the inflitution of most of them. Likewise of fasting days
of the which Montane and not Martian, first made laws. But if you be able out
of the first of the: Corr, and the 11: cap: to prove a feast in the Church, to
be instituted of Saint Paull we have great marvel: we find there a feast of
belly chere condemnid, and men willid to eat there meat at home and not in
the Churchis: But of the institution of any such feast, no likelyhod in the
world: As for the Gown we would minister in, wether it came from the Iewis
Turks or Papists it skillith not for none of them abusith it supersticiously
in their ministratione:


The examiner. Well, be it as Polidore, Glossa ord. and Hierome says, that
the Egiptians used linen clothes: yet Hierome finds no fault with all the
Clergy of his time, who al used such white apparel, as appears in the
confuration of the Pelagia^s, who laid to his charge, and other their apparel
and ornaments, as contrary to God. Quae sunt rogo inimicitia contra deum, si
tunicam habuero mundiorem: Si espiscopus. presbiter, and diaconus, Aduer. Pel
Lib: 1
and reliquus ordo ecclesiasticus in administratione sacrificiorum candida
vest processerint. etc.

What enmity (I pray you) is this against God: if I have a more clean coat:
if the Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, and the rest of the Ecclesiastical order,
at the administration of sacrifice, go in white apparel? It appears Saint
Hierome charge them as Pelagians, who speak against white garments in the
Church. Neither were these vestures in price only in the occidental Church:
but also in the oriental Church, Hom. 60.
as Chrysostom shows plainly in a Sermon to the people of Antioche, willing
the Priests to take diligent care to whom they did minister the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, An. do, 400.
saying: Hoc vestra dignitas est. etc. This is your worship, this is your
safety, this is your crown: and not because ye go round about in the Church,
in a white and a shining garment. So then in those fathers days men did not
cavil against their white vestures in the Church, because they were fetched
from the Heathens or Jews.


The aunsuuerer. You think you have wone your spures to prove your whit lynnen
surples, by your two placis of Ierom and Chrysostom: which aree all you can
say for them. And yetmake no thing in the world for allowing of them. For
Ierom askith what harm it were, if they should use whit garments: he does not
simply affirm that they did were them. you know the figure used in such
putting of cases, fictio. Chrysostom says hit is no part of their worship to
walk about with whith garnments, he does not commend the use of such apparel.

But to examine the placis seueralye, you say all the clergy in Icomes time
used such white apparel. You say: a great deal more the^ you are able to stand
by. For vow are never able to prove with all the lerning you have out of this
place: ayther that all the clergi used them: or that the clergi used them only
in divine setuis or that the cle^gie did use them and not lay men also, or
that they were of whit lynnen: or finally with out all controversy that they
were white, for the wordca^didus does not ^pperlie signefie whit, but
lightefhini^g, orlighte colored, as may apeare out of Plynny lib. 35. cap. 6.
where after he has compted Cerusca to be of coler candida, he says the best
kind of it is of Asia, which is purple. The poet Horace has this verse, Rubro
vbi cocco, tincta super lectos vestis canderet eburnos, where clothi^g dyed
whith red scarlet, shined upon Iuery beds here it is aplyed to red. Again who
knowith not theses phrases candidus dies, a fayer day, candidus sol, the
bright son, etc. And in the place alleged it is manifest that candida
vestis, does signefi a clenely and somewhat gor geous or costly apparel, and
that may evident lie appear, both by the words going before and coming after.
Which if you would have added all men might have seen how litil this place
makith for Surplessis. The words before are these, Vnde adiungis gloriam
vestium and ornamentorum deo esse contrariam. Quae sunt rogo inimicitiae etc.
wheropon you say next that the glory of the apparel and ornaments, is
contrary to god. I pray you what cumytie is it against god, if I have a more
clenely cote, if the Bishop pressed and Deacon, and the rest of the
Ecclesiastical oder in ^e ministration of the Sacrifices shall come forth in a
bright colored garment. Cauete clericicauete monachi, viduae and virgins,
periclitanmi nisi sordidas vos, atque pannosas vulgus aspexerit. Take heed you
clergy men, take hedt you monks widows and virgins, you are in danger
except the common people see you in filthy and ragged appatell. Taceo de
hominibus saeculi, quibus aperte bellum indicitur and inimicitiae contra deum,
si pretiosis atque nitentibus vtantur exuuiis. I speak not of lay men to whom
open war is proclaimed, and emnitie against god, if they were costly and
gorgeus apparel. by these words it is out of doubt Ihetom spekith of gorgeous
or clenely apparel, what coler soever it was. not only white apparel common
to lay men, nor proper to prests used abrod, not only in the Church, raither
of any matter then linen: for in his time linne^ was used but of few: and of
effeminat persons, such as were curtiers, as may appear in diucrse placis, in
this first Epist. ad Heliodoru^, ad Nepotianum, in epitaphio Neopotiani, ad
Gaudentium, and Erasmus as often has notid, that is was scarce thought met for
a man to were linen next his skin much lose above his gown, and iestith
after his manner that that sholdnowe become ecclesiastical, that in old time
was courtlike. But let us here what Ierom says in other placis to the same
purpose in his epi. to Marcella, of the sickness of Blesilla, he says: nos
quia serica vest non vtimur, monachi iudicamur, quia ebrij non sumus, nec
cachinmo ora dissoluimus, co^tinentes vocamur and tristes, Si tunica non
canduerit, statim illud and triuio, impostor and Graecus est, we because, we
were not a silken garment, are judged to be monks, because we are not drunk
nor gape wide in laughter, are called continent and sad. if our cote be not
light collered or whith straight way, we here the common proverb, a grecia^
and deceiuer, here again, it is plain that this Ca^dor vestis, is referred
not so much to the coler as to the costlines. Secondly that hit was vsuuall
apparel, and thirdly that it was not used of all the Clergy finally if
Candida vestes must needs signefy a white surplese, here what Ierom says
speknig purposelie of the apparel of prests, ad Neapolianum. vestes pull as
aeque deuita^vt candidas. fly black garments even as as well as whit garments.
gallantnes and slavery must alike be avoided, for the one sauerith of dirtenes,
the other of vain glory. But these garments were in price, in the Oriental
Church. No doubt in great price, when Chrysostom says plainly that all there
worhpp was to discharg there duty: not that they should go about in a white
shining garmente. But where you ad in the Church, you ad morethe^ is in the
text and bewray your unjust deali^g in the cause. you had been better to have
alleged the same place out of the 83. homily upon Math. where these words are
(in the Church) but what have you wone by this? have you approved the^ to be
whithe silk. Have you shewid that they were proper to the Church seruis? And
not common garments, such as both for lightness in those hort countris, and also
for estimacion, as is declared before, they used in those days to were. That
which Chrysostom notith and discomendith as unmeet you alleg and Command as
mete: And though both out of Ierom and Chrysosto^ you could prove all your
desire, what preiudicie is that to ower cause.


The Examiner. Here one thing must not be omitted that S. Ezec, 44
Hierome in the same place where he speaks of the Egiptians linen clothes,
has also these words: Porro religio diuina alterum habitum habet in
ministerio, alterum in vsu vitaque communi: The religion of god has one habit
in the ministration, and another in common use and life.


The aunsuuerer. God forbid that your should alledg the docters against the
papists, so frowardlie, as you do against us, you would then discredit our
comman cause, for that which makith altogether against you, you leave out, and
wrest to your porpose that which makith nothing for you: Saint Ierom
expounding the place of Ezechiel, where god commands the priests of the old
law, to put ou their lynnen garments, and other attire, when they enter into
the holy place, and put them of when they come out: declarith that god will
have nothing observed, in his ceremonies, that agreth with the superstition of
the gentiles, and then notith what: spiritual doctrine may be gathered thereby,
for our lerning. His words are these. First concerning the putting of, of
their ministering garments. Per quae discimus non quotidianis and quibuslibet
pro vsu vitae communis, pollutis vestibus, nos ingredi debere in sancta
sanctorum, sed munda conscientia and mundis vestibus, tenere Domini Sacramenta,
etc. wherbie we learn that we must not enter in to the holy of holies, whith
Daily and Every kind of defiled garments, used in the common life, but with a
clean conscience and clean garments, to keep or hold the Lords Sacraments. As
for that which followith, they shall not shave their head nor let their haere
grow long but shall round or poulle there headd, it is plaineli showed that we
must not have our heds shorn, like the priest, and worshippers of Isys and
Serapis, neither again have long hear, that is the manner of riotous persons,
of a Barbarouse people, and of Soldiors. But that the honest habit of priests
may be showed by their face. And after a few words, at it were au^swering a
secret objection, because the Egyptians ptiests did were linen garments, also
he says. vestibus linaeis vtuntur Egyptii Sacerdotes, non solum intrinsecus
sed extrinsecus, porro religio diuina alterum habitu^ habet in ministerio,
alterum in vsu, vitaque communi. Feminalia recte assumuntur vt honestas decorq^
seruetur, ne scilicet ascendentes altaris gradus, and in ministerio
discurrentes, reuelent turpitudinem.

Rasa capita habet supersticio gentilis, vinum autem quantum ad me pertinet,
non reor aliquem se abstinere gentilium. The Egyptian priests vvweare lynnen
garments, not one^e with in, but also without, but the religion of god has
one habit in the ministerire, and a another in the use and common liffe. The
briches arwel taken, that honesty and comlynes may be kept least when they go
up to the alter steps, and rwne about their ministry, they reuele their fill
thynes, the superstition of the gentills have shaven heds. But wine for my
part, I think none of the Gentiles does refuse. Here Jerome does affirm that
god would not have the priests of the old law to shave their heads, because
it was the mark of idolaters, nor to were theer holy lynnen garments abroad
because the Egyptian priests did so: but he will have them to wear breachis and
to abstain form win. which none of the Gentiles observe for religion.
Whether this place be well alleged against us that makith altogether for us,
let all men both lernid and vnlernid judge. If you would take pains to read over
the place again, you shall see that he spekith of the religion of the Iewis
he priests, and not of the apparel of Christian ministers. Where also you
shall, find, that abroad your priests did wear common apparel, contrary to
your former assertion,

The same Hierome, lib. 42. cap. 53. in Esaia^ upon these wordrs. Non me
inuocasti Jacob, etc. says in the person of God: Quod autem arbitraris
obtulisse te mihi victimas, and arietes immolasse, scias cos a me non esse
suspectos: quia mihi and idolis communes erant. And where as thou thinckest,
thou have offered to me oblations, and sacrificed rams, know thowe that they
were not received of me, becaucause they were commune to Idols with me. Thus
Hierome in plain words makes for us: though some cry with open mouth
against us that we have neither scriptures nor doctores.


The examiner. As for Platinas Albe, it is not here to be spoken of: neither do
men take for laws, whatsoever Durandus writes. though yet out of his words
no such necessity need to be gathered, as you would have to follow.


The aunsuuerer. Platina his albe is heareto be spoken of, because by the
formar book of king Edward (whereto the act of parliament referrith us) an
albe is appoincted with a vestement, for a cope, for the administration of the
Sacrament. and in some placis the priest at this dayewerith an albe. Durande
though he be no law maker to us, yet he his agreat patron of yours in this
cause, who with Manipulus curatorum and his fellows make this necessity, look
the placeit is to plain.


The examiner Besides this, it is not though reason sufficient to detest the
Surplesse or other apparel, be cause they may serve also for some
signification. For the apparel, of Christian men would be such, as it might
speak, or as it were preach some part of godliness to them selves and others.
1. Pet. 3.
So it seems S. Peter would have women to order their attire. So Tertullian
says: De pallio. De cultu foem. Ad fab.
Ipse habitus sonat: The habit it self gives a lesson. So in another place:
Cur mores meos habitus non pronuntiat? why does not the apparel show forth my
manners: So S. Hierome says: Tanta debet esse. etc. Such knowledge and
learning should be in the Priest of God, that his going, moving and all
things, should by some signification, speak. He ought to conceive the truth
in his mind, and to sound out the same in his habit and apparel, that
whatsoever he sepeaketh it might be doctrine to the people, Lib. 2. paed. cap.
10. mart Iulit.
To his purpose has Cleme^s Alexand. and Basil spoken: but it shall not be
needful now to rehearse their testimonies, when as by these we may perceive
that vestures may have their good significations: and yet are we not bound to
believe every fond meaning, as such idle brained. Durandes do bring or collect.


The aunsuuerer. We do not detest the apparel so much for the signification
sake, but for the supersticion. and if it plese you, that the apparel must
sound and pronounce: what can the apparel of idolatry sound of you, but that
you are of the sect whose liuerie you wear? These placis all make against you.
As your profession is not popish so by these ffathers, your apparel should be
confotmable.


The examiner. Wherefore if you would have waighed what god, Christ, S. Paul,
and many godly men have done in things invented by Panims and mis beleuers:
you would not for the first aucthours refuse a commodity, but use to Gods
glory that, which others abused to his disho nour saying to them as Tertulian
said to Pallium, a vesture of ydolatouts: Gaude palium, quia meliot de
philosophia dignata est, ex quo Christianum vestire caepisti. Rejoice O
Pallium, that a better kind of philosophy has vouchasafed to receyne the,
since thou have be gone to clothe a Christian.


The Aunsuuerer. We utterly deny that ever God or Christ, or S. Paull,
conuertid any supersticions use, or ceremonies, to the religion of Christ, that
was inuentid by paynims, and miscreants to dishonor god with all. If any
godly men have done it, they did it not in that they wear godly men, but in
that they were me^. As for Tertulians cloak, it makith no more against us, the^
his Shoes. You might have made it more ancient then Tertulia^s time. for
Typlion the Jew knew Iu sinus, to be a philosopher by his cloak. The cloak was
a garment of idolaters, but not an idolatrus garment, an habit that was the
mark of a philosopher and not of a idolater such as be the habits that
graduats wear in the universities. and so we read in the monodie of Gregory.
Nazia zene, that S. Basils contrie men, receued the same philosophers cloak, in
the university of Athens, as a sign of thea^ degree also the greek proverb,
of them that were philosophers, so far as these berde and cloak could make
the^: sufficiently declarithe that though idolatours philosophers wore this
weed, yet they did not wear it as idolaters, but as philosophers. The words
that the cloak spekith, do manifestly declare, that it was the common habit of
all conuertid Christians generally, and not the proper weed of priests
singulerlie. Therefore if Tertulian and other Christians, casting of the Roman
gown, which all proud and wicked men used to wear, did put on the greek
philosophers cloak, which was an habit of gravity simplicie, and frugalitie.
What makith this for wearing the bad ges of idolaters? Tertulian and other
Christianes in his time, changing their religion changed their garments, you
cha^ging your religion keep your old garments, still even a mark of popish
religion, the caracter in the beast. Tertulian affirmith that he castof the
gown, and put on the cloak, that he might reprove the vices that were used in
the gown: Taceo Nerones, Apicios and Ruffos etc. I say nothing of Neros,
Apitius and Rufus, I will give a purgation for the filthimes of Scaurus, the
dising of Curious and the Dro^ kennes of Anthonius, and remember that these
among a great many other were gown men such as cannot easelie be fownd in the
clokenen. These filthy corruptions of the City, what speech can draw forth
and brethe away but his that wearith a cloak. the trayterusnes of of Gardner,
the creweltie of Bonner, the baudrie of weston. which all did wear forkid
capes, what spech can breath away, and drive ont of the real me, but his, that
wearith a round capp. now see what Tertulia^s cloak makith for you.


The examiner. The next let that stops you from wearyug these garments, is,
that they have been abused to Sorcerie, Con^uring, and Idolatry: and yet when a
man has perused that which you have uttered in many words, there is no more
said against any apparel now remaining, then that the Surplesse served to
make holywater, without the which (you say) no cyrcle could be kept. These be
but silly sleightes to dasel the eyes of the weak, on this manner, to make so
huge a cry in so small a matter, if a papist had you in handelyng (whose
wyckednes is shameful, and religion most vnpure) he would bid you look over
your book better, when you say holywater cannot be made without a Surplesse.


The Aunsuuere. Durand says that the surples must be worn, in all service of
the altar, and holy things, but all the seruis of the altar and hollie things,
wear Idolatry and filthy Superstition, and therefore the surples was abused
further the^ the making of hollie water. And where he says it must be worn in
seruis of all holy things we thought he had meant holy watter also, but herin
perchance we might be deceived for by all liklihod, we have not made hollie
water, nor said mass, nor practiced all popeholie service, so often as you.


The Examiner. Well, admit the Surplesse was used not only to make holiwater,
but also some time to coniuring: must it therefore never serve to good use
again? Shall we make this law upon your head, that such things as have once
served to wicked purposes, can never be set up in good place again? What and
if men conjure in their usual apparel? What if men conjure with the robes,
scepter, and crown of Princes? What if men conjure in the name of the Lord,
or other Princes names? Shall we of neceseitie throw away all these things,
as polluted with service of the devil? Howsoever you would make a purgatio^
of these things, surely wise men both has and can turn that to serve the
glory of God, which once served to bad uses.


The aunsuuerer. We have often times declared before, that those things which
are necessary and good must be retained, though they have never so much been
abused. And we allow according to Tertulians rule, in his book De corona
militis, whatsoever seruith the necessity, profit, or honest comfort of man's
liffe: whosoever were the inuentor thereof. But of other things not necessary
being in religion abused, we say whith him, oderis, o Christian, quorum
authors no^ odise non poteris. Thou must hate, o Christian those things the
authors whereof thou can not choose but hate. Mark I pray you this
distinction, it is not ours but Tertulians, and ansuerith to all you can
allege in this matter. if then unnecessary things must be cast awave, forth
abuse, lest they confirm the abuse, how much more the Surplesse and other
things that never had any use in the Church of Christ. The^ gods name, his
word, usual apparel, robe septers and crou^s of princis, are no more like A
Surples, in this respect. then an apple like an oyster.


The examiner. It is a notable saying of S. Augustine, touching the manner of
the City of God in the apparel and diet of them that are made citizens
thereof, that it changes nothing: De ciui. dei. lib. 19 cap. 19.
Si non est contra diuina praecepta: if it be not contrary to Gods
commandments: Vnde ipsos quoque philosophos, quando Christiani fiunt, non
habitum vel consuetudinem victus, quae nihil impedit religionem, sed falsa
dogmata mutare compellit: whereupon it compels not the Philosophers when
they are made Christians, to change their apparel and diet, which hinder not
religion: but their false opinions. This was the practice of the Church of
God, which now (belike) you would turn vpside down: and yet a hallowed and
christened bell you can well bear to ring to a Sermon: you can be content
Dirige money be converted to preachynges: solemasse priests be made good
preachers: you would not be displeased if Monasteries to be plucked down,
were converted to good uses. If you look on your Churches and Pulpyttes, you
shall find that they were horribly abused. Be not therefore herein to rash, in
utterly condemning those things, which wicked men framed for a time to their
fantasy.


The aunsuuerer. Saint Augustine spekith of philosophers habits, whereof
mention is made before, not of Idolaters garments, such as they put on, to
doseruis to diuills: of common apparel not preistlie vestiments, as for the
moni the man the pulpit, or any thing else that may have a good use, in the
religion and Churches of Christ, is owres, and not the Papists. But the
surplesse the albe the cope, the capp, the tippet, the wide sleaue gown, etc.
whereof there is no good use, but to make dissension, to offend the weak to
confirm the obstinate, to grieve the godly, to retain superstition, they are
the Papists and none of owres. You should remember the general rule of
Tertulian, before mentioned.


The examiner. But sorcerers and coniurers (you say) for their instruments
must needs have help of things. 1. Re. 28.
You make men marvel how they coniured before Christ came: whence the woman
that raised up Samuel had her instrumenres consecrare: Act. 8. Act. 19.
how Simon Magus in the Apostles times wrought all his wonders: and what
Priest made holiwater for the son of Sceua the Jew: and how now among the
Painims and Turks men are able to work their feats, though none be there in
Surplesses to help forward their work. You shall find it therefore
otherwise then you say, that coniuring and sorcerie will continue but to well
without these garments.


The aunsuuerer We speak of Coniurers of our time and our country, and
therefore wismen need not marvel, how Jews and painims did conjure before
Christ, and turks after Christ. But they may raither marvel to see you wrangle
so childishlie, about the moune shine in the water and that you reprove in us,
you comitt your self namely to heap up so many sente^cis of scripture, to
prove that which no man denies, as though we knew not that there was
coniuring before Christ. And therefore must meruelle that you maruelle at this.


The examiner. There is a third thing that stirs you to refuse this
apparel and that is, the opinion which men had and have still (as you do
think with your selves) of these garments.

Whether the blind papiste, the weak papiste, and simple Ghospeller (as you
term them) have these opinions now aduouched, it is rather phantasied of
some, then believed of the best part. Peradventure you show what you have
taught them to suppose of these matters, and thefore trusting that they have
learned their lesson, you conclude thus of every one of their minds. And if it
were so, that they had such estimation of these garments, you heard out of S.
Augustine the manner of Christ's Church to be, to refourme their false opinion
by wholesome and sound doctrine. D. Bucer.
for there is no manner of order that men can take, wherein some may not have a
fond opinion: As the Phariseys had in washing their hands, in their apparel,
and yet the things are not taken away by the Gospel:

As also now some have in fasting days, the Sundays, fisshe days, alms
gathered for the poor, in Sermons at burials, and such others: and yet it is
not thought expedient, that such things out of hand should be altered.


The aunsuuerer. Experiens does to much try, that all these opinions are
conceived, of these garments, which we must not maintain by our example
which were nothing else but to give offense. But you that are the best part
believe it not. If you were abrod you might hear the outcries of the people
against you for these things, you might see decking of Crossis and Churchis
with bows, and flowrs, for ga^gweke procession: if you walked in the country,
you should hear the common voice say. Popery is not so evil as they make it
for then they would never commau^d these things so streigthlie to be observed.
You should hear: neyghbore played we not a wise part, when we kept our Mass
clothes and books, for by the mass neighbor we shall have all again, one
day. We are bold to tell you that are above the talk of the rude people,
even there rusticall terms, because your ears are not so acquainted with
them. Nor your eyes see so fare abroad: you might hear the questions of the
simple gosplelers propounded: whether with safe conscience, they may come to
the seruis with there presens, to allow this gere, yea some openly confese they
will not come: and yet you cannot believe it, ye pretend great knowleg in the
state of the common wealth abrod, and yet have litil understanding of the peopls
affection, if you know not this. Secondly, we speak of such things as are
neither necessary nor profitable, for Christ's Church, but rathere superfluus
and hurtful. As for fasting dais we know none that are retained, and we would
wish that some fish dais were aither taken away or changed, to other times.
Fasting is good, but prescribed dais of fasting, vnlese it be in time of some
common calamity, sauerith of popery. fish days for police are indifferent, so
all other circumstances conserning indifferent things be observed. And fish
dais are not ffasting dais.


The examiner. Concerning Doctor Bucers judgment in this matter of garments,
you first allege a saying of his: but when, to whom, where, and of what
particular apparel, you declare not. In deed this good father, in the
beginning of his letter to Bishop Hoopet has, that he would have been at some
great cost, so that this controversy either had never ben moved, or very
speedily reptessed and extinct, And in few lines after, he wishes to bear
some hard penance in his body, so that they were order lyput away (not by
private authority) in respect of the abuse (I say) which he saw had sogreat
strength then in many places of England.

But you (peradventure) fearing lest this his saying were not so strong upon
your part as you wished, you farther say, that he wills in such case as ye
are now, in no wise to receive them. whereunto you cite his exposition upon
the 18. Chapter of saint Matthew.

This place if you would have indifferently rehearsed, you should have opened
to the world, that his mind was, that some ceremonies abused, might be still
retained. His words are these, in the beginning almost of that his exposition.

Fateor equidem, In cap. 18 Math.
licet ab Antichristis inuectum sit. etc. Though whatsoever thing is decreed,
contrary to the liberty of externe matters, it has been brought in by
Antichistes, as the difference of persons, meats, days, places, and very many
more: yet because commonly men were persuaded that all those things were the
commandementes of the Church directed by the spirit of God, so received all
those things as coming from the will of God: I ackowledge in deed, that
reason it is, we use circumspectly even. now the liberty obtained by Christ,
and with Paul sometime circumcise Timothy, that is, that we use well some
ceremonies, which others abused, taking occasion thereby to teach Christ
purely, although by no means these inventions of man can be compated with
circumcision, or the like ordinances of God. Thus far Doctor Bucer.

In this sentence though many things may be noted: as that the false opinion
of men did not persuade him to cast all these things away: as that these
things were not to be refused because they were the devises of man; as that
occasion might hereby be taken to preach Christ purely, and such other: yet
it shall suffice to put you in mind, that he thinks godly men may well use
some rites which were abused before time. So that if you take one piece of his
exposition with another, you shall not need to term your betters and fellow
servants in Christ that receive this apparel, to be enemies or shtinkers.

This well learned fathers words, to his friend beyond the sea well wayed,
makes nothing against the orders now practiced. For we may and do (praise be
to God) hold fast Puritatem rituum et doctrine, the purity of rites and
doctrine, and also flee and derest the leven of Antichrist, with all erroures
and superstition, though we keep these few ordinances, according to the rules
of Gods book. Wherein men had superstition before us. There is a difference
(you know) betwixt the purity of rites, and the clean taking away of all.
But peruse this godly man's Epistle.


The aunsuuerer. What can be more plainly declared, then that he wrote at
Cambridg to a friend of his beyond the sea the iz of Ianuarii an 1550. as is
alleged by Theodore Beza, a litill before his death (and as it is like) sense
the epistlls which you now have translated in to English: by which words of the
epistlle, Beza chargith Baldwin, for slandering Bucer, that he did allow the
reformacion of England in Rits and Ceremonies, and futher shewith that Bucers
Judgment might apere, in the reformation of Argentine, all though it was not
altogether according to his mind. More over he says all the best learnid men,
and most religious bishopes of England, declare what they judge of the retayning
of these things and what they defier conserniug them, in their late Apollogy:
but your exposition of the putitie of rites, maynteynith the slander of
Balduin, for the would have all superstition taken away and the things
retained, so will the rankest papist in all Louayn say:

But Peter Martyr Iudic 18. fol. 166. rejects the same chift, both off the
Papists and yo ue at this time. Danitae superstitione^ and cultum Michae
receperunt. etc. The Damites received the superstition and worshippinges off
Micha. Even so the Papists have translated strange Ceremonies, and almost
infinite, from the Jews and Gentiles into there mass. They say they have
removed the superstition from them, nay rather they have in many parts
increased hit. They have off the Jews, water, oil, incense, salt-garmentes,
lights, and many other such things, which in time off the Law, were not
Idolatrous, when they leaned upon the word off God. But no we they at vnpure,
and supersticious, when they have not the word off God. Hear this father. Who
plainli affirms your garments to be vnpure, and supersticious because they
have not the word off God.

Therefore once again we must tell you that the superstitious ceremonies not
necessary, the surest way to purify them, is to take them clean away.

You lightly pass oner that he callithe the^ the leven of Antichrist wherbie
some with most wordlie wisdom and vain devises would Join together God and
Bellial thouching your cauillatio^ upon his words in the 18. of matthew fateor
etc. we never denied but Ceremonies well instituued, though they were abused
might be retainid. yet Bucer spekithe but of tolleration for a time. Thefore if
there were once a time to circumsice Timothy, now it is a time if ever there
was any, not to circumsice Titus, which if you would have taken the pains to
have translated but 3. lines further, should have evidentlie aperid by the
sentence of Bucer, it selffe. But that you would feign have cloked. for he says
what is wont to be done, not a few searing the trobell of the cross, and
goinge about in vain to plese both God and man, even there where the gospel
has been long time preached, where the word now requierith examples of deeds,
pretendinge allwais the infirmitis of others, where in deed their own weakness
does in this thing with hold them: do both them selves serve man's traditions,
and compel others thereu^to. Also let the reder hear note, that by Bucers
judgment, distinction of persons, meats etc. was brought in by Antichrist.
Secondly that they cannot be compared with circumcision, and thirdlye that
they ought not to be retainid: for the gospel has been long preached. As for
Judging of our betters, charge Bucer and not us. you deal with us, as fathers
and masters Jesting and sometime frowardlie quarrelling with their children,
lay a fault to there charg, and when the boy denyethe it and excusith him self:
why then I ly says he. the pore child cannot make his just purgation, and
defense but he accusith his father or master to be a liar. So wha^ we purg our
selfs of rebellion and disobediens that is laid to our charge, we judge you,
we condemn our Superiors etc.


The examiner. Here you rehearse doctor Peter Martyr by precemeale, when as
there is no writer of these days more evidently against you. But be cause you
would have men to suppose that all the learned ra^ne upon your side you, are
content also that this man should speak two words, rather then be thought to
kepesilence. And touching this great Clerks mind, peruse over his Epistle
that follows, and look on his Commentaries upon the first to the Corinthians.


The Aunsuuerer. Here you wrangle as you are wont to do, but Peter Martyr whose
authority you brag so much of callith them relikes of the Ammorites and that
both in his epistelle before the commentary to the Judges, written sense that
which you translat, and in his epistelle to the Bishopp of Elye, before his
answer to Smithe which woe words although they do sufficientlye prove, that he
would have such stuff utterly to be abolished, yet beside them also you have
before in this auswer in xii several placis sentencis of his, to the same
purpose whereof all save one, were written, sense the epistels that you make so
much of, which being well weyid, make littill for your purpose. And yet that it
may apere how often and how ernest Peter Martyr is, in invehying against this
stuff, where and when soever occasion seruith, we have added affewe mo
sentencis of his. Cutauit vero Iehu templa Balis etc, 2. Re. 01.
Iehu also caussed the Templs of Ball, to be destroyed, lest they should return
to there formar use: wherefore I think that many do not well, which although
they have embraced the gospel of the son of god, yet they have kept still the
instruments of popery, after any sort. And they have provided much better for
godliness, which have caused Images, Idols and also the ornaments of popery to
be clean cut away. Also when he has spoken of the consecration of
leuiticalll priests, he has these words (Sublatis autem istis vmbris, 1. Sam.
7
nobis nihil relinquitur nisi impositio manuu^, etc.) But all these shadows
being taken away, there is nothing left for us, but laying on of hands. But the
papists (I wene (that they might be more reuerencid have translated to them
selves all those Ceremonies and rites of Moses: they are clipped, shaven,
washed, oynted and clothed. and I marvel somewhat why they are not circumcised.
He Peter Martyr denies that clothing to Christian ministers. and makith it
proper to papists, as i^mediatlie after he affirmith it to be a piece of there
Character, and a mark, of theirs. also writing upon Gedeons ephod, which he
made for a pollitike end.

He affirmith that if God will not allow rites and Ceremonies, of his own
Institution, when they were done with outfaithe, 2. Reg. 2.
how much less will he allow those inuentio^s off men, which because they
have no ground of his word are altoger void of faith. And again (obiiciu^t
item nobis quod in sacris vtamur vestibus prophanis etc. speking of the
papists) he says they abject also against us, that in our holy service, we
use common garments: and in our common use, wear no grauer apparel. In dead we
confess that we follow Christ and his Apostells, which did not wear an
apparel diverse or differing from other men. Also in Iud. 10 fo. 117. repetith
the like objection of the papists. (Et denique quod nostrae ceremoniae, etc.)
And finally that our Ceremonies to senses of the flesh are dry, and withowt
plesantnes, they have no garments, no prick song, no Organes, no playerlike
Masses. In the same commentary, fo. 87. be aunswerith a great objection of
yours: concerning the sacrifice and wood that was dedicated to Baal, which God
commanded to be offered to him saying that therefore it is not lawful for us to
eat Idol offerings: and apply at our pleasure idolatrus Ceremonies to gods
seruis, because god by singular priuiledg once commanded yt, for he made laws
for men, and not for him self.

And upon the 19. chapter fo. 174. he declarith how fare the authority of the
civil Magistrate which you urge so vehemently against us does extend (Subiicitur
Ecclesiastica potestas magistratui, etc.) The Ecclesiastical power is subject
to the Magistrate, non in subjection spiritual but political. For concerning
the Sacraments, and preachings, it is not subject unto him. For the word of god
and the Sacraments, which the minister uses, the Magistrate cannot bend, or
bow neither compel the pastors or teachers of the Chith to teach other wise.
Or mynister the Sacraments otherwise then is prescribed by the word of God.

Conserning his comment, on the first of the Corrinth. we have vewid it, and
somewhat we have found against you, but nothing that makith for you. Here we
bring to you in deed Peter Martyr speking to you in print and not out of broken
papers.


The examiner. Doct. Rid
That glorious Martyr of Ghrist doctor Ridley, you report, how he being
required of papisticall persecutours to do on all their massing apparel, that
thereby the papists might rejoice and work their spite, he (you say) refused
them, and spoke then vehemently against them. Surely herein he did like a
constant professor of Christ's religion, perceiving the end and purpose
naught and wicked, whefore those things were then enforced upon him. It was
meet that he should not then yield one jot to them, that sought to bring him
into spiritual bondage again. Galat. 3.
But every man that will, may see a great unlikelihood betwixt those times and
ours, betwixt their use then, and nowe-betwixt their end and commaundeementes,
and those that be now.


The aunsuuerer. If the only end and purpose of the co^maunders made Rydlie
Inueygh so vehemently and bitterly against the popish garments he was much to
blame to give them so odius names, as to call them, abominable, folish, yea to
fond for a vice in a play, which in. v. years after should be so profitable,
so full of aedifing, so oderlie, so decent, for the best gospellers in England.
But it is well known that this holy Martyr, repentid at his death that he had
manteynid them so much in his liffe. Learn you that live, this good lesson of a
worthy Martyr preparing him self to die. This was Cygnea cantio. the last
sweet song of that good Swanne.


The examiner. What injury you do to that worthy Bishop Master Jewel, in
framing his sentence to serve your humor, al men that know him, see, and
futher understand that he is not of your mind. You would feign [belike] make a
number, if you might, wherefore you will have one way, that you want another.
They that require your conformity in these things, having by Gods law and
man's, the oversight also of Gods people in this land, have good hope that
these things [wherein they wish that you go forward with them to the work
of Gods building] will do good, and not hurt, in this Church at this season,
according to those words which you bring out of that excellent work of so
learned a Bishop. They well weyghe the nature of their people, the manifold
occasion they may obtain hereby, to spread abroad the sweet smelling savor
of the Gospel of Christ with diverse other the like considerations. You had
done well, if you would have made some proof in these matters, before you so
confidently bare the matter down with your undoubted asseueration that they do
hurt, and want al good properties: as if you saw in one of your paroeces, what
is convenient for the whole Realm. And here with this stout denial, wanting
his profes, you conclude the opinions of men, which all both alive and dead.
are [as does fully appeare] clean contrary to your judgment in these matters
of garments.


The aunsuuerer. We do that lernid Bishopp no Injury to apli a true minor to
his true and lernid mayor. In the house of god that is hurtful that does no
good. these rittes do no good, Ergo they be hurtful. You say theare is hope
they shall do very much good. But he further affirmith that all Ceremonies
ought to be clear lyuelie and and albe to edify: but these rits, are nether
clear lively nor albe to edify. ergo, they ought not to be in the Church. But
it is you that do his worthy bishope Injury, to help Harding his adversary
with an answer, who for breking the bred in 3. peecis, may answer
whatsoever you answer or can answer for surplesis, the one being as
indifferent as the other. But what this lernid Bishops judgment is of all
relickes of Papistrie may apere in his answer to the fourth division in 4.
page of the same Book where he yeldith four resons why he refused to call it
passione Sunday, not because he was ashamed of the passion but because it was
taken of the papists, to be called so. His words are these. neither do we
refuse your fantasies because they be cat holike as you surmise, but because
they be your own, devised by your self of late dais, many of them contrary to
gods holy word and are not catholic. Now let all men judge whether it be a
greater matter to call passion Sunday then to wear the apparel that is
urged. We are suar so to call it, is of it self but a thing indifferent, and
of small importau^ce. Thus ye se still how our rule out of Tertulian holds.


The examiner In the fourth and last place, you consider what shall happen to
your selves, if you receive these rites, as you may well do with the rest of
your brethren, who fight in the lords warfare, a good fight, having faith and
a good conscience: You shall be thought (you say) to bring the people into Egypt
again.

The wearing of this apparel, which (as you often testify) is in his own
nature indifferent, can not be likened to the bondage of Egypt, which is
slavery to sin, error and superstition. The substance of popish religion
may well be compared to those cheynes, for that many are sure tied there, with
ignorance and blyndnes, from the which you may still go forward (to Gods
praise and your own discharge) by discrete and diligent teaching, to loose
Gods people sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death, as mani a godly
man does yet still, following the worthy examples of wise preachers aforetime,
who in such like things contented them selves with the manner of the region,
where they preached, Aug. Epi. 117.
and never willed them to lay aside their Heathenis he apparel, De ciui. dei.
lib. 19 cap. 19.
no more then almighty God commanded his people to cast away from the^ the
Aegiptians clothes, when he delivered them thence, and preached unto them new
laws and ordinances. Exo. 12.
Though Moses suffered the people so redeemed from captivity, to use the
Aeigptians apparel: yet no man thought that he would ever bring the^ into
Egypt again. Thus then by doctrine if you labor still to pull some out of
captivity and darkness, 1. Tim. 4
and go before your flock on that manner, as S. Paul speaks, you should be a
pattern, in word in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and pureness,
you need not to deem of your selves worse then all godly men will judge of
you, that is, that you be workmen that need not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of God, 2. Tim. 2 Mat. 24.
and geuyng Gods household meat in due season^. You know how you must instruct
in meekenes an obedience all men, 2. Tim. 2
proving if God at any time will give them repentance, Romans 2.
that they may understand the truth, and that they may come to amendment out
of the snares of the devil: And also you know, 2. Pet. 2.
that wherein you teach other men, you must specially teach your selves, so
doing, you shall not lead your flock to Egypt gaiane. For they turn to
Egypt, Hebr. 6.
who wallowe again in the mire of their sins and errors, who after they
were once lightened, and had tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy ghost, make a mock of the son of God (as it is written
to the Hebreues) whose case is ve^ie lamentable.


The aunsuuerer. The bondag of Egypt is slavery to superstition. the substans
of popish religion is the very bondag. superstitius ceremonies are the Cheins
wherbie we were tyede to it. You cavil vainly of the Egyptian garments, none
of the Israelites were Egyptia^s priests, that wore Idolatrus garments, you say
well that wherein we teach other men we must teach our selves. We teach
other men to abhor all popish Ceremonies, therefore we must not Embrace
these onre selves. Matthew. Illirycus a lernid man, writing against Adiap
horistas or indifferent men, altogether agreing with us and overthrowing you.
callith the ceremonies garlike, and onnians of Egypt.


The examiner. You have taught (you say) as Tertullian did: That nothing must
be taken from the Idoll-Tertullian in that place speaks of that thing, De
corona milit.
which was first invented, A canditatis diaboli of the Devils professors, or
of them that were mere Idolatours, then he speaks of that thing which was,
Dicatum ipsis a primordio, dedicated to set forth the worship done to idols
from the beginning, which two conditions you find not in these matters now
talked of. For they were brought into the Church by them that professed the
same God and Christ that we do: neither were they appointed to serve any,
saui^g the true God, since the co^mi^g of the son of God: And therefore you
misreport this authority, and such like.

Tertulian dissenteth very much from your opinion in the wearyng of abused
apparel as it appears where he handeleth somewhat this matter, saying: De
idolol.
First the causes must be considered, for the which a man does any service or
duty: Then he grants that the purple robe which was used of idolatrous
priests, might be worn, De cor. mil.
if it where a token of birth, of kynne, or of order. Moreover, in that place
whence you fetch your authority, he thinks that somethynges invented and
abused of Idolatours, may serve both to our use, and the service of God, if
they have any profit, help, or comfort for the life of man, as at large is
there set out, where he inueyeth sharply against the Garlande, being the^
worn both of idolatours among Christian men without all kind of commodity,
and also of the Idol it self, which was decked therewith. Wherefore (if you
had meant plainly) you might have translated these words, In habitu idoli, in
the habit of the idol: and not in the habit of an idolatour, as you have
done.


The aunsuuerer We must think you handle the controversy with little
conscie^s when you would wrest Tertulian out of our hands, who most planielie
and directllie handlith our very case^, as Petir Martyr in a manner
confessith, and you do not gretlie deny. We say that papists are the diuills
professors, and that they first dedicated them to the service of their
Idols, for they never did good seruis in the Church of Christ. We agree with
Tertullian, that many things abused may be retainid, even garments, but not
such as were abused to Idolatry, for he says Ta^tu^ enim honoris nomine,
conferebantur h^is qui familiaritate^ Regum, merebantur etc. They were geuin
only to honor such, as deserved the familiarity of kings, for if they had
been bound to the prishod or to any service of Idols, doutles such men of
holiness and constancy, (he meanith Joseph and Daniel) would straight way have
refused such defiled apparel. Note hear that Nabuchodonoser and Darius, by
whom Daniel was preferred to honer did confess the true god. And commanded
all men to do the like Dan. 4. and 6. and Tertulianus affirmith that if the
apparel had been such as was used to Idolatri Daniel would not have worn it,
for he says that purple and other signs of dignities and poweres that in the
begni^g have benne dedicated to the dignities and powers of idolatry (habent
prophanationis suae maculam). They have their spot of profaning with the
idols them selves. Again (tunicam si induas inquinatam per fe poteris
forsitan illam non inquinari perte, sed tu per illam mu^dus esse non poteris).
If thou put on a garment that is defiled by it self, thou may perchance no
defile it by the, but thou by it can not be clean. Nulbitus licitus est apud
nos, illicito actui ascriptus. No apparel is lafwll for us that has been
appoincted for an unlawful act. speking of apparel appoincted for idolatry.
To be short in his book of prayer he condemnith all Ceremonies used in prayer
(that have not authoritio of the scripture) for superstition, and for this
ca^se at the lest not to be used, because they make us like the gentiles (vt est
quorumdam positis paenulis orationem facere, sic enim adeunt ad idola nationes)
as the manor of some men is to put of their clokes when they pray, for so the
Gentiles go to worshipp their Idols. To put of a cloak and put on a surplesse
are they not indifferent? they are both in nature and substans good, in use
and ceremony forbiden. and why should this be enjoined* Let these places be well
considered and then judge whether Tertulia^ make against us, and whether we
have misco^strued his words or no.


The examiner. What you have taught also (as you write) of the Mass and the
Popes holy creatures, you may in that still continue as occasion shall serve.
Yet it is a great marvel that you see not, that it is far worse to
communicate in false religion and idolatrous Sacraments, then to wear the
apparel of the Heathens and such like, specially when all false and erroneous
opinion is quite removed from them.


The aunsuuerer. We cannot but teach that all his holy creatures, are unholy
and superstitius though the creation from god be good. You marvel that we
see not that it is far worse to communicate in false religion and Idolatrus
sacraments, then to wear the apparel. We maruele gretlie, what you should
mean to say so. S. Paul prouithe to the Cort. that to eat meat offered to
Idols, was to communicate with devils. 1. Cor. 10. Even as to eat the
Sacrament is to communicate with Christ. And to eat of the sacrifices is to be
pertakers of the alter. What difference there is between papists and ge^tils in
this respect, We confess that we see not.


The examiner. Tertullian says, that many Christian men took up Pallium a
Heathenishe vesture. De pall. Ad fab. Cle. recog. 7. 2. Tim. 4.
Hierome says, that many Godly men wore the Greek Philosophers weed, so that
thefore they were pointed at as they went. Clemens (if you like his authority)
says, S. Peter had upon him that garment called Pallium. Chrysostom, says,
that Paul also sent for his Pallium, Ter. de pal Au gell. lib. cap. 15
a Romish garment, for his use, and yet these were not thought, nay they
would not communicate with the Gentiles in their serving of devils. Many an
lionest man wears a Hatte, which was the privilege of Ceres priests and
Jupiters: and yet detesteth idolatry. Many a godly Leuite preached Christ (no
doubt of it) in his Jewish apparel: and yet he was well known to flee Iewishe
religion. It is not then (as you think) as great an evil to wear garments
abused, as to be partaker of idolatrous sacrifice, specially when as to the
godly Christian all things are sanctified.


The aunsuuerer. Colleworts twice sodden are poison, we have before answered
off Tertulians cloak, that it was the mantel of a philosopher, not of an
Idolatert, as for the hates of Ceres and Jupiters priests, we have not to do
with them, no more then with Cardnalls hattes. you should prove that Ceres and
Jupiters priests, if they were made ministers of the Church of Christ, might
retain there hattes, by which they were known to be Ceres and Jupiters
priests. Our hattes are not priuilegiati galeri, priuiliged hattes appointed to
serve in religion, but common and civil hattes, For the levites we a^swered
before, that they had no such usual apparel distinct from other men as you
fantasy. Act. 4.
As clear as you make it, you shall never prove that, such Christian leuits
preached or ministered in their Ephods. Barnabas was a leuit. What Jewish
apparel wore he? we read that he had so litill regard to his apparel that he
rent it with Paull when he save God dishonored. Paull was a Pharisie but he had
given over pharisaical apparel, Act. 23
and wore as you grant (pallium) a romish garment, ergo not ^ewishe. And in
the counsel he was feign to declare, and that with a loud voice, that he was a
pharise, he was not known by his garment to be one.


The examiner Now at length are you come to the Epiloge [as it were] or full
conclusion of your work, Epilog.
and pretend great sear, where as little needs and allege feeble causes for
so stoutea refusal, and brag of courageous constancy to much out of time.
If you have taught [for your] teaching you oftentimes tell us of, as wherein
(belike) you could not sometime indiscreetly behave your selves) that no
holiness is to be hanged upon any kind of apparel: that they be superfluous of
them selves toward our salvation: that some have been abused to superstition:
and if you so declare still, and yet not without lawful authority, upon some
good considerations, and to an end both political and also profitable: now
use these things which you know other godly are contented to wear, not for
holiness, salvation, or superstition, but that they would (as it were) redeem
the time of preaching Christ's Gospel to his people, by Gods grace, none of
those sorts of men, for whom you (and we also) are careful, shall by you
iustlye be hurt: neither shall your doctrine ryghtly be called into suspicion,
as which was and is all one, though it be uttered in apparel, rather
appointed by order, then devised and chosen by private men's heads.


The Aunsuuerer. If we had as large consciencis as you have gown sleaues,
perchance we need not fear, but for any thing that you say we have great
cause to fear, lest we offend, and bring our doctrine, that we have taught
into doubt and that we shall teach into supicion.


The examiner. This many men think very strange in you, that you stand in
greater fear that men will believe rather your apparel then your words: your
coat, then your preaching: your owteward show then your inward mind, often
opened by speech, and plainly set before them to perceive. What do you judge
of gods people, that they be so much without sense and understanding? You
fear the thing your selves imagine, and imagine even what you list.


The Aunsuuerer. We judge gods people to be as by experiens we find them, and
it is raither like they will believe our doings, then our sayings. if we say
all marks of Idolatry are to be abhorred, many seeing us use them our selves,
will think thear is no great danger in using them, nor truth in our words,
what so euar we say of them. yt is the best persuasion, if the tongue and the
cote talk and theache one thing. Ar for offense gueing, our protestation will
not excuse us, no more then if a man would willfullie dig a pit break a bridge,
or lay a log, in the way and then cry out and say O. take heed you fall not.
we must stopp holles not make them take away stombling blocks, not lay
them, and then bid men bewar of them.


The examiner. Here next may be seen your severe and sharp sentence upon all
you brethren and fellow ministers, when you in your selves pronounce but hell
and dampnation to all them which upon sincere* love toward the flock of
Christ, 1. Cor. 16.
having a wide door opened unto them by gods singular grace, to spread abroad
the knowledge of Christ, have not such regard in whar apparel they should
enter and feed, as to be found faithful dispensours of the mysteries of God.
In which paynefull service if they go forward to the end, shall hear not
that terrible voice upon the naughty servant, which you utter: but the
confortable saying to the good servant, well god servant. etc.


The aunsuuerer. Nay here may be seen your false and uncharitable
interpretation to say that we threaten to others, that we fear to our selves.
Of other we say once again, they stand or fall to their Lord, who by his
fire shall bourne all the hay, straw, and wood, and save all them that hold
fast upon the only foundation Jesus Christ.


The examiner. In the judgment of all wise men, you had done right well, Luk
19.
if you had either stayed your pen in this place, or spoken more plainly for
the discharge of some, when as you notify to the world, that the earnest
solicitours of these matters were blouddy persecutours, and still bear back
in the religion of Christ.

Surely the sagest and sobrest in this common wealth and Church, conceive a
better opinion of them that first stablyshed these things by law, and of them
also which of duty now call upon the execution of the same, as they may
rightly of them, by whom chiefelie all Romish religion, with superstition and
error, was through the spirit of God bannished this Relame.

Well, howesoeuer it has pleased you for spite against some one, to bring a
great number of very godly in obloqui and suspicion, if the things required be
indifferent in them selves, and not so horrible and dangerous for this Church
at these days (as the prudent and chare overseers judge, even as it were in
the sight of Christ, to whom they must render an account for his dear flock)
what matter is it who they be that call, upon you to accomplish your duty?
Unless you think that no man ought to make general laws in the like cases,
but let every Curate be supreme governor in his own parish. which loose
imagination, what inconvenience it will draw with it, you may well consider.

How innocent hands they have from the blood of all Gods Saints, who under a
most godly, virtuous, and pure regiment, deal with you all manner of ways,
that you slip not from your loyal obedience, yea though they should use
toward some of you charitable severity, terrible lenity, auengement
medicinal (as S. Augustine sets out the true ecclesiastical discipline)
not only the wise within this Realm understand: but the enemies also without,
contra. li Petil. li. 3. cap. 4.
confess.


The Aunsuuerer. All wise men be not of one judgment, but they may easelie see
if they will that to be true which we have said, that the earnest soliciters
in these matters, seek not the advancement of gods glory, but the defacing of
the Gospel. You always burden us with envy, as though we meant all them
that by any means, meddle with the matter, to be blodie persecuters, nay all
godly men wish, and we as gods Ministers, may speak, that those prudent and
chairie overseers which tithe mint and anice would raither execute mercy and
Judgment, mercy in providing more then ten thousand Preachers, not hindering
those few that are. Judgment in disserning between half Papists, Hietlinges,
and faithful and learned preachers. Judgment in restoringe discipline to the
Church without the which it is no perfect Church, therbie to punish the
evil and cherish the good. not to be so straight in exhortinge trifles as
though nothing wanted to the perfection of the Church but the apparel of
ministers


The examiner But because your enemies, as you surmize, put you in mind of
your duetiful subjection, you will not be cowards (you say) yielding your
weapons to your adversaries hands: As if by wearing this apparel, the sword
of Gods word were wrested out of your handeling, 1. Cor. 10
where as (you know well enough] in these orders: you may manfully cast down
strong holds, overthrow imaginations, and every high thing that exalts him
self against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity all
understanding, to the obedience of Christ, yea and take vengeance of all
disobedience, as S. Paul describes at large the faithful preachers weapons
and fight.


The aunsuuerer. We count Hipocrites and papists, to be our Enemies, not such
as you surmize, to who me we should yield, the power of gods word though we
kept the books, if we did that which we have taught to be contrary.


The examiner. Nay God grant this indiscreet dealing of yours, be not a
voluntary throwing away of your weapons in deed, marueillous dangerous also
to Christ's people committed to your charge, whiles you open thus a gappe for
hirelynges to crepe in, and defend not your flocks from the great peryls of
heinous errors, and ungodliness of life, because some having interest, as well
as you, in your sheep, show unto you an orderly poy at or two.


The examiner. This is untimely iestinge, to know we are violently thruste
out, and say we willingly leave our flocks, we trust that they which can
defend the cause alone with out us, will provide for the Church with out us
which God grant.


The examiner. Last of all, you request two things. Tit. pri. Rom: 14.
The one: That you may keep your conscience undefiled. This your petition in
some things touching the worship of God, might have his place: But in these
matters (which you call indifferent) what is it that should defyle you? The
thing hit celf or your weak opinion of it? The thing it self does not pollute
you: For (as saint Paul says to the pure, 1. Cor. 8
all things are pure. And agrine: Nothing is common or unclean of it self.
Now as concerning your weakness (thanks be to God (that which the same S. 1.
Cor. 8.
Paul reports of the Corinthes, may be verified of you: we all have
knowledge. And: we are sure that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that
there is none other God but one. It were to be wished (and would to God there
were no examples now of it) that none of them which pretend herin a straitnes
of conscience, Math. 23
did strain a Gnat, and swallowe a Camel.


The aunsuuerer. Last of all you repete your principalls so often craved, and
yet never granted that these things, are indifferent, then that there is no
way to spotte our consciencis, unless they were weak, as though they may not
be spotted by giving offense to others, we marvel with what learning and
conscie^s you allege Saint Paulls affirmation, that which was but his
adversaries objection, we have all knowledge, when immediately after in plain
words he denies it, to be true, saying all me^ have not knowledge. If any of
our judgment in this matter strain at a gnatt, or swalloweth A Ca^mell, we
have not nor will not take upon us to defend them.


The examiner. Next you require, freedom to reach your flocks by doctrine.
This thing your bounden obedience may easily obtain: where as by your own
wifulnes, you deprive your selves thereof. Then you would go before your sheep
in that which you have thaught. If it be as far as becomes your own
persons and degree, you shall deserve thanks, whenever you perform it. For
though it chance so oftentimes, that many things are to be taught of them
selves indifferent: yet in your example it shall not be lawefull for you to use
them before your paroeces as you list. Meet is it that Christian people hear
diverse times of the freedom of conscience, in meats, places, times, and
days: and yet neither you nor they ought to disturb political order lawfully
taken.


The aunsuuerer. Yet again we deprive our selves, when all the world knows
we are deprived by others, and would gladly part from our living, upon
condition we might preach Christ purelie. S. Paull was glad that Christ was
preached wheather it were of occasion or good will. God grant the same mind to
all our Bishops and magistrates. our requests were made in humble suet and were
of the fathers of the Clergy them selves thought, reasonable, we hope the
Queen's Majesty will give a more merciful answer then you have, who have been
in all your treatise against us your poor, brethren a cruel Orator.


The examiner. Which disturbaunce of public quiet in rites and ordinances
(which may be for the variety of places diverse, and yet to be straightly
observed) what a great offense it is, not only the Scriptures may teach you,
and the usage of Ghristes true Church: but also the determination of this
Church in England, both agreed upon in king Edwarardes days, and also
testified and subscribed by them selves, who now would gaynsay their own
doings then. The words which the whole Sinode were well pleased withal. and
whereunto all the Cleargies hands are set to be these:

It is not necessary that tradicions and ceremonies be in all places one or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diuersies of Countries, times, and men's manners, so that
nothing be ordered against the word of God. In the articles agreed in the last
Sinode.
Whosoever through his private judgment, wyllyngly and purposely does openly
break the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnaunt to
the word of God, and be ordained and approuued by common authority, ough to be
rebuked openly (that other may fear to do the like) as one that offen death
against the common order of the Church, and hurts the authority of the
Magistrate, and wounds het consciences of the weak brethen.

After these Godly men's judgments, if you go before your flock in this quiet
manner, your example verily shall edify much.

Thus therefore, if we all shall be faithful and wise servants, geuyng our
masters houshol de their duty of meat in due season, and also be found by
our Lord, when he comes, so doi^g, happy shall we be and we shall have our
portion, not with the hypocrites, where is weepi^g and gnashi^g of teeth: but
with the blessed in the kingdom of the most mighty God, which is king of
kings and Lord of Lords, to whom be honor and rule everlasting. Amen.


The aunsuuerer. The articles of the Sinode have such conditions annexed to
them, that we need not fear to subscribe to them again in the former, so
that nohing be ordered against the word of god in the latter which be not
repugnaunt to the word of god according to these conditiones we pray god that
all men may decree and obey orders.


The examiner. But let us follow the truth in love, Ephesians. 4.
and in all things grow up into him which is the head, that is Christ.


The aunsuuerer. It is the thing that we wish to follow, the truth in love
and in all things to grow up into Christ, which is the head and not to grow
backward to Antichrist.


The examiner. Nevertheless, in that whereunto we are come, let us proceade by
one rule, Phil. 3.
that we may be of one accord.


The ausuuerer. You should have added the words goinge before, let us thefore
as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if you be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal that same unto you if you would be content, that as many as be
perfect, continue in the same mind, we would be glad to proceade by one rule,
that we may all be of one accord to the which we wish you would with us say.
Amen.


FINIS.

