ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF WITHIN THE DIOCES OF NORWICH: In the first
Visitation of the R. Reverend Father in God, MATTHEW, LORD BISHOP OF NORWICH.

Printed at London, by Richard Badger. 1636.

The Tenor of the OATH to be Ministered to the Churchwardens, and any other of
every Parish, that shall be sworn to make Presentiments.
YOu shall swear, that you and every one of you, shall and will duly consider,
and diligently enquire of every one of these Articles here given you in charge
and of all the branches thereof, and make true answer, to all particulars
therein demanded; and that all affection, or favor, or hatred or hope of
reward and gain, or fear of displeasure, or malice of any person, and all
other pretenses set aside, you shall and will present every such person of your
Parish, or within it, as has committed any offense or f^ult, or made any
default mentioned in any of these Articles; or which is vehemently suspected,
or otherwise defamed of any such offense, fault, or default; wherein you shall
deal uprightly and fully according to the truth; neither presenting nor
sparing to present any contrary to the truth: Having in this action God before
your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth and virtue, and to
suppress vice, and to discharge your own consciences. So help you God, and
the Holy Contents of this Book.

God save the KING.
Articles to be enquired of in the Dioces of Norwich, at the Visitation, holden
in the year of our Lord, 1636.
Chap. 1. Concerning Religion and Doctrine.
ARE there any abiding in your Parish, or resorting to it, who have wilfully
maintained any heresies, errors, or false opinions, contrary to the faith of
Christ and holy Scripture? Or that do impugn any of the 39. Articles of
Religion, agreed upon in Anno. 1562. and stablished in the Church of England?
And is the declaration, which the Kings Majesty prefixed before those 39.
Articles, concerning the settling of the questions late in difference, duly
observed by all within your Parish, according to his Majesty's commandment*

2 Be there any in your Parish that have denied, or persuaded any other to
deny, withstand, or impugn, the Kings Majesty's authority, and supremacy, in
causes Ecclesiastical within this Realm?

3 Is there in your Parish any that has been, or is vehemently suspected to
have been present at any unlawful assemblies, conuenticles, or meetings,
under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion? Or do any affirm and
maintain such meetings to be lawful?

4 Be there any abiding in, or resorting to your Parish, that are commonly
reputed to be ill affected in matter of the religion professed in our Church,
or taken to be Recusant Papists, or factious separatists, refusing to repair
unto the Church, to hear divine Service, and to receive the holy Communion? Or
that have or do publish, sell or disperse any superstitious, seditious, or
schismatic Books, Libels, or Writings, touching the Religion, State, or
Ecclesiastical government of this Kingdom of England? Present their names,
qualities, and conditions, if you know or have heard of any.

Chap. 2. Concerning public Prayer and administration of the holy Sacraments,
etc.
1 Have any in your Parish spoken, or declared any thing in derogation or
deprauation of the form of Gods worship, establ^shed in the Church of England,
and the administration of the Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonies, set forth and
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer? Or do any preach, speak, or declare,
that the Book of Common Prayer contains any thing that is repugnant to the
holy Scripture, or not meet to be used? Or do use any scornful words against
those godly Sermons, called, The Homilies of the Church?

2 Has any in your Parish, caused, procured, or maintained any Minister, to
say any common or public prayer, or to administer the Sacrament of Baptism,
or of the Lords Supper, otherwise, or in any other manner, than is mentioned in
the said Book of Common Prayer? Or has any interrupted, hindered, let, or
disturbed the Minister in reading of divine Service, or administering the
Sacraments in such manner, as is mentioned in the said Book? Or has any
interrupted him in his preaching, or reading the Homilies?

3 Is the Sacrament of Baptism rightly and duly administered according to the
form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer; with due observation of all
Rites and Ceremonies prescribed to be used in the same, without adding or
altering of any part of any prayers, or interrogatories? Is the sign of the
Cross every time used, and the Surplice never but worn in the administering of
it?

4 Has the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism been at any time
deferred longer than till the next Sunday or Holiday, immediately following the
birth of the child?

5 Has the Sacrament of Baptism been refused to be administered to any
children, borne in, or out of wedlock, their birth being made known to the
Minister of the Parish, and they offered unto him to be baptized? Or have any
such children died unbaptized?

6 Have the Parents of the child baptized, been at any time admitted to be
Godfathers or Godmothers to the same? Or have any been admitted to be
Godfathers or Godmothers to any child, before they have received the holy
Communion? Or have any Godfathers or Godmothers used any other answers or
speech in Baptism, then is by the Book of Common Prayer appointed? Or have
they given to the children baptized any name that is absurd, or inconvenient
for so holy an action?

7 Have any children been baptized in private houses, or by any Lay-person, or
Midwife, or popish Priest; or by any other than your own Minister? And have
all children privately baptized, if they lived, been afterward brought to
your Church, that the Congregation and the Minister of the Parish (in case they
were not baptized by him) might be certified, whether they, or any of them were
lawfully baptized or no?

8 Have the children that have been borne to any popish Recusant in your
Parish, been publicly baptized in your Parish Church, by your own Parson,
Uicar, or Curate? Or by whom else were they baptized, or where, to your
knowledge, or as you have heard?

9 Has the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly and reverently
administered in your Church or Chapel, so often and at such convenient times,
that, at least thrice every year (whereof once at Easter) every parishioner
within your Parish, being of the age of 16. years, or upwards, might receive
the same?

10 Has the said blessed Sacrament been delivered unto any, or received by any
the Communicants within your Parish, that did irreverently either sit, stand,
or lean; or that did not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees, in
plain and open view, without collusion or hypocrisy?

11 Have any of your Parish, which are openly known to live in notorious sin
without repentance; or any excommunicate persons or schismatics, common and
notorious deprauers of the Religion and Government of this Realm (without
unfeigned sorrow showed by them for their impiety and wickedness) been admitted
to be partakers of the holy Communion?

12 Has any of your Parish been debarred from the said holy Communion,
without just cause, or without intimation presently given to the Ordinary or
Bishop of the Diocese?

Chap. 3. Concerning the Church, the furniture, and possessions thereof.
Have you in your Church or Chapel, the whole Bible in the largest Uolume, of
the last translation, the Book of Common Prayer, the two books of Homilies,
and Bshop- Jewels Apology, all well and fairly bound? And have you also in
your Church, the form of the Divine Service, for the 5 th day of November, and
for the 27 th day of March, and the Book of Constitutions or Canons
Ecclesiastical?

2 Have you in your Church or Chapel, a Font of stone set in the ancient
usual place, whole, and clean, and fit to hold water? A conueniet and decent
Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk, or some other decent stuff
continually laid upon the Table, at the time of divine Service; and a fair
linen cloth thereon laid, at the time of administering the Communion? And is
the same Table placed conveniently, so as the Minister may best be heard in his
administration, and the greatest number may reverently communicate? To that end
does it ordinarily stand up at the East end of the Chancell, where the Altar in
former times stood, the ends thereof being placed North and South? Is it at any
time used irreverently, by leaning or sitting on it, throwing Hats or any thing
else upon it, or writing on it; or is it abused to any other profane or common
use? And are the ten Commandemens set up in your Church or Chapel, where the
people may see and read them, and other chosen sentences also written upon the
walls of your said Church or Chapel, in places convenient for the same
purpose?

3 Have you in your said Church or Chapel a convenient seat for your Minister
to read divine Service in? Where does it stand? how far from the Chancell?
and which way does the standing thereof cause the Minister to turn his face,
when he kneeleth therein at prayer? Have you also a comely Pulpit set up in a
convenient place, with a decent Cloth, or Cushion for the same; a comely large
Surplice; a fair Communion Cup of silver, and a cover agreeable to the same; a
Flagon of Silver or Pewter, with all other things, and Ornaments necessary for
the celebration of divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments? And
have you a Chest wherein to put the alms for the poor, with three locks and
keys unto it, and another Chest for the keeping of the Books, and the
Communion Uessels, and Ornaments of the Church? Or where are they kept?

4 In the said Chest, have you a Register-booke in Parchment, wherein to
register the Christnings, Weddings, and Burials? And is the same book written
and kept in all points according to the Canon? And is the Christian name of the
mother, as well as of the father, therein duly registered? And is there a
transcript thereof transmitted every year into the Bishops principal
Registry? Have you also a fair Paper-booke, wherein every Preacher which is a
stranger, is to subscribe his name, the day he preached, and by whose authority
he is licensed? And have you also a Table set up in your Church, of the
Degrees, wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry?

5 Is your Church or Chapel, with the Chancell thereof, and your Parsonage
house or Uicarage-house, and all other houses thereto belonging, your parish
Almes-house and Church-house, in good reparations? and are they employed to
godly and their right holy uses? And if any of them be ruinated and wasted, in
whom is the default? And is your Church, Chancell, and Chapel, decently and
comely kept, as well within as without? and are the seats in them well
maintained, the Steeple and Bells preserved, the windows in no part stopped up,
but well glazed, the roof and walls clean, the whole floor kept paued,
plain, and even, and all things there in orderly and decent sort, without
dust, straw, or litter, or any thing that may be either noisome or unseemly
for the house of God?

6 Is there any in your Parish, that has or does refuse to contribute toward
the reparation of your Church, or toward the provision of such things as
belong thereunto?

7 Is your Churchyard, or Chappell-yard well fenced, and kept without abuse?
and if not, whose is the default? Has any person within your memory, or that
you have credibly heard of, incroached upon the Churchyard, by setting up any
kind of building or fence upon it, or by opening any door, gate or style into
it? Has any used that place (consecrated to an holy use) profanely or
wickedly? Has any quarrelled or stricken one another, either in the Church or
Churchyard? Has any person behaved himself rudely and disorderly in either;
or used any filthy or profane talk, or any other rude and immodest behavior
in them? Have any Plays, Feasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church-ales, Drinkings,
Temporall-Courts or Leets, Lay-iuries, Musters, exercise of dancing,
Stoole-ball, Football, or the like, or any other profane usage been suffered
to be kept in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard? Have any annoied your
Churchyard or the fences thereof, by putting in of Cattle, by hanging up of
clothes, or by laying any dust, dung, or any other filthiness there? When
Graves are dug, are the bones of the dead piously used, and decently
interred again, or laid up in some fit place as beseems Christians? And is
the whole consecrate ground kept free from swine, and all other nastinesse?

8 Are your Churchwardens careful to take special order, that no Dogs be at
any time suffered to come into the Church, to the disturbance of the divine
Service, and the polluting of that holy place of the Christian Congregation?
And do any of the Inhabitants (of what condition soever) or of their company,
bring their Hawks into the Church, or usually suffer their Dogs of any kind
to come with them thither, to the profanation of the house of God, and his
holy worship?

9 What Legacies have been given to the use and benefit of your Church, and
how have they been bestowed? Who has received and detained them without due
employment? Does any detain or imbezell, or has sold and made away any of the
Church-goods, or used or employed them otherwise, then by law they ought to do?

10 Is your Church full, or vacant of an incumbent? And if vacant, who
receives the fruits thereof, and who serves the Cure, and by what authority?
And is it a Parsonage, Uicarage, or Donatiue?

11 Is there in your parish (or any where about you, that you know or have
heard of) any Church, Chapel, or Oratory, now demolished, or likely to be
ruined, or that is converted to any private or secular use?

12 Has any private man, or men, of his or their own authority (for ought you
know) erected any Pewes, or builded any new Seats in your Church? And what
Pewes or Seats have been of late years new built, by whose procurement, and by
whose authority? And are all the Pewes and Seats in the Church, so ordered,
that they which are in them, may all conveniently kneel down in the time of
prayer, and have their faces up Eastward, toward the holy Table? Is the middle
Alley of the Church, or any of the other Alleyes or Isles, or the body of the
Chancell, built upon (in any part thereof) for the setting up of Pewes or
Seats, or for the enlarging of any there adjoining? Are there also any kind of
Seats at the East end of the Chancell, above the Communion Table, or on either
side up even with it?

13 Are there any privy Closets, or close Pewes in your Church? Are any Pewes
so loftily made, that they do any way hinder the prospect of the Church or
Chancell, or that they which are in them be hidden from the face of the
Congregation? What Galleries also have you in your Church? How are they placed,
and in what part of the Church? When were they built, and by what authority? Is
not the Church large enough without them to receive all your own parishioners?
Is any part of the Church hidden or darkened thereby, or any of the Parish
anoyed or offended by them?

14 Has any in your parish defaced, or caused to be defaced, or purloined any
Monuments or Ornaments in your Church, or any inscriptions of Brass, any Lead,
or Stones there, or the Glasse-windowes? When was it done, and by whom?

15 Has any popish Recusant being lawfully excommunicate, or any other
excommunicated person been buried in your Church or Churchyard, before
absolution from that censure and excommunication obtained? And if yea, then by
whom, and when?

16 Be the profits, tithes, or any commodities Ecclesiastical, belonging to
the Parsonage or Uicarage of your Parish, converted to the use and benefit of
the Patrons or of any other, and by them received and detained? And how long
have they been so? And is there but a Curate or stipendary Priest kept in any
place, where you have heard or do believe, an Incumbent should be possessed,
and what allowance has be?

17 Is there any other Cure annexed to your Parish, or any Chapel of ease
belonging to the same? How are they served, by whom, and upon what allowance?
Or have you in your Parish any dwelling house with a Chapel therein; or in
which any room is ordinarily used for preaching, or saying the divine Service,
and administering the holy Sacraments?

18 Have you a true Terrier of all the Glebe-lands, Meadows, Gardens, Orchards,
Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tithes, within your
Parish, or without, belonging to your Parsonage or Uicarage, taken by the view
of honest men in your said Parish, appointed by the Ordinary? And is it safely
kept and preserved, and in whose hands? And has there a true copy thereof,
under the hands of the Minister and Churchwardens, been transmitted and laid
up in the Bishops Regestry, there to continue for a perpetual memory thereof?
And if you have no such Terrier yet made, you the Churchwardens and Sidemen,
together with your Parson or Uicar, or in his absence, your Curate, are now
appointed to make diligent inquiry of the premises, and to make, subscribe, and
assign the said Terrier, and to bring in a true copy of it into the Bishops
Regestry, as is aforesaid.

Chap. 4. Concerning the Ministers, Preachers, and Lecturers.
IS your Minister, Parson, Uicar, or Curate, a Graduate in either of the
Uniuersities, yea, or no? And if he be a Graduate, then of what degree is he?
and what kind of Hood does he use to wear in the Church?

2 Is your Minister a licensed Preacher, yea or no? And if he be licensed, then
by whom? Does he preach usually in his own Cure, or in some other Church or
Chapel near adjoining, where there is no Preacher, once every Sunday? And
how often has he been negligent in so doing? Does he also preach standing,
and in his Cassock and Gown (not in a Cloak) with his Surplice and Hood also,
if he be a Graduate, and with his head uncovered? And if he be not a licensed
Preacher, does he take upon him in his own Cure, or elsewhere, to expound any
Scripture or matter of Doctrine, or does he keep himself only to the reading
of Homilies published by authority; and besides, procure Sermons to be preached
amongst you, once every Month at least, by such as are lawfully licensed? And
does he or his Curate upon every Sunday when there is no Sermon, read some one
of the Homilies prescribed by authority, and before the said Homily, use that
form of prayer (only) which is prescribed in the fifty fifth Canon?

3 Is your Minister resident with you upon his benefice? or if absent, how long
time has he been so? and where is he resident for the most part? And does he
in his absence make allowance to the poor, and what allowance does he make?
Has he any other Benefice, and does he supply his absence by a Curate that is
licensed to preach, and what allowance does he make to his Curate?

4 Is your Curate licensed by the Bishop of the Dioces? And does your Minister
or Curate serve any more Cures than one? If yea, then what other Cure does he
serve, and how far are his Cures distant one from the other?

5 Has any being no Minister, or Deacon, presumed at any time to read common
prayers openly in your Church or Chapel; or to serve the Cure of your Parish?
Or has any Deacon not having received the full order of Priesthood, taken upon
him alone to administer the Communion in your Church or Chapel? You are to
present the names of any, that have herein offended.

6 Does your Minister, Preacher, or Lecturer, begin his Sermon at any time, or
part of the divine Service, but immediately after the Belief called the
Nicene-creed? Does he before his Sermon (or Homily, if he read one) use any
form of prayer which is of his private conceiving or collecting, and of his
own inuenting or choosing, or does he contain himself within that brief
form only, which is prescribed by the Church (in the 55. Canon) thereby to
move the people to join with him in prayer for Christ's holy Catholic Church,
and for the Kings most excellent Majesty (naming him and his Royal Titles)
for the Queen, the Prince, and the Royal Issue; for the Archbishops also and
the Bishops; for the Council, the Nobility, the Magistracy and Commons of the
Land, and to give thanks to God for the faithful departed out of this life?
And does he always conclude it with the Lords Prayer? Does the Preacher or
Minister also after his Sermon, wholly forbear to use any kind or form of
prayer (not being prescribed,) as also to pronounce the Blessing (out of the
Pulpit) wherewith the Church uses to dismiss ye people? But does he there
conclude, only with, Glory to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost:
and then coming from the Pulpit (if the Sermon were made within the Church or
Chapel) does he, or whosoever then officiates, at the same place, where he
left before the Sermon, proceed to read the remainder of the divine Service,
and at the close of all, to give the Blessing?

7 Does every Priest and Seacon in your Parish daily say the Morning and
Evening prayer, either privately or openly, unless he be upon lawful cause
hindered? Does your Curate say the same daily in your Church or Chapel, with
the tolling of a Bell before he begin? Especially does your Minister or Curate
do it on every Sunday and Holiday, and their Eues, and on the day of the
conversion of S. Paul, S. Barnabies day, and every day of the holy week next
before Easter; as also on all Wednesdayes and Fridayes, at fit and usual
times, according to the form prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, in a
reverent manner ever, and as audibly and distinctly as he uses to preach? Does
he also read all those Psalms and Lessons, and no other, with the Collect,
Epistle, and Gospel, which are appointed for the day? At the end of every
Psalm, do they stand and say, Glory be to the Father, etc. and does he leave
out the Contents of the Chapters? After the Lessons, does he use any other
Psalm, or Hymn, but those which the Book of Common Prayer has appointed?
Does he read the Creed of S. Athanasius (called the Quicunque vult) on all
those days for which it is appointed, and the Commination on Ashwednesday, and
the Letany on every Wednesday and Friday?

8 Does your Minister and Curate, at all times, as well in preaching or reading
the Homilies, as in reading the Prayers and the Letany, in administering the
holy Sacraments, solemnization of Marriage, burying of the dead, churching of
women, and all other Offices of the Church, duly observe the Orders and Rites
prescribed, without omission, alteration, or addition of any thing? And does
he, in performing all and every of these, wear the Surplice duly, and never
omit the wearing of the same, nor of his Hood, if he be a Graduate?

9 Does your Parson or Uicar having a Curate under him, notwithstanding read
divine Service himself upon two several Sundays in the year, publicly at
the usual times, both in the forenoone and afternoon, in the Church which he
possesses? and does he also administer both Sacraments, as often in every
year in such manner, and with the observation of all such Rites and
Ceremonies, as are prescribed in the book of Common Prayer in that behalf?

10 Does your Minister, Preacher and Lecturer, every year, of purpose and
expressly, (yet not by way of disputation, but by plain conclusion and
determination) teach and declare the lawful authority which the King has over
the State, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; and the just abolishing of all
foreign power or jurisdiction over the same?

11 Does your Minister publish in his Sermons any doctrine, which is new and
strange, and disagreeing from the Word of God, and from the Articles of
Christian Faith and Religion, agreed on and published Anno Domini 1562. And
does he teach any thing, which he would have the people religiously observe and
believe, but that which is agreeable to the Scriptures and that which the
Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered out of that Doctrine,
according to the Canon?

12 Does your Minister go to the administration of holy Baptism, ever
immediately after the second Lesson? Does he always (at first) ask, whether
for child be baptized or no? Afterward, does he ever use and never omit, both
to take the child in his hands, and also to make the sign of the Cross, so
as to touch the child's forehead in making the same? Does he at any time baptize
but in the Font, or with any Basin or Paile, or other Uessell set into the
Font? Has he ever deferred or willingly neglected or refused to baptize any
infant within the Parish, being in danger of death, notice thereof having been
given to him? And has any child died without baptism, by his default?

13 Does your Minister or Curate often admonish the people, that they defer not
the baptism of their infants any longer, after they are borne, than is
prescribed, unless upon a great and reasonable cause, declared to the Minister
or Curate and approved by him; nor that they procure them to be baptized at
home without great necessity?

14 Has your Minister admitted any person to answer as Godfather or Godmother,
at the christning of a child, that has not before received the holy
Communion, and is not able to recite the Lords Prayer, the ten Commandments,
and the Articles of Belief, and to answer to the same, being required? And
does he, at the Font, as soon as he has baptized any child, admonish them to
bring the child to the Bishop to be confirmed, as soon as he has learned the
Catechism?

15 Does your Minister, every Sunday and holyday before evening prayer, where
no Sermon was wont to be, half an hour, or more, catechize and instruct the
youth and ignorant persons of your parish, in the ten Commandments, the
Articles of Belief, and the Lords Prayer? And does be use for that purpose,
the Catechism set forth in the book of Common Prayer, and diligently hear,
instruct, and teach them in the said Catechism? Or what other Catechism does
he use either in public or private? And be the youth and ignorant persons of
your parish, sent in due time unto your Church, by them that ought to send
them, to be catechized and instructed by the Minister? And if not, you are to
present the names of those that make default in sending them, and of all those
that use not to come.

16 Are your afternoon Sermons (if there were wont to be any) turned into
catechizing by question and answer, where and whenever, there is (...) great
cause apparent to the contrary? And is this truly and sincerely performed,
without mockery, or in show only?

17 Does your Minister use to administer the holy Communion, at least thrice in
the year (whereof once at Easter) to every parishioner in your Parish, that is
sixteen years of age and upwards; and first to receive the same himself,
kneeling, on every day that he administreth it to others; and to administer it
to none but to such as do kneel at the receiving thereof? And does he always
use the words of Institution, according to the Book of Common Prayer, without
alteration, at every time, that the Bread and Wine is renewed? Does he also
use to deliver the Bread and Wine to every Communicant severally, and with his
own hand, repeating to every one, all the words appointed to be said at the
distribution of the holy Body and Blood of our Lord JESUS, and upon no pretense
omitting any part of the words, or saying them all but now and then to many at
once? And is there warning given by him, to the parishioners, publicly in the
Church, at morning prayer the Sunday before every time of his administering of
the holy Communion, for their better preparation thereunto?

18 Has your Minister admitted unto the holy Communion any of his cure or
flock, which be openly known to live in sin notorious without repentance,
or any that have maliciously and openly contended with their neighbors, before
they be reconciled; or any Churchwardens or Sidemen, who having taken their
oaths, to present to their Ordinary all such public offenses, as they are
particularly charged to inquire of in the Parish, have and do notwithstanding,
wittingly and irreligiously incur the horrible crime of perjury, either in
neglecting or refusing to present such public offenses, as they themselves
know or have heard to be committed within your Parish?

19 Has your Minister at any time admitted unto the Communion any that refuse
to be present at public prayers, or who are notorious deprauers of the Book
of Common Prayer and administration of the Sacraments, or of the Orders, Rites,
or Ceremonies therein prescribed; or of any thing contained in the thirty nine
Articles, or in the Book of ordaining Priests and Bishops? or who have spoken
against, or depraved his Majesty's Sovereign Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, unless they and every of them do first acknowledge their
repentance for their sin, and promise to do so no more?

20 Does your Minister or Curate admit any to the Communion, before they can
say their Catechism, and be confirmed?

21 Does your Minister together with the Churchwardens and Quest-men, take
diligent heed and care, not only that all and every one of your own
Parishioners do receive thrice every year; but also that no strangers of any
other Parish, do come often and commonly to your Church from their own Parish
Church, or do there receive the Holy Communion?

22 Does your Minister, before the several times of the administration of the
Lords Supper, admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if any of them have their
conscience troubled and disquieted, to resort unto him, or to some other
learned Minister, and open their grief, that they may receive such ghostly
counsel and comfort, as their conscience may be relieved, and by the Minister
they may receive the benefit of Absolution, to the quiet of their conscience
and avoiding of all scruple? And if any man confess his secret and hidden
sins, being sick or whole, to the Minister, for the vnburthening of his
conscience and receiving of spiritual consolation or ease of mind from him,
does he the said Minister (or has he at any time) by word, writing, or sign,
openly or covertly, directly or indirectly, reveal and make known to any
person whatsoever, any crime or offense, so committed to his trust and secrecy?

23 Has your Minister solemnized the marriage of any person under the age of
twenty one years, without the consent of their Parents or Governors; or has
he married any, which do not audibly say and answer in all things appointed by
the Liturgy; or any without a King, or in times prohibited, or without the
Banes first published three several Sundays or Holidays, in time of divine
Service, in the several Churches or Chapels of their several abodes, without
a special license from the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, or his
Chancellor, or the Commissary, first had and obtained? And does he begin in
the body of the Church, and then go up to the Table, as is appointed? Also
does your Minister, so often as there is any marriage, appoint to have a
Communion? After the Gospel, does he say a Sermon (if he be licensed to
preach) wherein to declare the office of man and wife, according to holy
Scripture; or else does he read that which the Church has appointed to be
read at matrimony?

24 Does your Minister use the form of thanksgiving for women after
childebirth immediately before the Communion Service? Or has he admitted
thereunto any women begotten with-childe in adultery or fornication, without
license of his Ordinary?

25 Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from
time to time call upon his Parishioners to give somewhat according to their
abilities, to godly and charitable uses; especially does he in force it upon
them with earnest exhortation (as is prescribed) at the time of the oblation or
offering before the Communion, and upon their sick beds, or when they make
their wills?

26 Does your Minister or Curate resort unto such as be dangerously sick in
your Parish (if he be sent for, or notice thereof be given to him) to instruct
or comfort them in their distresses, according to the order of the Book of
Common Prayer; not omitting then especially, to move them earnestly to
liberality toward the poor?

27 If any being sick do desire the prayers of the Congregation, is it done
according to the form in the Liturgy, at the time of divine Service; or is it
done only by giving their names to the preacher, and mentioning of them in the
Pulpit, before or after Sermon?

28 Has your Minister ever refused to bury any which ought to be interred with
Christian burial? Or has he deferred the same longer than he should? Does
he go before the Corpse to the grave, and there say the whole service
appointed, not omitting the Lesson or any other part? Does he devoutly kneel,
when he says the prayers and the Collect at burial? or has he admitted any
to Christian burial, which by the Laws of the holy Church, or of this Realm,
ought not to be so interred?

29 Does your Minister being a Preacher and having any popish Recusant or
Recusants in your Parish, labor diligently with them from time to time, to
reclaim them from their errors? Or otherwise is he ouer-conuersant with them,
or suspected to favor them?

30 Has ydur Minister, (or any other taking upon him the calling of a
Minister) preached, baptized children (except in case of necessity) solemnized
marriage, churched any women, or ministered the holy Communion in any private
house or houses? If yea, then where, when, and how often has he done it?

31 Do you know, or have heard of any which are reputed to be Ministers (or of
any other of the Laity, either Male or Female) that presume to make matters of
Divinity their ordinary Table-talke? Or that under pretense of holiness and
edification, take the liberty at their Trencher-meetings, or where several
company (not being all of the same family) are assembled, rashly and profanely
to discourse of holy Scripture? Or amidst their cups, to dispute or determine
any Articles of Faith and Religion, or touching any point of doctrine or
Ecclesiastical discipline, at their own pleasure, and to their own fancy?
You shall name the persons, times, and places, as far as you know, or have
heard, and can remember?

32 Does your Minister, every six months, in your Parish Church, openly in the
time of divine service, upon some Sunday, denounce and declare, excommunicate
by name, such as do persevere in the sentence of excommunication, not seeking
to be absolved? And has he said divine Service, whiles any excommunicate
person has been present in the Church? Or has he admitted any person, that
has been excommunicate, into the Church, without a Certificate of his
absolution from his Ordinary? Or has be stayed or forborne to denounce any
excommunication, or suspension or absolution that has been sent him from his
Ordinary?

33 Has your Minister been at any private me etings or conuenticles, to
consult there, about the impeachment or deprauing of the Doctrine of the Church
of England, or of the Book of Common Prayer, or of any part of the government
and discipline of the Church; or to practice any form of their own, either
for worship or discipline?

34 Does your Minister, upon Sundays at Morning Prayer, declare unto the
parishioners what Fasting-dayes and Holy Days are to be kept, the week
following?

35 Does your Minister in the Rogation-dayes, go the perambulation of the
circuit of your Parish, saying and using the Prayers, Suffrages, and
Thanksgiving unto God, appointed by Law, according to his duty; thanking God,
for his blessings, and praying for his grace and favor?

36 Does your Parson or Uicar maintain and keep in due reparation, the
Mansion House, and all other edifices belonging to his Parsonage or Uicarage,
without suffering them to grow into ruin or decay?

37 Has your Minister taken upon him, to appoint, or to hold or continue any
private or public Fasts, or meetings, for preaching or lecturing on any
working-day, in his own Parish or elsewhere, or prophesies or exercises, or
any other such thing, not approved by his Ordinary for the time being?

38 Is your Minister studious in holy Scripture, and abstaineth from
mechanical trades, bodily labor, soliciting of causes in Law, common buying
and selling of Horses or other Cattle, and all other employments not befitting
his calling and holy Function? Does he usually wear a Gown with a standing
collar, and sleeves strait at the hands, and a square Cap* Does he in
iourneying use a cloak with sleeves, commonly called a Priests-clerke, without
guards, buttons or cuts? Does he at any time in public wear any coife or
wrought nightcap, but only a plain cap of black silk, satin, or vel^et: Does
he at any time go abroad in his doublet and hose without a coat or cassock, or
wear any light colored stockings? Or is he any way excessie in apparel,
either himself or his wife?

39 Is your Minister suspected, or known to have obtained his Benefice by any
Simonai^^ll compact, directly or indirectly? Or is he reputed to be an
incontinent person, a frequenter of Tauernes, Innes, or Alehouses, a common
gamester or player at dice or cards, a common swearer or drunkard, or otherwise
faulty in any other kind that is scandalous to his function?

40 Has your Minister publikly in your Parish Church or Chapel, once every
year read over the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical agreed upon by the
Clergy of both Provinces, An^o Dom 1603. in such manner as the same is
commanded to be done?

41 Is there any in your Parish or resorting thereunto, who having taken holy
Orders of Priest or Deacon, does voluntarily relinquish and forsake^h h^s
calling, and lives in the course of his life as a Layman? Or any that having
been sil^nced, or suspended by authority, so remains without conforming
himself in due obedience to the Church? And how does he employ his time; and
where or whence has he his maintenance, as you know or have heard?

42 Are any admitted to preach in your Church, who do not before the
Churchwardens subscribe their na^^s in your book provided for that purpose, and
the day when he or they preached, and the name of the Bishop or Bishops of whom
they had license to preach?

43 Does any Preacher particularly impugn and confute any doctrine delivered
by any other Preacher in the same Church, or in any Church near adjoining,
before he has acquainted the Bishop of the Dioces therewith, and received
order from him, what to do in that ease?

44 Have you any Lecturer in your Parish, and on what day is your Lecture? If
any such be, does he, twice at the least every year, read divine Service both
morning and evening, two several Sundays, publicly in his Surplice and Hood?
And also twice in the year administer both Sacraments, with such Rites and
Ceremonies as are prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer?

45 Does the Lecturer (whosoever he be) read the divine Service according to
the Liturgy printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood before every
Lecture?

46 Does your Preacher or Lecturer behave himself in his Lectures and Sermons,
as he ought to do, teaching obedience, and edifying his auditory in matters of
faith and good life, without intermedling with matters of State, or news, or
other discourses not fit for the Pulpit; and also without favoring or abetting
Schismatics or Separatists (that are at home, or are gone abroad) either by
special prayer for them, or by any other approbation of them?

47 Have you any Lecture of Combination set up in your Parish? And if so, is it
read by a company of grave and orthodox Divines, near adjoining, and in the
same Dioces? And does every one of them preach in a Gown and not in a Cloak?
And when and by whom were they appointed? And what be their names?

48 Is any single Lecturer (maintained by your Town or otherwise) suffered to
preach, he not first pro^essing his willingness to take upon him the cure of
souls, nor actually taking a Benefice or Cure, so soon as it may be fairly
procured for him? What is his name, and what license has he? And has he a
settled contribution affixed to the Lecturers place; or is it arbitrary, and for
this Lecturer only? What sum does it amount to ordinarily? By whom is it
usually paid or collected, or of late years has been?

49 If any Psalms be used to be sung in your Church, before or after the
morning and evening prayer, or before or after the Sermons (upon which
occasions only, they are allowed to be sung in Churches) is it done according
to that grave manner (which first was in use) that such do sing as can read
the Psalms, or have learned them by heart; and not after that vncough and
indecent custom of late taken up, to have every line first read, and then sung
by the people?

Chap. 5. Concerning Matrimony.
BE there any in your Parish, that have married within the degrees of affinity
or consanguinity, by the Law of God forbidden, as is expressed in a certain
Table published by authority in Anno 1563. And if any have so married, what be
their names, and where were they married, and by whom?

2 Has any been married secretly in private houses, or without their Parents
or Governors consent signified, being under the age of 21. years?

3 Have any persons been married in your Parish, the Banes having not been
thrice published, three several Sundays or Holidays, in time of divine
Service? Who were the parties, and who were present at such marriages; and what
Minister married them?

4 Have any persons by license or without, been married in your Parish Church,
neither of them at that time dwelling in your town? Or has any marriage (that
you know or have heard of) been made at any time, by license or without, but
between the hours of eight and twelve in the morning? Or was not the divine
Service then openly and duly said, the Assembly being called together by the
tolling or ringing of the Bells, as is at other times used? Or has the Minister
solemnized any marriage (without Banes published) by virtue of any License
granted by the Archdeacon or his Official, or by any other license then of
the Archbishop or Bishop of this Dioces, or their Chancellours, Commissaries,
or Uicars general, or the Commissary for faculties. And has any License been
granted by any to such persons as were not of good state and quality? Name the
persons and all particulars, as far as you know, or can remember?

5 What popish Recusants, or their children have been married in your parish?
In what sort was the matrimony solemnized? when? and by whom?

6 Do any persons being lawfully married, live asunder? and in whom is the
default?

7 Do any (heretofore divorced or not) keep company at bed and board, with
any other man or woman, then with the person that he and she were married to?
what be their names? when and where were they married, and how long have they
continued so together?

8 Have you any in your Parish, which live together as man and wife, and yet
not known, by whom, where, or when they were married?

9 Have all new-maried persons (the same day of their marriage) duly received
the holy Communion? If not, by whose default was it, as you conceive?

Chap. 6. Concerning the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
BE the Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners yearly in
Easter-weeke, according to the 89. Canon? And has any taken upon him to be
Churchwarden, not being so chosen? Or has any continued above one year in
his office, without a new choice?

2 Have any of the Churchwardens retained any of the Church-goods in their
hands, and not made a just account at their going out of their office, of what
they have received and expended; or not delivered to their successors, by Bill
indented between them, whatsoever money or other things belonging to the
Church, that remained in their hands?

3 Are there in your Parish yearly, two, three, or more discreet persons,
either chosen by the Ministers and Parishioners in Easter-weeke; or if they
cannot agree, appointed by the Ordinary to be Sidemen, or Assistants in joint
office with the Churchwardens?

4 What rates or leuies (as you know or have heard) are yearly or commonly
made in your parish for Church-uses? What is the yearly sum thereof
ordinarily? and what are the particular uses, or where are they written down,
to which the same are for the most part employed?

5 Do the Churchwardens and Sides-men or Assistants, diligently see, that all
the Parishioners do duly resort to the Church, upon all Sundays and
Holidays, and there continue the whole time of divine Service and Sermon;
suffering no idle persons to walk, or talk, or stand idle, either in the
Church, Churchyard, or Church Porch, during the time of divine Service or
Sermon; but causing them either to come into the Church, or else to depart? And
have they the said Churchwardens and Sidemen forborne, either for reward,
favor, or affection, to present them, that have been, or are negligent in
coming to Church, or that use to walk or talk therein, or that have been
found by them standing idle, or talking abroad, either in the Churchyard or
streets in the time of divine Service or Sermon, on Sundays or Holidays; or
that have not received the Communion yearly, at the Feast of Easter, or within
one month after?

6 Do you know of any Churchwardens, which within forty days after Easter,
in their year, did not exhibit to the Bishop or his Chancellor, the namer and
sirnames of all the parishioners, as well men as women, which (being of the age
of 16. years and upward) received not the Communion the Easter before? And
have you, this last year exhibited a bill of them? or are you ready now so to
do?

7 Do the Churchwardens against every Communion, advise with the Minister,
about the providing of a sufficient quantity of fine white-bread, and of good
and wholesome wine, for the number of Communicants that are to receive? And is
the wine brought in a clean and sweet standing Pot of Pewter, or of other
finer metal? Upon the Communion days, do your Churchwardens (immediately
after the Sermon or Homily, and the Ministers exhortation to remember the
poor) gather the devotion of the people in a fair and solemn manner, and put
the same into the poor man's bore?

8 Have the Churchwardens suffered the Church, Churchyard, or Chapel, to be
profaned by Plays, games, feasts, banquets, suppers, church-ales, drinkings,
temporal Courts, or Leets, Lay-iuries, musters, etc. at any time acted, kept,
or held in them?

9 Has any man, that you know or have heard of, by speech or writing, or upon
the assertion of any other man affirmed; That men ought not to take the office,
or the Oath of a Churchwarden, or of presenting at the Bishops visitation? Or
that the said Oath is unlawfully given them; Or that being taken, it is but of
course, and binds them not, nor need to be regarded; Or that (the said Oath
notwithstanding) it is free for them, neither to make inquiry, nor to answer;
but to do what they list, and to leave out and pass by whom they will, and
what they will, in their presentiments?

Chap. 7. Concerning the Parishioners.
1 Do any in your Parish profane any Sunday or Holiday, by any unlawful
gaming, drinking or tippling in Tauernes, Innes, or Alehouses, in the time of
Common Prayer or Sermon; or by working, or doing the work of their Trades and
Occupations? Do any in your Parish buy or sell, or keep open their Shops, or
set out any wares to be sold on Sundaies, or Holidayes, by themselves, their
servants or apprentices; or have they any otherways profaned the said days?
And has the Kings Declaration concerning the lawful sports and recreations
been published among you, yea or no? If so, when was it done, in what manner,
and by whom?

2 Is the fifth day of November observed and kept in your Parish, with Prayer
and Thanksgiving unto God, in such Form, as is by Public Authority appointed
for that Day?

3 Is there any in your Parish that has been heard to impugn or speak
against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawful use
of them; or to affirm by word or writing, that the form of Making and
Consecrating Bishops, Priests and Deacons, or any thing therein contained, is
repugnant to the word of God; or that the Gouer^ment of this Church under his
Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Officers, is
Antichristian? Or has spoken reproachfully, or disgracefully of the Kings
Majesty's Courts Ecclesiastical, or of the proceedings thereof?

4 Have you any in your Parish, that do come to the Sermon only, and not to
Divine Service; or which use to come late to Church, and to depart from Church
before the Blessing be given, wherewith they are to be dismissed at the end of
Service? Or that do not reverently behave themselves, entering into the Church,
and during the time of Divine Service? Do all (both men and women) devoutly
kneel, when the General confession of sins, the Letanie, the Ten
Commandments, and all Prayers and Collects are read, as well at Baptismes,
Marriages and Burials, as at other parts of the Divine Service? Do all use due
and lowly reverence, when the blessed Name of the Lord JESUS is mentioned: and
stand up when the Articles of the Creed are read? Do any men cover their heads
in the Church, (unless it be for infirmity, in which case, they may only were
a coife or nightcap,) or then and there give themselves to babbling, talking or
walking, and are not attentive to the Prayers and Hymns, and to hear Gods word
read and preached? Do all say Amen audibly, and make such other answers both
in the Letanie, and all other parts of divine Service, as by the Rule of the
Common Prayer book, are to be made by the people?

5 Does any within your Parish, men or women, being sixteen years of age and
upwards, or any other, lodging or commonly resorting to any house in your
Parish, wilfully absent themselves, from your Parish Church or Chapel, upon
Sundays and Holidays and other days appointed, at morning and evening
prayers, or refuse to receive the Communion, or persuade others from coming to
Church, or receiving the holy Communion?

6 Have you any popish or puritanicall Recusants in your Parish, that be of
insolent behavior, not without public offense; or that do boldly busy
themselves in seducing or withdrawing others, either abroad, or in their own
Families, from the Religion established in ye Church of England? And how long
have the said popish or puritanicall Recusants obstinately abstained, either
from divine Service, or from the Communion? Whether of any long time, or of
late only?

7 Are there any in your Parish, who do absent themselves at any time from your
own Church, and do resort to any other Parish or place to hear other
preachers? Or are there any in your Parish, that do communicate, or that do
baptize their children in any other Parish?

8 Is there within your Parish in any house or family, any one that is called
or reputed a Chaplain, or that is known or supposed to have entered into holy
Orders? Or any that lives there in employment as a scholar? Present their
names if there be any such, and how long they have been there?

9 Is there any in your Parish, who do refuse to have their children baptized,
or themselves to receive the Communion, at the hand of your Minister, because
he is no Preacher, or does not edify in their fancy?

10 Does any married woman within your Parish, after childe-birth neglect to
come to Church according to the Book of Common Prayer to give thanks to God
for her safe deliverance, veiled in a decent manner, as has been anciently
accustomed? And does she then kneel in some convenient place nigh to the
Communion Table, w^ile the Priest (standing by her) gives thanks for her? And
if there be a Communion, does she then offer her accustomed offerings and
receive the holy Communion?

11 Are there within your Parish or thereunto resorting, any players on Stage,
or with Puppets, or any Musicians, Fiddlers, Rimers, or Iesters, which do use
any profane or filthy passages, in their songs, speeches, or gestures, to the
dishonor of God, abuse of Scripture, or the corrupting of good manners; or
which do publish any thing scandalous to the State, or reproachful to the Holy
Clergy?

12 Have you any in your Parish that are commonly known, or reputed to be
blasphemers of Gods holy Name, common and usual swearers, drunkards, usurers,
filthy speakers, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, bawds, concealers
of fornicators or adulterers? Have any in your Parish been detected of such
notorious crimes, and what penance have they done for the same?

13 What corporal punishment for any such offense, has been commuted and
changed into a pecuniary mulct or sum of money, by any Ecclesiastical Judge
exercising jurisdiction within this Dioces, by virtue of any Grant or
Commission? What was the sum of money by any of them so received and taken, and
to what uses was the same employed? And upon such Commutations, was the
unfeigned repentance of the delinquent published in the Church?

14 Do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistrisses, cause their children,
servants and apprentises to come to the public catechizing on Sundays and
Holidays, to be instructed and taught therein? And those that do not their
duties herein, in not sending them to it, or not coming, or not learning and
answering, you shall present their names?

15 Have any in your Parish received or harbored any women gotten with-childe
out of wedlock, and suffered her to depart without punishment first inflicted
on her by the Ordinary? You shall truly present as well the party harboring,
as harbored; and who is suspected to be the father of the child?

16 Is any person or persons suspected or detected heretofore of incontinency
and therefore departing out of your Parish for a season, now returned again? Or
in what place else is he or she now abiding to your knowledge, or as you have
heard? You shall not fail to present the whole truth in that behalf?

17 Do all your Parishioners, of what sort soever, according as the Church
expressly them commands, draw near, and with all Christian humility and
reverence come to the Lords Table, when they are to receive the holy Communion?
And not (after the most contemptuous and unholy usage of some, if men did
rightly consider) sit still in their Seats or Pewes, to have the blessed Body
and Blood of our Savior go up and down, to seek them all the Church over?

18 Are there any lately deceased in your Parish, whose last Wills and
Testaments have not yet been proved? or did they dye intestate? And if so, who
has taken upon him the administration of their goods, and whether by lawful
authority from the Ordinary, or without? What be the names of such deceased,
and of their executors and administrators?

19 What persons be excommunicated in your Parish, and for what cause to your
knowledge? and how long have they stood excommunicate? And do any of them, not
being absolved, presume to be present in the Church at divine Service? And do
any familiarly use the company of such as do obstinately stand excommunicate,
knowing the same; and what be their names?

20 Do you know of any that have abused the Churchwardens, or other sworn
men of your Parish, or given them evil words for executing their office, or to
disharten and deter them from executing it, as by oath and duty they are bound?

Chap. 8. Concerning Schoolmasters, Physicians, Chyrurgions, Midwives, and
Parish-Clarkes.
Have you any Schoolmasters in your Parish, that teaches publicly or in
private houses? Is there any teaching of Scholars to read or write in the
Chancell, or in any part of the Church? Does any Papist keep a Schoolmaster
in his house, who comes not to Church to hear divine Service and to receive
the holy Communion? What is his name, and how long has he taught there or
elsewhere? Does your Schoolmaster teach any Papists or Sectaries children,
that come not to Church? Does he bring his scholars to church, and duly
instruct them all to learn the Catechism in the Book of Common Prayer, at
the least once every week; or what other Catechism does he teach? Is he of
honest and sincere life, and religion, and conversation? Is he a Graduate and
sufficient to teach, and diligent in teaching and bringing up of youth?

2 Is any thing withheld and otherwise employed, that has been given to
the use of a School in your Parish? What is it? By whom is it imbezelled?

3 What Physician or Chyrurgion have you in your Parish, who not being a Doctor
of Physic or otherwise sufficiently licensed in either of the Uniuersities,
does notwithstanding practice physic? What other persons have you among you,
either male or female, who take upon them to profess physic or chyrurgery?
And who be Midwiues in your parish?

4 Have you a fit Parish-Clark (aged 20. years at least) of honest life, able
to read and write? Are his and the Sextons wages duly paid without fraud or
diminution, according to the ancient custom of your Parish? By whom is he
chosen? Is he diligent in his office, and serviceable to the Minister? Does he
keep the Church clean and the doors locked? Is there any thing lost or
spoiled, by his default?

5 Does your Clarke or Sexton take upon him to have, or suffer any
superstitious or any unseasonable ringing of the bells at any time, or any
ringing without good cause, such as the Minister and Churchwardens have not
allowed? When notice is given of any Christian passing out of this life, within
the Parish, does he neglect to toll a passing bell, or to ring after the
departure?

Chap. 9. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
WHat peculiar or exempt jurisdictions know you of, within ye compass of this
parish?

2 Are there any Ecclesiastical Officers exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Diocese, or any Ministers or Clerks under them, who
do take or exact any extraordinary fees, for any cause that you know of?

3 Have any Churchwardens and Quest-men, concealed and not presented any
abuses or offenses punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court? Or have any such
offenses, being by them presented to the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Commissary,
Official, or any other using Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within this
Diocese, been suppressed, or left unpunished, for bribe, reward, pleasure,
friendship, fear, or any other partial respect?

4 Are any Assemblies called Uestry-meetings, held in your Parish? when, and
how often are they? In what place, and by whom? Has any thing (that you have
heard of) been proposed, treated, or concluded therein, touching the divine
Service, or the doctrine and discipline of the Church? Or any thing meddled
with, for the government of the Church or Parish, which belongs to the
Ecclesiastical cognition and Jurisdiction?

5 Does the Archdeacon once in three years, visit and survey your Church,
touching the repaires of the same, and upon any defect found, has he made
certificate of it, as far as you know or have heard?

6 Are there placed by the Registrar, two Tables containing the several rates
and sums of all fees due to the Judge, and other officers of your Courts; one
in the usual place or consistory, where the Court is kept; the other in the
Registry; in such sort as every man may come to view the same without
difficulty? And does the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Commissary, or Official, or
any other Minister of the Court, exact or extort any other greater fees or sums
of money, than in the said Tables are contained?

7 Does any Archdeacon, Official, or Surrogate under him, make commutation of
any penance; or does the Chancellor or any Commissary, or any Surrogate under
any, commute or change any penance or corporal punishment, for any money,
without the consent of the Bishop? And what money have they or any of them
received for such commutation, and of whom? when, and what was the offense, for
which any such sum of money was received, or appointed to be paid?

8 Does the Chancellor, Archdeacon, Commissary, or Official, or any other
person using Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, speed any act in any cause,
privately of themselves, and not in the presence of some public Notary or
Actuary?

9 Is the number of Apparitors increased in this Diocese? And wherein, and in
what manner is the Country ouer-burthened or grieved by them? Has any of them
under pretense of authority, cited or summoned any person unlawfully; or has
any of them taken any reward for the concealing of any offense or sin, or that
the offenders might escape punishment? Who be they that have so done? Or do
any of them take any fees that are not usual? Have they threatened any to
prosecute them, if they had no reward given them? Or do any of them cause any
party to appear in any Ecclesiastical Court within this Diocese, without a
citation first obtained from the Judge of the Court?

10 Has any Ecclesiastical Judge or Officer whatsoever, Advocate, Registrer,
Procter, Clerk, or other such Ministers, any way abused themselves in their
Offices, contrary to the Laws and Canons in that behalf provided?

11 Were there any particular or special injunctions given (as you know, or
have heard) by the Uicar general or any other Commissioner, at the last
Metropoliticall Uisitation of the most Reverend the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace? And how have the same been performed or observed by the
Minister or any other of the Parish, whom they concern?

12 Lastly, have you and every of you, by your selves, read, or have caused to
be read to you, all these Articles? Have you well examined and inquired into
every particular therein intended? Have you sincerely, uprightly, and without
any partial affection or concealment, presented and made known all and every
of the offenders in any of the particulars, either as they are taken in truth
to be, or by common fame reported?

If you know any other matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance, worthy the
presentment in your judgment and fit to be reformed by Ecclesiastical
censure, though it be not expressed in these Articles, yet you shall likewise
present the same by virtue of your oaths.

The Minister also of every Parish may and ought to join with the
Churchwardens, or other Sworne-men, for the presenting of offenses; and if
they be so irreligious as not to do it, the Minister of himself may and ought
to present the offenses, or the Churchwardens and Quest-men, for not
presenting, and is required in his Canonical obedience so to do.

There must be distinct answer made to every Article, and to every branch
thereof, as far as they know, or have heard of any offense.

And if (their Oath and all this advertisement notwithstanding) any
Churchwardens or other Sworne-men, shall follow the customary manner, and be
careless in inquiring and presenting as they ought, then shall they not be
able hereafter to say, that they had not fair warning to the contrary given
them in the spirit of meekness; or to complain that they are hardly dealt
with, if (upon information and proof otherwise had) they be called to answer
their wilful perjury, in some other course of justice, for neglecting to
inquire and present to all the particulars herein proposed?

And to the intent that all things above mentioned may (by the help of God) as
well be kept, as set in good order, the Chancellor of the Diocese, and all the
Commissaries are hereby required, that so far as to them in their several
places it shall appertain, when the Synods and Generals are holden
respectively, they do faithfuly inquire after all these things, and in all
places of their Jurisdictions exact a due observance of the same.

The Parson, Uicar or Curate of this Parish is required to receive this Book,
and upon the Sunday next after the receipt hereof, immediately after the Morning
Service, to publish the contents of the Process which is sent forth. That all
Preachers and Lecturers (if there be any in the Parish) together with the
Churchwardens both of this present year and of the last year, and two or
three of the chiefest parishioners beside, as also all Physicians,
Schoolmasters, Chyrurgions, Midwiues, and Sequestrators, may take notice of
the day and place specified in the said Process, for appearance at the Lord
Bishops Uisitation: and after publication so made, this book of Articles is to
be presently delivered to some of the said Churchwardens, for the use of
themselves and the rest that are to make Presentiments.

Ma. Norvicen.

FINIS.

