AN ABSTRACT, OF CERTAIN Acts of parliament: of certain her Majesty's
Injunctions: of certain Canons, Constitutions, and Synodalles provincial:
established and in force, for the peaceable government of the Church, within
her Majesty's Dominions and Countries, for the most part heretofore unknown
and vnpractized.

Cod. de Epis. and Cler. l. Nulli licere. Neither let them fear, to be called
and suspected pickthankes, seeing their faythfulnesse, and diligent travel
carries with it, as well praise, as honesty and godly zeal; having published
the truth to the ears of all men, and brought it to the open light.

PROVER. 31. 8. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all the children
of destruction.

To the Christian Reader.
THou have seen (beloved) by long experience, a lamentable contention, to have
grown and continued in our English Church, about reformation of
Ecclesiastical discipline and popish ceremonies, whereby the quiet and
peaceable estate, both of the Church and common wealth, have been shrewdly
troubled and brought in hazard. The causes of which war and dissension, I
leave to the good consideration of thy godly wisdom, only I am to entreat
thee, to accept this my labor bestowed, upon the study of the laws, appointed
for the governance of the same Church, hoping that by the authority of her
excellent majesty, and the counsel of the honorable fathers and governors
of her highness empire: they may hereafter, not only be better executed, but
also, if the case so require be reuisited. For were the same Laws either
better known unto the whole church, either better executed by those unto whom
our gracious Sovereign, has committed their Execution, no dout, but very many
and notable points of such controversies, as have been a long time amongst us,
would be easily and speedily by the same laws decyded. I am not (beloved) in
this so weighty a cause, absolutely to rest my self upon the skill of mine own
simple judgment: only according to the knowledge given unto me, I have for my
part, faithfully labored to cite the law, for that end and purpose, whereunto
I take the same to have been first ordained. And therefore I am heartilye to
desire thee, to accept of this my labor and trauail: undertaken, not only for
the defense of her highness Laws, but also for my brethren and neighbors
sakes, and that peace and prosperity, might be within the walls and palaces
of Jerusalem: Farewell, and pray in thy spirit, for the preservation of the
life of our gracious Queen Elizabeth.

An Abstract of certain Acts of Parliament: of her Majesty's Injunctions,
Canons, and Synodals Prouincial: established, and in force for the peaceable
government of the Church within her Majesty's Dominions; heretofore for the
most part unknown and vnpractized
BY an act of Parliament, made the 25. H 8. C. 19. entitled, An act concerning
the submission of the Clergy. etc. It was enacted as follows.

Provided also, that such Canons, constitutions, ordinances, and Synodals
provincial, being already made, which be not contrariant nor repugnant to the
laws, statutes, and customs of this realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the
kings prerogative royal, shall now still be used and executed as they were before
the making of this act, etc. This act is revived 1. Eliza. ca. 1. Out of this
act I conclude, that al Canons, constitutions, ordinances, and synodals
prouincial, made before this act: requiring and commanding a learned Ministry,
prohibiting many benefices to be given to one man: prohibiting civil
jurisdiction to be in Ecclesiastical men, and prohibiting one man to
excommunicate, for that such Canons, etc. cannot be contrary or repugnant to
the laws of this realm, nor hurtful to the kings prerogative, are in force,
and ought to be executed: and therefore by this act, all the Canons specified
in any part of my treatise are in force, and so by virtue of this act, a
learned ministry commanded: Plurallities forbidden. etc.

A learned Ministry commanded by the Law.
Ex: De elect Cap. Nihil est.
NIHIL EST etc. There is nothing that may hurt more the Church of God, then
that men unworthy are taken to the gournment of souls. We therefore willing
to apply a medicine to this disease, decree by an inviolable constitution,
that when any shall be chosen to the government of souls, he (to whom the
confirmation of his election appertains) diligently examine both the process
of the election, and the person elected: to the end, that if all things
concur aright, he may confirm him in his function. For otherwise if any
thing shall be unadvisedly attempted, not only ^e that is unworthily promoted,
but also the unworthy promoter him self, shall be punished: and if any man
shall approve any of insufficient learning, of an unchaste life, or not of
lawful age, when his negligence herein shall appear, we decree him to be
punished thus, not only that he be ^uite deprived of power to confirm the next
successor: but least by any means he might escape unpunished that he be also
suspended from the commodity of his own benefie. Out of which constitution,
these conclusions may briefly thus be gathered. 1 Whatsoever is hurtful to the
Church of God, the same is to be forbidden. 2 But it is hurtful to the Church
of God, to have unworthy men taken to the government of souls. 3 Therefore
the same is to be forbidden.
1 He that cannot worthily execute his office, is ^ot to be admitted to holy
orders, and Eccle^asticall dignities. 2 But a man of insufficient learning, and
of dishonest conversation, can not worthily execute his office. 3 Therefore such
a one, is not to be admitted to Ecclesiastical dignities.


IF any judge the meaning of this Chapter, to be only of superior Prelates,
as Archbishops, bishops, Abbotes, or such like, elected by some common society
of canons, Monks, Friars, or collegiat Priests, (because of these words,
Election and Confirmation, properly applied to such) and not to inferior
Ministers (which are properly said to be presented, and instituted:) then is
such both diligently to mark the reason of the decree, providing a remedy
against the detriment; that might redounde, to the Church in both cases, if for
both remedy were not before hand provided: And also to understand, that the
name of Prelate, is by law attributed likewise to every Parson, and Vicar,
having cure of souls: D. ex. de cleric aegrotant c. sua and glos. lynd. Consti
de sacra. iterand. c. ignorantia verse. prelati.
Quia quilibet qui praeest curae animarum dicitur esse Prelatus. Every one that
is preferred to the cure of souls is named by this name Prelate: And also that
election and confirmation in, and to the superior functions, have but the very
same effect, to the obtaining of their promotions, that presentation, and
institution, have to the inferior Ministers, for enjoying of their benefices
then is such: (I say) to consider all these things, together with the end of
the chapter, where special charge is given for inferior offices. And so no
doubt he will forthwith conceive the truth, and surcease this surmise, for
otherwise the decree following shall convince him manifestly of an error.

Ex. de penit. and remissio. c cum in^mitas. The souls is first to be cured.
PRESENTI DECRETO, etc. By this present decree, we charge and straightly
command, that the Physicians for the body, when they shall be called to any
sick persons, they first varne, and induce, the patients, to call for the
Physicians of their ^ules, that when they shall have provision for spiritual
health, they may proceed to the more wholesome remedy of bodily health,
considering, the cause ceasing, the effect likewise cease. Here you see the
law is general, and extends to all in general, as well to poor gentlemen
and poor parishioners, as to greasy Monks, Friars and Canons, seeing the
souls of both, may be infected, and the reasons may be thus gathered. 1 That
which is most precious is first to be cured, and that which is spiritually
diseased, is spiritually to be cured. 2 But every man's soul is most precious;
and every man's soul is spiritually diseased. 3 Therefore every man's soul
ought first to be cured: and every man's soul ought spiritually to be cured.


OVt of which conclusion follows this co^sequent, namely, sithence every soul
is spiritually infected, and every soul spiritually infected, must be
spiritually cured, that therefore every soul ought to have a spiritual
Physician, able to apply a spiritual medicine, and to cure his spiritual
disease: otherwise it were absurd, to command, that spiritual diseases should
be healed, without spiritual physicians appointed to that purpose. But this is
too too plain; we will proceed.

Ex. de aetat. and quali. c. penult.
CVM SIT ARS ARTIVM, etc. Considering the government of souls, is an Art of
all Arts, we straightly command, that the Bishops, either by themselves, or
by other fit men do instruct or diligently inform, them that are to be
promoted to be Priests, touching holy offices and Ecclesiastical Sacraments,
how they may be able, rightly to celebrate them. For if they shall henceforth
presume to ordeine such as are unskillful, and ignorant, we decree that both
they that do ordain, and they that are ordained, be subject to grievous
punishment. For it is a thing more holy, especially in the promotion of
Clergy men, to have a few good Ministers; then a great many evil, because of
the blind, lead the blind, they both shall fall into the ditch. 1 Unskillful
and ignorant men, ought not to be admitted to an office, wherein greatest
knowledge and cunning is required. 2 But to the government of men's souls,
greatest knowledge, and greatest cunning is required. 3 Therefore to the
government of the souls of men, unskillful and ignorant men are not to be
admitted.


THe first proposition is proved by two reasons, the one a comparatis by a
comparison: the other ab euentu, from the event. The second proposition, is the
reason of the law it self, because the government of souls, is ars artium,
a cunning past all cunninges. The former reason, which is by way of comparison
is evident. It is a thing much more holy to have a little good then much evil,
Whereunto agrees that which is written in the 23 distinction chap. tales.
Tales ad ministerium eligantur clerici, qui digne possunt, etc. Let such
Clearkes be chosen unto the ministry, which may worthily handle the Lords
Sacraments. For it is better to have a few Ministers, which may worthily
exercise the work of God, then many unprofitable etc. In Cod. De veter. lure
enuclea. l. 55 contrarium. Authen. De tabell coll 4. Authen. De referen. in
sine. coll. 2.
And in like case the Emperor. Melius est pauca idonie effundere, quam multis
inutilibus pregrauari, and melius est pauca agere caute, quam multis periculose
interesse: and multitudo on erosa, nihil habet honesti. It is better to utter a
few things aptly, then to burden men, with man^ things unprofitably: And it is
better to do a few things warely, then to be conuersaunt in many things
daungerously. And a multitude altogether burdensome, has no show of honesty.
And again, the Canon concludes, Tutius-est ea sine periculo ex necessitate
quae legem non habet omittere, etc. It is more safe to omit those things
without danger, upon necessity which has no law: then that through rashness
condemned by law, they should not without great danger be vainly conferred.
Whereas a certain shadow only may appear in the deed but no truth follow in
effect. Al which principles by common experience, are so well and familiarly
known unto every one of us, that they need few colors to paint them out. For
as touching our food and diet, our furniture and apparel: our pastimes and
pleasures: our business and affairs, we can every mothers son, deem it far
better, to have a little sweet and wholesome meat cleanly dressed, than many
dishes vnsauourly seasoned: that a woman fine and neat in simple attire, is
more to be commended, then one vngainely apparrelled in sumptuous robes. That a
man were better to keep one proper horse, or one high flying Fawcon a kilduck,
then ten resty iades, or ten bangling bussardes. That one discreet, painful,
and diligent servant, will do his master more honesty, and get him more lucre
and advantage, then twenty idle and loytering merchaunts. And can we be so
provident for our bodily sustenance: so vigilant for our earthly pleasures, and
so circumspect for our worldly affairs: and shall we be altogether blocks,
and without all sense of understanding, what is most healthful, most pleasant,
and most profitable for our souls? Can we be wise touching the affairs of
this life, and shall we be foolish for the life to come? Can we be heedfull,
for matters momentanie, and of no value, or continuance: and shall we be
heedlesse, in matters of eternity, and such as concern our beatitude for ever?
If any man think that a few good ministers, will not serve to bring the people
of God, unto God: will he therefore conclude, that he may lawfully appoint many
Ministers of the devils culling, to bring them to the devil? The second reason
is taken from the sequel or event which might happen, if remedy were not
sought. If the blind lead the blind, they both shall fall into the ditch. 15.
Distinc. and nomine Constitutio. Otho. quam ad venerabiles.
And it has many other grounds and conclusions of law, to sound it self
upon: namely. Talis debet eligi, cuius comparatione, caeteri grex dicantur. Et
minister, debet esse forma gregis, ad quam se debent subditi reformare: and
debent esse ministri in exemplum, quasi signa posita ad sugittandum. Such a man
ought to be chosen to have the charge of a flock, in comparison of whom the
multitude he has to govern; may in deed be called a flock: and the minister,
ought to be the form of the flock, whereunto the inferior sort ought to
reform them selves: and the Ministers ought to be examples and as marks for
others to shoot at. These grounds, and reasons, amongst the greatest part of
our Ministers, have had no place or interteinment at al, but are utterly turned
topsy turuie. For where by these Maxims, they should be seers: where they
should go, and step before others in knowledge, as guides to conduct them:
where they should for their piety, and honest conversation, be patterns for
others to square out their actions by: where they should be marks, for people
to aim, and shoot at, they be now for the most part, clean contrary, even the
very tailinges, and garbage of the people, and such as can scarce say B. to a
battledore. Marks in deed to aim at, but such as the nearer a man should
shoot at, the more it would be his hinderaunce. Examples in deed they be, but
alas such examples, as it rueth, good men to see, how many by them are drawn
to ungodliness, and vnhonestye, to Alehouse haunting, to dicing, to table
playing, to Carding, to bowling, to bearebayting, yea and that on the Lords
day too: But I say, that notwithstanding these things be thus abused, yet the
law prescribes still how they should be better used, as follows.

Li. vi. de elect c licet. Canon.
LICET CANON, etc. Although the Canon of Alexander the third our predecessor,
among other things did ordain, that none should take upon him the government
of any parish Church, unless he had accomplished the age of 25. years, and
were commendable for his knowledge and honesty: yet because in the observation
of the foresaid Canon, many have showed themselves negligent. We by execution,
of Law, willing to supply their perilous negligence, ordain by this present
decree, that non be admitted to the government of any parish Church, unless
he be fit for his manners, for his knowledge, and for his age.

And again, INFERIORA MINISTERIA, etc. Let no man take upon him, the inferior
ministeries: as a Deanrie, an Archdeaconrie, and others that have cure of
souls annexed; neythar yet the charge of a parrishe Church, unless he have
accomplished the age of 25. years, and be to be approved for his knowledge and
conversation.

These constitutions do expressly prohibit any person to be admitted to the
government of souls, and so to any parish Church, that is not qualified (as
you here) and why? Non conuenit talem aliis praefici in Magistrum, qui nondum
se nouit esse discipulum. It is unseemly that such a one be appointed a master
over others, which as yet has not known him self to be a disciple. And
again. 49. Destinc. cap. sacerdotes. Authen de sanct. epis. Damus. ff. De
^curio. L honores. 3 cap. distinc. Glos. consti. Otho cum sit ars.
Debet promotus esse literatus, quia cum ipse debet alios docere, non debet
ipse discere. He that is promoted ought to be learned, in as much, as he taking
upon him to teach others, him self ought not now to learn. And again.
Honores and munera non ordinationi, sed potioribus iniungenda sunt. Honors and
offices are to be given to the best approved, and not to an ordination alone.
And again. Debet promotus omni poscenti reddere rationem. He that is promoted
ought to give a reason to every one that asks. And again. Cura animarum
debet vigiliis onerosa esse, and sollicita, vt iste cui committitur, curet ne
pereant subditi, sed saluentur. The charge of souls ought through
watchfulness to be painful and careful, that he to whom it is committed be
diligent to foresee that the people perish not, but rather that they may be
saved. And again. 8 q. 1. Licet. ergo.
Et qui doctior est and sanctior, est eligendus. And he that is the more
learned and the more holy, is to be chosen. And even upon the self same
reason: namely, that the souls of the people, should not be in peril for want
of teaching: It is ordained that no Church with cure of souls, should be
destitute, above a certain time prefixed and lymited, for the provision of
some man able to guide the people.

Ex De elec. Ne pro Defectu.
NE PRO DEFECTV, etc. Least for want of a Pastor the ravening Wolf should
destroy the Lord his flock: or that a Widow Church, should suffer great
hinderaunce in her substance: we willing in this case, both to meet with the
peril that might happen to souls, and also to provide for the indemnities of
the Churches, do ordain that a Cathedral Church or regular Church, be not
void above three months. Peril of souls, the cause why a time is limited,
for the placing of a Pastor within certain Months.
And again, even for the self same causes and considerations in the Chapter.
Nulla ex. de concessio. prebend. And in the Chapter. Quoniam ex. de iure
patro, It is commanded that if a lay man, or Clergy man, Patron of a
benefice, present not his Clearke, the one within six months, the other
within four months: That then afterward it shall and may be lawefull for
the superior to supply their negligence, and to place one able to go in, and
out before the people, to guide them, to teach and instruct them. They who by
usurpation exercised authority over the Lords people, did in the time of
darkness so carefully provide, that the people under their pretensed
government, should not be unprovided, (as they imagined of a seer) to foresee
the danger that might ensue toward the souls of the people, above the space
of four, or at the most of six monethss. What excuse now remains, for them
that challenge the like authority over the people of the Lord, in the time of
this great light, and manifestation of his son: suffering many thousand
flocks to want sheepheardes, and so to be in danger of the Wolf: not only
six months, but now almost six and twenty years, for so long as they want
a sheepehearde, so long are they in danger of the Wolf: but they want a
shepherd, so long as they want one able to govern them, to exhort and to
admonish them, to rebuke and comfort them. ff. De verb. signi. l. aedificium:.
profecisse.
Paria enim sunt omnino non fieri, aut minus rite fieri: qui minus soluit, non
soluit, perficisse aedificium videtur, qui ita statuit vt in vsu esse possit.
It is all one in effect whether a thing be not don at all, or not rightly and
duly done: He is said not to pay at all, which pays less then is his due
to pay: And he is said to have perfected a buylding, which has so framed it,
that it may be inhabited. Peril of souls cause of renunciation.
And again, for this purpose, even to avoid the perrill of souls, the Law
provides, that if any man through want of foresight of the waightinesse of
the office, vnworthilye have taken upon him the government of any Church (a
burden too heavy for him to bear) he may forthwith forgo and renounce the
same, both so to be disburthened him self, and that the Church also might be
furnished, with some able man, to supply the necessity thereof.

Ex. de prebend. c. venerabilis.
PRO DEFECTV SCIENTIAE, etc. For want of knowledge a Man may desire cession:
For where as knowledge is chiefly necessary about the Administration of
spiritual things, and also behoofefull about the charge of Temporal things,
let it be lawefull for him that has charge to govern the Church in these
thingts, to renounce the said Church in case he have no knowledge whereby he
may govern the same. For (says the Lord) thou have rejected knowledge, and
therefore I will reject thee, that thou be no Priest unto me. Hence may be
gathered two arguments, the one to prove the necessity of knowledge in a
spiritual Pastor: the other to prove a lawfulness for the renouncing of
that, which without great prejudice and hurt to him self and others he, can
not retain. 1 He that takes upon him the administration of spiritual
things, must have the knowledge of spiritual things. 2 But he that takes
upon him the government of the Church, takes upon him the administration of
spiritual things. 3 Therefore he that takes upon him the government of the
Church, must have the knowledge of spiritual things.
1 It is lawful for every man that takes upon him a charge or function,
without knowledge how to govern the same charge, to forgo and for sake the
said charge or function: 2 But every unlearned minister having a charge, as
without knowledge how to govern the same his charge: 3 Therefore it is lawful
for him to renouuce his said charge.


ANd again, even to avoid the peril of souls, and that neither age, neither
any bodily disease or impotency, should be any occasion or hinderaunce to the
people, from having and enjoying the benefit of a teacher, the law provides in
this case, also as follows.

7 q. 1. Petisti
PETISTI, etc. Thou desire that for thy age growing upon thee, and thy bodily
infirmity, thou might without advise in the same seat, where thou
gouernest, place one in thy steed: but we (God being our helper) give counsel
to thy holiness, that for the help of reasonable men's souls, (Christ being
thy guide) thou do not leave these which thou obtaynest, in the Church of
Mense, but if the Lord according to thy request shall give unto thee a perfect
man, who may take upon him the care for the health of souls, thou shall
ordain him Bishop in thy place, and he shall be in the Gospel committed unto
thee, and in bearing the ministry of Christ, in every place shall visit and
comfort the Church of God. All which Canons and constitutions being made and
published long sithence, are again confirmed, ratified and allowed by latter
constitutions, decrees, and ordinances, as follows.

Ex. commu. de Praeb and dig c. Ad regimen.
AD REGIMEN, etc. Although we by disposition from above, unworthily called to
the government of the universal Church as we ought, so have we in our desires,
that by our endeavor and diligence, fit men be taken to the regiments of
Churches and Monasteries, and other Ecclesiastical benefices, according to the
divine pleasure, and our purpose and intent, which might rule and profit the
Churches, Monasteries and the foresaid benefices to be committed unto them.
And again.

Clement. de aetat. and quali. c p. 1.
CVM ECCLESIAE. etc. For as much as the churches whereunto unfit persons in
knowledge, manners, or age, are preferred suffer for this cause (as experience
teaches in their spiritualities and temporalities) oftentimes great
detriments: we willing that this thing, by the diocesanes of the places, unto
whom this charge, by reason of their office apperteineth, be more diligently
foreseen: straightly enjoin that they themselves more diligently observe, and
cause inuiolably to be observed by their subjects, such canonical
constitutions, as have hitherto been published for the preferring of persons
unto such Churches, if they will avoid the displeasure of God, and the
punishment due by the Apostolic sea. And not only these Canons established
and confirmed by the Popes Act of Parliament, but even our own prouincial
constitutions made long sithence, for the realm of England, have ordained and
established a learned ministry, and appointed an able and fit state of
Clergy men, to be had through out the whole Empire and Dominions of her
Majesty. The tenor of some of which constitutions follows. Otho. constitu.
cum sit ars.. exigit.
First. Exigit namque ars nostra catholica, vt sit vnicus in vna ecclesia
sacerdos, alias magister perfectus, ordine and habitu, vita sancta, scientia,
and doctrina. For our Catholic religion requires that in one Church there be
one Priest, otherwise called a perfect teacher, in order and habit, in holy
life, in knowledge, and in doctrine. Secondly. Absque magistro preterea
ecclesia desolata manet sape die nec persona in ea, nec saltem vicarius
perpetuus inuenitur, sed aliquis forte simplex sacerdos, de vita, sancta,
scientia, and doctrina est ei nimis modica heu cura: without a master the
church oftentimes remains desolat, having neither parso^ nor any continual
vicar, but perhaps some silie ignorant Priest: but as touching their holy life,
their knowledge and their doctrine (alas) there is too too little care had.

Otho. constable. cum sit ars.. absque.
SACER ORDO. etc. A sacred order is to be conferred to him that is most
worthy, to the end that by him the other sacraments might be ministered.
Wherefore, since it is a thing very perilous to ordein me^ unworthy, Idiots,
Illegitimate, irreguler, persons unlearned, persons: vagrant, and such as have
not any certain or true title indeed: We ordein that before the conferring of
orders, dilligent inquisition and search be made by the By. of al these things.
Which constitution, whether it be observed or no, I refer the reader to the
directions of the By. Canons: Wherein they manifestly tell us, that they proceed
first, and enquire afterward: that they first give the minister a charge,
appointing him to teach, and afterward send him to the Archdeaco^s or his
officials court to learn, as is manifest in their Canons, published in the year
of our Lord. 1571. Title Archdeacon: and also in the aduertisementes. Title
ecclesiastical policy. Wherein they have not attended the meaning and intent
of Law, which always requires. Bart. in l. si quis posthumos. filiu^. nu. 3.
ff. de li. and posthu. ff. de. minor. l. de. aetate and de feriis lc. 2.
Vt qualitates adsint eo tempore, quo dispositio sumat effectum. That qualities
must then be had, when the disposition takes effect. Vt qualitas testis
attenditur tempore quo deponit. As the quality of a Witness is then to be
considered, when he is deposed. Again, Quando quaeritur de aetate, quae est
talis, quae reddit personam inhabilem, adiudicium exercendum, Been potest de
hoc quaeri, ante omne iudicium. When there is any Question of such an age, as
makes any person unable, to exercise judgment, this ought very well to be
enquired of, before all judgment. In like manner I say, considering certain
capablenesse, and special ability, by virtue of diverse qualities, wherewith
ministers ought to be endued, is necessarily required, to be in the^ at the
time of their ordering, that therefore by law, they ought not to be ordained,
unless the said qualities be found in them at the time of ordering: and if
any other preposterous order be used, that therefore the whole actions, are
void and frustrate. For where by disposition of law, a certain form and
prescript order is limited, there if any in uersio^ or preposteration be used,
al is clean marred. And why? because you follow not the direction of your
Letters patents: you exceed the bounds of your commission, and pass the limits
of your jurisdiction, the Law making you adiudge, to do that, and that, after
that, and that manner. You make your self no judge by doing after your own
fancy, thus, and thus, after this, and this manner, without any commission. And
where you were by a public consent, of a public magistrate, made a public
person to execute a public law: you make yourself a private person, by putting
in practice, a private devise. ff. de recept. arb. l. non distinguendum. de
officio.
Non ergo arbiter quod libet statuere poterit, nec in quaere libet, nisi de qua
compromissum est, and quatenus compromissum est. Therefore an Arbiter, cannot
determine every thing, as he will, nor in what thing he will, but only that
thing whereof the compromise is made, and according to the form of the
co^promise. ff. Si a non competeti iud. l. 1.
Iudex ad certu^ re^ datus, si de aliis pronunciauit, qua^ quod ad eam rem
pertinet, nihil egit. A judge appointed to one special matter, if he pronounces
any thing impertine^t to the same, he has lost his labor. ff. de procurat. l
maritus
Maritus id solum exequi debet. quod procuratio emissa praescripsit. A husband,
that is proctor for his Wife, ought only to execute that, that his proxy
prescribes. And the reason is this, A learned Ministry commanded by the Civil
Law.
Fines mandati sunt diligenter obseruandi. The bounds of a commandment ar
diligently to be kept. Neither are the imperyal laws barren and void of the
like holy functions, but exhibit unto us the self same provisions as before:
namely, that men holy and religious; men furnished with the best gifts and
graces, should be preferred to the sacred ministry. Cod. de epis. and cler:
L: si quoniam.
Nemo grad^ sacerdotis, venalitate pretii mercetur, quantum quisque meretur,
non quantum dare sufficit estimetur. Let no man make marchaundize, or buy the
degree of a minister, every one ought to be esteemed by his merits, and not by
his money.

Again. Authent. De Sanctis episcop.. clericos. coll. nona.
CLERICOS AVTEM, etc. We do not otherwise suffer Clearkes to be ordained,
unless they be learned, and have a right faith and an honest life. But if holy
rules shall forbid those which are chosen by others, as unworthy to be ordained,
then let the most holy Bishop, procure to ordain whomsoever he shall think
meetest. Note that by civil law, a Bysh. may not ordeine a minister, unless
the people choose an unworthy man.
And thus common law, provincial law, civil law, and statute law, (for our
statute laws have ratified these laws) pronounce all with one voice and one
consent, that our dumb and silent Curates, and stipendaries, have no
approbation or allowance, no favor or intertainment from them, or by their
authority. Why? What shall we say then, or how are they allowed then? I will
tell you. Certain perverse, conceited, and selfeweaning men, soothing them
selves, and fostering their dotages and fond affectious errors, with these
rules of law, Non requiritur summa perfectio: and that Sufficit mediocris
scientia, A perfect knowledge is not required, and a mean knowledge is
sufficient. ff. De aedil. edict. le. Sciend. Illud and le Si quis venditor. Ex.
cap. cum. Nobis. olim de elect.
Imagine these our Sir John's, the very Asses of our schools, having
approbation from some Bishop, by whom they have been tried and examined to have
(as they term it), Competentem quamuis non eminentem scientiam, competent,
Though not eminent knowledge, may notwithstanding the former provisions,
lawfully take themselves for true ministers, and be reputed by others for
lawful possessours, in, and to those places, whereunto they are admitted.
Answer to the objection of a competent knowledge.
Whereunto I answer, that the ignorance of these terms and words of law,
Namely, Summa perfectio, mediocris and competens scientia, Is the ground of
this error. And therefore it rests briefly to view, what manner of learning
and knowledge, by justice and equity of law, may be and is reputed, mean,
competent, and sufficient, for him that shall take upon him a pastoral charge,
wherein also if our bare mumbling ministers shall be found culpable, they are
then by definitive sentence, on the part and behoof of the law, not only to
be adjudged guilty of voluntary intrusion into the right and possession of
others, but also to be punished for taking upon them offices, without any
lawful calling.

IGNORANTIA MATTER, etc. Ignorance the mother of errors, is specially to be
avoided in the Ministers of God, which have taken upon them the office to teach
amongst the people of God. Let the ministers therefore be warned to read the
holy scriptures. Paul the Apostle willing Timothy to attend to reading, to
exhortation of doctrine, and always to abide in them. Let the ministers
therefore know the holy scriptures, and let all their labor consist in
preaching and doctrine, and let them edify as well in knowledge of faith, as
examples of good works. The Ministers must know the Scriptures, and preach.
Out of which chapter these conclusions may be gathered. First that ignorance
of the word of God is especially to be avoided of every minister as before.
Secondly, with what knowledge every minister ought to be qualified. 1 A teacher
of Gods word, must especially avoid ignorance. 2 But a minister is a teacher.
3 Therefore a minister must especially avoid ignonoraunce.


Neither is here small store of little knowledge, such as wherewith our reading
ministers are furnished, but such whereof express mention is made in this
decree, and may necessarily be concluded thus, 1 Whosoever takes upon him the
office of a teacher, amongst the people of God, ought always to attend to
reading, to exhortation, and to dwell in the same. 2 But the minister takes
upon him the office of teaching amongst the people of God. 3 Therefore he ought
to attend to reading, to exhortation, and to dwell in the same.
1 He that has taken upon him the office of a teacher amongst the people of
God, ought to bestow his labor in preaching and in doctrine. 2 But a minister
has taken upon him the office of a teacher. 3 Therefore he ought to bestow
his labor in preaching and in doctrine. Whereunto agree diverse other decrees,
following.


THe reason why a Prior should have knowledge and be learned, is, for that the
law charge him with cure of souls.

Ex. de statut. Monacho. c. cum ad Monasterium prior.
PRIOR AVTEM, etc. Let the Prior in comparison of the rest, next after the
Abbot, be a man of power, as well in deed as in word, that by his example of
life, and word of doctrine, he may instruct his brethren, in that which is
good, and draw them from evil, having zeal of religion according unto
knowledge, both to correct and chastise offenders, and also to comfort and
cherish the obedient. Out of which constitution I conclude thus, a similibus ad
similia, From like unto like. 1 Whosoever cherishes and comfort the
obedient to the faith, and corrects or improoueth the disobedient, must be
mighty in word and deed. 2 But every minister ought to cherish and comfort the
obedient to the faith, and to correct and improoue the disobedient. 3 Therefore
every minister ought to be mighty in word and deed.


ANd therefore since both in this and in the former constitution, the law
maker abused the word of the Lord, and applies it to have the people taught
false religion, I mean popish religion, for that was the intent of the
decrees: And seeing the Chaplain of the devil, applies the truth to
establishe his diuilish doctrine, and under color of verity, were so careful
to feed the souls of them that bear his marks, with error, superstition and
false religion, popish religion: Seeing I say, the superstitious lawmaker was
so careful for his superstitious time: Our chieffe Prelates, who have not yet
abandoned the policy of this traitorous lawmaker, as perilous for the
government of the state of the Lords household, over whom they challenge the
government, but with tooth and nail maintain this his policy to be a
policy meet for the Lords servant to be guided by: what can they answer
in the defense of their wilful disloyalty to the lord in this behalf? The law
which the enemy unto the Lord, did make in the time of popery, for maintenance
of popish procurations, popish dispensations, popish ceremonies: popish non
residentes: popish exco^munications: popish visitations: popish paiments of
oblations: popish courts of faculties: popish licenses: the very same laws,
and the self same ordinances, to serve their own turns, they turn to the
maintenance of their prelacies, dignities, and ministeries under the Gospel. A
reason of these their doings, if they were demanded, I conjecture would be this:
namely, that a law appointed by the adversary to abuses, having good grounds,
may be applied to good uses: and that it is not executed now, any more as the
popish law, but as the law apertaini^g to her highness crown and regal
dignity, being established by the high Court of Parliament. Wherein touching
the former, they said somewhat, if the matter did consist, inter pares, and
that the most highest, as it were accusing him, that he had not dealt
faithfully in his fathers household, giving them as parfect a law for the
government of his household by discipline as by doctrine: And yet by their
leaves, why then should not this law of the enemy last specified, nay rather
now there own law, having better grounds, and better reasons, for the
validity thereof, then the laws mentioned before, concerning their prelacies
and dignities, etc. Why (I say) should not this be as auaylable with them now,
to exhort the people unto the truth, as it was with the idolaters, to exhort
unto lies: to dehort now from popery, as it was then from the Gospel: to
instruct men now in the true knowledge of Christ, as it was then to teach men
the knowledge of Antichrist: to correct offenders now, against piety and holy
religion, as it was then to correct contemners of impiety and profane
religion: to comfort and cherish the obedient now to the faith, as it was the^
to comfort and cherish the disobedient to infidelity, and Paganism. Touching
the acts of Parliament, sithence they chaleng by them immunity, for the
confirmation of their abuses: it were requisite for them to give the servants
of the Lord leave a little to challenge as great a privilege, by the same, for
the stablishment of the right use of things through their default, yet amiss
and out of frame with us. If the cause of the former, in truth and verity, be
as good as the cause of the latter, in show and semblance only yea if it be
far better (for theirs in truth is starcke naught) and the law authorize for
the one in deed that, that the same law in appearaunce only approoueth for
the other. If for their fellow servants sakes, they will not be more favorable
unto their Lord and masters cause: yet were it expedient for them to be
entreated to be more favorable, to the justice and equity of their own laws,
then continuallye, by placing unable men in the ministry, thereby as it were
accusing the same of imperfection, and in sufficiency, as though it tolerated
any such thing, when as in truth, it does nothing less, evermore speaking as
follows.

Extra: Cum: de priuilegiis. c. inter cuncctas verum quia
VERVM QVIA, etc. But because after baptism, amongst other things, the
propounding of the word of God, is most necessary unto salvation, whereby the
hearers hearing that which is our victory, be instructed in the faith, be
taught to flee things to be avoided, and to follow things to be followed, by
which, such as by sin are fallen, do rise again, we have great care that
such brethren be promoted, which by sweet oil of the word may comfort our
subjects, may forbid them sins, may nippe the wounds of their sins by
reprehension, and may provoke and induce them to purge and wipe their offenses
with bitterness of repentance. Unto the execution whereof, the knowledge of
the law of God is required, the integrity of life and soul is to be had. For
it is written. Thou have refused knowledge, and I will refuse thee, that thou
be no Priest unto me, because the lips of the Priests keep knowledge, and
they search the law at his mouth. For otherwise he can not as his duty is,
discern between sin and sin, etc. All which decrees of themselves, are
plain and sufficient enough, to impugn and overthrow all opinions whatsoever
vainly conceived against the provision, and validity of law, authorizing, or
ratifying (as it is vntruelye surmised) either any unpreaching, and unlearned
ministry, or any indiscreet dishonest, or ungodly persons, to execute any
offices in the Church. For by these decrees (established first by the enemy of
true religion, for the planting of his supersticion, but now turned by our
policy from that use, and made a law for the government of the Church) are so
many special proprieties of a true pastor, so substantially pointed out, that
none, without too too great immodesty, may in any wise affirm the law to be
defective herein. Whereunto our english constitutions and synodals provincial,
may be annexed, as directly and evidently proouing, with what manner of
competent and convenient knowledge every minister ought to be adorned.

Prou: gu. lind de offi. archipres. ignorantia sacerdotum.
PRECIPIMVS (says the provincial constitution) VT QVILIBET Sacerdos plaebi
praesidens, quater in anno: hoc est semel in qualibet quarta anni, die vna
solemni vel pluribus per se vel per alium exponat populo vulgariter, absque
cuiusque subtilitatis textura fantastica 4, fidei articulos, december mendata
Decalogi, duo praecepta Euangelii, etc. We command that every priest president
over any people, fouretimes every year, that is to say, every quarter of the
year, in one or more solemn days, by him self or some others, expound unto
the people in their vulgar tongue, without any subtlety, the four Articles of
the faith, the ten Commandments, the two precepts of the Gospel, etc.

Here are you to see the particularities laid forth, wherein every minister
ought to be exercised, how often, how plainly and sincerely he ought to teach.
Wherein our fathers in time of ignorance and superstition, were more zealous,
then we in these days of the true light and knowledge of the Gospel. Quarter
sermons from whence they came.
For from hence quarter Sermons, now amongst us, have crept in and had their
beginning, though now fostered with greater corruption, then in those former
days they were. For proof whereof the Reader shall understand, that these
words, Semel in qualibet quarta anni, die vna, solemni, vel pluribus per se vel
per alium. In every quarter of the year, in one or mo solemn days by him
self, or some other have not this meaning, that it was sufficient, for the
president of the people, absolutely by an other, four times in the year only,
to preach and to instruct the people, as it is now a days amongst us
practiced: but the meaning is, that the Articles of the faith, the ten
Commandments, the two precepts of the gospel, etc. should in deed all of
them be expounded, and made known unto the people four times in the year,
and that in four several solemn days, if it were so possible. But because
the law maker did foresee, that it was impossible, that with any fruit, this
so great a work, could be finished: therefore both to take away all cauilling
from the people, who might think it sufficient to have quarterly Sermons: and
also to the end the pastor might be kept in a continual exercise of his
duty, this Pluribus was added, to the intent that the whole doctrines might
once every quarter, be wholly expounded: Glossa ibid.
So that semel is not here taken for simul, that these doctrines should once
every quarter, altogether and at one time alone be taught, but that they
should be once every quarter at particular and several times: particularly,
and severally be taught: for so, though they be at many times, particularly
taught, yet in the whole, they may be said to be but once in a quarter wholly
taught. And these words. per se vel per alium, by him self or by another,
have another manner of exposition then a great many understand or think them
to have. For it is commonly thought sufficient, that these words, per alium (by
another) be understood, in case the pastor himself be altogether ignorant.
But the meaning thereof, only is thus.

Ex. de offi. iudi. ordin. c. inter caetera.
CVM CONTINGAT quod Episcopi propter suas corruptiones multiplices, vel
inualitudines corporales aut hostiles incursus, seu occasiones alias (ne
dicamus defectum scientiae, quod in eis reprobandum est omnino, nec de cetero
tollerandum) per se ipsos non sufficient ministrare verbum Dei populo, etc. If
the Bishops for some necessary business, or bodily infirmity, or hostile
invasion, or other occasions (we will not say for want of learning, which is to
be reproved in them, and hereafter not to be tolerated) can not by them
selves minister the word of God unto the people, that then it shall be lawful
for him to choose some other fit person to supply his room.

A Bishop ought personally to visit his Diocese, and an Archdeacon his
Archdeaconrie, and yet neither of them both, ought to visit by another, unless
he be Infirmus vel aliter ligitime impeditus, quo minus possit personaliter
visitare. Glos. linw. cle. cens. c. 1. verb. rationabili.
Diseased, or have some other lawful impediment, so that he cannot visit in
his own person. And it is concluded in the case of residence, that one bound
to keep residence, must keep it by him self. Ex. de cleri. non residen. c.
conqueranti.
Et quis debet residentiam facere per se non per alium, and nisi fecerit,
potest priuari. Moreover it is directly forbidden, that the office of
preaching, should be deputed to any other.

The office of preaching may not be deputed to others.
CETERVM SALVO, etc. But saving the Legate of the Apostolic sea, let it be
lawful to no man, to whom it shall be commanded to preach the cross, to
excommunicate, or absolve any, hereafter to commit the same things to others,
because not any jurisdiction, but rather a certain ministry, is committed
unto him in this behalf. All which things, are more at large manifested by
the last chapter of the former title in Lindwood, where the Priests are
commanded to be diligent teachers of Gods word, that they be not accounted
dum dogs. The words of the Chapter are these.

PRAESENTIS CONSILII, etc. By the final determination of this present
counsel, we have straightly enjoined, that Parsons and Vicars, labor to
inform the people committed unto them, with the food of Gods word, according
to the measure that shall be inspired unto them, that they be not worthily
adjudged dum dogs, seeing that with wholesome barking they chase not away the
biting of spiritual Wolves from the Lords sheepfold. And the reason of this
provincial is, derived from an other decree.

Extra. de offi. iud ord. c. inter caetera.
INTER CAETERA, etc. Amongst other things belonging to the salvation of
Christian people, the food of the word of God, is known to be most
necessary for them, because that as the body with material, so the soul
with spiritual food is nourished, for man lives not by bread only, but by
every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. And that this, and the
former, might be diligently executed, to meet with the carelessness of Pastors
in doing their duties, there is a special ordinance, made for the inquisition
of the offenders, here in as follows.

Johan: Peccham de offic. arc^
DE PVBLICATIONE ARTICVLORVM, etc. Touching the publication to be made of such
articles, whereby a man forthwith does incur sentence of excommunication, let
the Archdeacons make diligent inquisition, and as often as they shall find the
Elders, not to have preached, or published at the times appointed the moral
instruction of the 14. Articles of faith, the 10. commandments of the
decaloge, the 2. Commandments of the Gospel, etc. so often let them rebuke
them, and by chastisement, and some canonical punishment, compel them to
supply that which rashly they have omitted. Competent knowledge is a knowledge
to preach.
Hence may aptly and necessarily be inferred, that he may be said to have a
competent knowledge, that has knowledge to preach; otherwise not preaching,
should not be punishable. And to this end tends that which is written
before: namely Exigit ars nostra catholica, etc. Our catholic religion
requires, that in one Church, be one perfect teacher, in knowledge and
doctrine. And as the gloss in the same place says. Glos. ibi. ver scientia.
Absit ergo quod sic prefectus sit, vt ad literum dicere possit illud. Hier.
cap. 1. a a a, Domine Deus nescio loqui, quia puer ego sum. God forbid that he
should be so perfect, as that by rote he were able to say, a a a, Lord God
behold. I cannot speak because I am a Child: but this perfection ought to be
such, as the gloss tells you in the same place in these words.

Glos ibi. ver absque magistro.
AD MAGISTRVM, etc. To a master or teacher pertayneth that which is written in
the sixth of wisdom. I will bring wisdom into light, and will not keep back
the truth. And in the same book, the 7 chapter. As I myself learned
vnfaygnedly, so do I make other men partakers of her, and hide her riches from
no man, that that may be verified of him, which is written in the 28. Job. He
searches the depthes of the floudes, that is the secreates of the scriptures:
and the thing that is hid, brings he to light. And Rebuff affyrmeth, that
Penitus illiterati dicuntur, qui nesciunt ossicium facere, ad quod tenentur.
They are said to be altogether unlearned, which cannot perform the duty
whereto they are bound. And the gloss upon the law in the Code says, that
they be not Deanes, which hasten to be called Deanes, and be not Deanes, when
they do not the office of Deanes. Her majesty also by her injunctions has
ratified and co^mauded the same: for as much (says she) as in these latter
days many have been made Priests being children, and otherwise utterly
unlearned, so that they could read Mattins or Mass: the ordinaries shall not
admit any such to any cure, or spiritual function. Wherefore in as much as by
these ordinances it is evident, that every minister to whom cure of souls is
committed, ought not to err or be ignorant in the word of God, but ought
always to attend to reading, to exhortation, to preaching, to doctrine, to
edification, to be of power in word and deed, to instruct, to inform, and to
comfort, to rebuke, to reform, and to correct, to expound the Articles of
faith, the ten Commandments, and to teach other holy doctrines,
concerning the love of God, and the love of our neighbors, to be able to make
others partakers, of the riches of Wisdom, and to bring wisdom into light,
and not to keep back the truth: In as much I say, as by the laws of our
government, the Ministers, of the gospel ought to be endued with such
qualities, and beautified with such graces: Let every one cease to maintain
any competencie or conueniencie of learning, to be in our dumb and
unpreaching Ministers: For let them read and read till their lips be tired,
and their eyes blinded, they shall notwithstanding by their bare reading,
ordinarily be no instruments of the holy Ghost to work faith in the
hearers. Nay, they rob the holy Ghost of his proper honor and office,
whereby he inspireth the preachers of the Gospel, with the spirit of wisdom
in good measure and proportion, to break unto the hearers, meet and
convenient food for their souls. For how shall they call on him, in whom
they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have
not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they
preach except they be sent? As it is written, How beautiful upon the
mountains are the feet of him, that declares and publishes peace? That
declares good tidinges, and publishes salvation, saying unto Syon, thy God
raygneth?

And as touching the Idol ministers them selves. Besides those reasons, there
remain many other very necessary for them diligently to look into, that so
understanding their own desperate estate, they may more willinglye, and
duetifully, yield them selves to be reformed, and to shake off those rags
under which they now shrowde them selves. They are diligently to hearken unto
the Canon of Gregory against them. 1. q. 1 c. Si quis neque.
Si quis neque sanctis pollens moribus, etc. If any, neither adorned with holy
manners, neither called by the Clergy, and people, or constrained by
compulsion, through love of his own heart, or filthy entreaty of his lips:
or for fellowshippe, or seruilitie, or fraudulent reward, and not for gain of
Souls, but puffed with desire of vain glory, shall take any Bishopply or
priestlie dignity upon him and shall not, even of his own accord leave the same
again in his life time, but suffer sudden death to take him unrepentant,
without all doubt he shall perish for ever. Secondly, ordo non solum gratia
suscipientis, sed etiam altorum confertur. Glos. in constitu. Otho. de scruti.
in ordin. ver. ad.
An order is not conferred, for his sake only that takes it, but also for
other men's sakes. A minister, is not called to minister to himself, but to
others, to labor for himself, but for others, to be served himself, but to
serve others: And the Lord came not to be fed, but to feed others. Thirdly,
Periculosum est ipsi ordinato quia tanquam mercinarius se ingerit, non vt
pastor. It is dangerous to him that is rodeyned, because he rusheth in as an
hireling, not as a shepeard. Fourthly. Periculosum est subditis, quibus
sacramenta ministrare, and quos curare deberet, ne diuersimode inficeret eosdem
moribus, and exemplo. It is perilous for the people under him, to who^ he
ought to minister the Sacraments, and whom he ought to heal, that he diversely
infect them not, with his manners, and examples; for that Diluere aliena
peccata, non valet is, quem propria deuastant, He cannot put away other men's
sins, whom his own Sins devour. And again, Pericutosum est decentiae
ecclesiae, in scandalo populari. It is dangerous for the Decency of the
Church, to be in any public slander or offense. 83. distinc. nihil.
Again, Malus praelatus dicitur lupus rapiens praedam. An evil prelate is
said to be a Wolf, ravening his Pray. 2. q. 7. Qui nec.
He is said to be Canis impudicus, propter defectum regiminis. A shameless
dog, for want of government. 2. q. 7. Non omnis.
He is said to be, Coruus, propter peccatorum nigredinem. As black as a Raven,
for the foulenes of his sins. He is said to be, Sal infatuatus, ad nihilum
proficiens. Unsavory Salt, profitable for nothing. 40. did. In mandatis. Glos.
lind. de offic. Archipres. c. fin v. canss.
He is said to be Porcus, A Swyne. He is said to be, Capo, A Capon, because
as a Capon can not Crow, no more can a dumb Praelate preach. And to conclude,
Praelatus, qui in doctrina mutus est, non est vere praelatus, cum officium
praelati non exerceat. etc. A Prelate which is mute in teaching, is not in
truth a Prelate, in so much as he exercises not the office of a Prelate.
These Canons and constitutions not contrariant or repugnant to the laws,
statutes, or customs of this realm, neither derogatory to her highness crown
and dignity, ^d therefore authorized by act of Parliament: ought to have been
better known, and better executed, by our chief Prelates, then by the space
of these 25. years they seem generally to have been. But yet besides these
former decrees, laws and ordinances, and the several reasons principles and
maxims, whereupon they were first grounded, there remains somewhat more
behind diligently to be considered: the which thing the more earnestly every
man shall rightly weigh, the more may he be astonished. A thing don in Israel,
at the doing whereof it is a wonder, that the ears of the hearers tingle not,
and the very hair of the heads of the standers by stare not, for fear least
the Lord in his righteous judgment, should execute his terrible vengeance
upon them. Thus stands the case, some pastoral church, or churches being
destitute of a Pastor, or Pastors, to feed the people, a solemn assembly and
convocation of the chiefest of the governors of the church must be gathered
together, and that not in an angle of a poor country Village, but in the
chiefest city of the Diocese, and that not on a workday, but either on the
Lords day, or on some other of their own festival days, and that for no
small matters, or to no small purpose, but even to present and offer unto the
Lord, an holy sacrifice, and to call upon his most holy name: To present (I
say) unto the Lord, a present meet and acceptable for his majesty, even men
meet to serve him in his spiritual wars, and to be Pastors to feed his
people with spiritual food of his holy word, men meet to take upon them the
most highest and most noblest callinges, that he has appointed to the sons
of men, the office and dignity of the preaching of his holy gospel. This (I
say) is the action whereof deliberate consideration is to be had, and whereof
follows a discourse, and wherein when all is done (as it is imagined) that can
be done, yet in truth there is nothing so, nor so done: they do but flatter
them selves, bleare the (...) of others, and which is most execrable, as it
were mock and delude the Lord to his face. Well then, let us consider what is
done herein.

In the time of that virtuous king, Edward the sixth, an order and form was
appointed by act of Parliament, for consecrating Archbishops and bishops, and
for the making of Priests, Deacons, and Ministers: Which statute is revived,
and the same order and form approved, in the eight year of her most
excellencies reign. The words of the statute are these.

[And that such order and form, for the consecrating of Archbishops and
Bishops, and for the making of Priests, Deacons, and Ministers, as was set
forth in the time of the said late King, and authorized by Parliament in the
fifth and sixth year of the said late King, shall stand, and be in full
force and effect, and shall from hence forth be used and observed, in all
places within this Realm, and other the Queens majesty's dominions and
countries.] The title of the book is this.

Ordering of Deacons.
[The form and manner of making and consecrating Bishops, Priests and
Deacons.] And first to entreat of Deacons, according to the form of the book,
you shall understand, that in the order and form of making Deacons, three
things principally are to be observed: First, the qualities requisite to be in
him that is to be made a Deacon: Secondly, the circumstaunces in making him a
Deacon: And thirdly, the proper duty and office belonging to him, that is
made a Deacon. Touching his qualities, they must be such, as were requisite for
the same. First, he must be a man of virtuous conversation, and without crime:
Secondly he must be learned in the Latin tongue: Thirdly, he must be
sufficiently instructed in the holy scriptures: Fourthly, he must be a man,
meet to exercise his ministry duly: Fifthly, he must believe all the
Canonical scriptures: Sixthly, he must be diligent in his calling: Seventhly,
he must be inwardly moved to that office by the holy Ghost. And as touching
the circumstaunces. First, he must be called. Secondly tried. Thirdly examined.
Fourthly, he must be twenty one years of age at the least: he must be
presented by the Archdeacon, or his deputy. Fifthly, he must be made on a
Sunday or holy day: Sixthly, he must be made openly in the face of the Church,
where must be an exhortation made, declaring the duty and office, as well of
the Deacons toward the people, as of the people toward the Deacons. Lastly,
touching the office committed unto him, it is: First to assist the minister in
divine service: Secondly, to read holy scriptures and Homilies in the
congregation: Thirdly, to instruct the youth in the Catechism. ^ourthly, to
search for the sick, poor and impotent of the parrish, and to intimate their
estates, names, and places, to the Curate, that they may be relieved by
convenient alms.

The form of ordering Priests.
COncerning the making of Ministers, not only all those things before
mentioned in the making of Deacons, but other circumstances and solemnities,
are required also: these demaundes and answers following must be made and given.

Bishop, Do you think in your heart, that you be truly called, according to
the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this church of England?


Answer. I think it.


Bishop. Be you persuaded that the holy scriptures, contain sufficiently all
doctrine, required of necessity, for eternal salvation through faith in Jesus
Christ? And are you determined with the said scriptures, to instruct the people
committed to your charge, and to teach nothing (as required of necessity to
eternal salvation), but that you shall be persuaded, may be concluded and
proved by the scripture.


Answer, I am so persuaded, and have so determined by Gods grace.


Bishop. Will you give your faithful diligence, always to minister the
doctrine and sacraments, and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has
commanded, and as this realm has received the same, according to the
commandments of God, so that you may teach the people committed to your care
and charge, with all diligence to keep and observe the same.


Answer. I will.


In these two aunsweres and demaundes last specified, are principally contained
two things. First the Minister charge himself, by a solemn vow, to teach,
and instruct the people committed to his charge, with the doctrine of holy
scriptures. The Discipline of Christ commanded by Parliament.
Secondly, the Bishop by virtue of the order, and form appointed by act of
Parliament, binds him as well to minister the Discipline of Christ, within
his cure, as the doctrine and sacraments of Christ, as the Lord has
commanded, and as this realm has received it according to the commandments
of God. And therefore every Minister, by virtue of this statute law, may as
well admonish, denounce, and excommunicate offenders within his charge, as a
Bishop may within his Diocese, the words are copulatiues, and therefore. Non
sufficit alterum, sed oportet vtrumque fieri. It is not sufficient to do one,
but both. And these words before rehearsed. [Will you give your faithful
diligence, always to Minister the Doctrine and Sacraments, and Discipline of
Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm has received the
same, according to the commandments of God] have in them two special points
to be considered: one touching the doctrine and sacraments of Christ: the other
concerning the discipline of Christ: out of which two branches, proceed two
other questions. First, whether every minister, ought not, to exercise the
Discipline of Christ, by force of this demand and answer, as well as the
doctrine and sacraments. Secondly, whether these, namely the doctrine,
sacraments, and the discipline be to be ministered simply, as the Lord has
commanded, or else whether they be to be ministered only, as this realm has
received the same without the commandment of God? For these words,
[according to the commandments of God] are but Synonima, unto those which went
before [ Viz. as the Lord has commanded] and so signify both but one thing.
To the first his own promise, to the Bishops interrogatorie, bindeeth him as
well to minister the Discipline, as the doctrine and Sacraments. To the
second, if you answer, that the doctrine and Sacraments, and Discipline of
Christ, are simply to be ministered, as the Lord has commanded: then it must
needs follow, if this Realm has received the same, according to the
commandment of God, that the law of the Realm, and the Law of God command
both one thing, and so by both Laws, the doctrine and Sacraments and
Discipline, are to be ministered as the Lord has commanded. But if you shall
say, that these things are to be ministered only, as this Realm has
received the same, though not according to the commandment of God; then these
words of the Article following, viz. [As this Realm has received the same
according to the commandment of God] conuinceth you of a slanderous tongue,
against the whole state and Church of God. For hereby you accuse them of great
impiety and ungodliness, and attaynt them of high Treason, to the Majesty of
God, as though the intent of the whole state, were to have the Doctrine and
Sacrament, and Discipline of Christ, ministered according to the
commandments of God; in case the Laws of the Realm, had so received the
same, and not otherwise: And so to have restrained the commandments of God
by the Laws of the Realm, and so to have concluded an impossibility,
limiting and restrayning the greater by the less; and a Law most perfect, by
a Law imperfect, and not rather the contrary, to have restrained in deed
the less, by the greater: the Laws of the Realm, by the commandments of
God: an imperfect Law; the Law of man, by a most perfect and absolute Law,
the Law of the most Highest, which is manifest by a threefolde repetition of
the one, as the Discipline of CHRIST: Secondly as the Lord commanded:
Thirdly, according to the commandment of God: where the Laws of the Realm,
are but once only mentioned. Again, in the ordering of Archbishops and
Bishops, the Archbishopp demands of the Bishop this question. [Will you
maintain and set forward, as much as shall lie in you, quietness peace, and
love, amongst all men, and such as be unquiet, disobebedient, and cryminous,
within your Diocese, correct, and punnishe, according to such authority, as
ye have by Gods word, and as to you shall be committed by the ordinance of
this Realm? Do these words, (and as to you shall be committed by the
ordinance of the Realm) restrain and lymitte these words which went before,
to correct, and to punnishe according to such Authority, as ye have by Gods
word.]

Surely, they can have no such interpretation. For the meaning of these words
is, that every Bishop should by the ordinauuce of the Realm, have his
office committed unto him, and once having his office so committed unto him by
the ordinance of the Realm: then to correct and punnishe according to such
authority, as he has committed unto him by Gods word: and as he is
appointed by the ordinance of the Realm to execute. Neither has the Bishop
any authority given him by these words, to correct, or punnishe any,
otherwise then the Laws of GOD permit him, though the Laws of the Realm,
were not agreeable to the Law of GOD. And in like case I conclude, that a
minister bound, as you have seen before, to minister the Discipline of
Christ, ought so too minister the same, as the Lord has commanded, though
the Laws of the realm, should not have received the same. For no discipline in
truth, ca^ be said to be the discipline of Christ, unless it be in deed
ministered, as the Lord Christ has commanded the same should be ministered.
And therefore, as no bishop may or ought to correct or punish any transgressour,
any otherwise then according to the laws of God: so no minister ought to
exercise any discipline, then such as the Lord Christ has commanded. If it be
alleged, that our discipline used in the church of England, be in very deed
the very same discipline, which the Lord Christ has commanded, (which is
utterly untrue) as appears. First and principally by the word of god.
Secondly, by the discourses written, between the learned on that behalf:
Thirdly, by the discipline practiced by all the reformed churches: and lastly,
by master Nowell his Catechism, commanded generally by the bishop to be
taught unto the youth of the realm in all schools of their Diocese: yet
notwithstanding, the minister contrary to a vow made by him at the
commandment of his Ordinary, appointed thereunto by law, is very injuriously
dealt with, for that he is not permitted to exercise any discipline at al: our
Bishops and Archdeacons challenging unto themselves a principal prerogative, to
punish al malefactors, within their several jurisdictions. An other reason,
that this statute has appointed, as well the discipline of Christ, as the
doctrine and sacraments to be ministered as the Lord commanded only, and none
otherwise is this: namely, for that this statute was made, to refourme as well
the disordered discipline used in the time of popery, amongst the popish
idolatrous Priests: as it was to reprove their false doctrine and
profanation of the sacraments: so that neither the one, neither the other,
should be ministered by the ministers of the Gospel; for otherwise, this branch
of the statute, should ordain nothing, and so contrary to the nature of a Law,
be Lex absurda, an absurd Law. And therefore, what open wrong and intolerable
injury is offered the Saints of God, and loyal subjects to her Majesty,
calling for discipline, at the chief Prelates hands, commanded by the Lord,
and in truth established by the Laws of her highness Empire: every
indifferent man, may easily discern. It follows in the Book of making of
Ministers.

Bishop. Will you be diligent to frame and fashion your own selves and your
Families, according to the Doctrine of Christ, and to make both your selves
and them as much as in you lies, wholesome examples and spectacles of the
flock of Christ?


Answer. I will.


Bishop. Will you maintain and set forwards, as much as lies in you,
quietness, peace and love, amongst all Christian people, and specially amongst
them, that are, or shall be committed to your charge?


Answer. I will.


In the end when he lays on his hands, he says to every one: Be thou a
faithful Dispenser of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments. And
again, Take thou authority to preach the word of god, and to minister the holy
Sacraments. Which action and Speeches of the Bishop, are to be well wayed,
and considered. The words which the Bishop pronounces: [Be thou a Faithful
dispe^ser] etc. [Take thou authority to preach] are words appointed him by the
whole State to be pronounced: What? was it trow you, the meaning of all the
States and Nobles of the Realm? or was it our most excellent Sovereign, the
Queens Highness her pleasure, to have enacted by Parliament, that a Bishop
should command an Apothecarie not exercised at all in holy scriptures, and
altogether unable to teach, to be notwithstanding a faithful dispensor of
the word of God, and to take authority to preach: No, no, they very well
knew, that the outward sound of the bishops words, in the ears of such a
man, could not work any inward grace, or give any inward virtue, to the
perfourmaunce of so high a calling, or of so holy a function. And therefore as
it becomes a true and loyal subject, I dare not for my part, so
dishonourablye conceive of their wisdoms, much less, I take it, should the
Bishop so disloyallye abuse their credit and authority. Was their intent and
purpose trow you, that the bishop by these his demaundes, and the minister by
these his aunsweres, should not bind the minister him self, to perform by
him self this duty to preach, but that the same should be done by a third
person? I trow no. For my masters and Doctors of the Canon and Civil Law,
Burgesses in the house of Parliament know, Institu. de invtili. stipu. si quis.
that Promssio facti alieni mutilis est, and quod si testator iusserit aliquem
in certum locum abire, vel liberalibus studiis imbui, vel domum suis manibus
extruere vel pingere, vel vxorem ducere, per alium id facere non potest, quia
haec omnia testatoris voluntas in ipsius solius persona intelligitur
conclusisse. A promise made of an other man's fact, is unprofitable, and that if
a Testator shall will any to go to a certain place, or to be furnished with
the liberal Sciences, or to build an house, or to paynt a Table with his own
hands, or to marry a Wife: that he can not do any of these things by an
other man, because the will of the Testator has concluded all these things
only in his own person. Was their meaning that the bishop pronouncing these
words. [Be thou a dispensor] was their meaning, I say, by those words, to
have the bishop commit the office of reading Homilies to a minister, or to
judge reading of Homilies to be preaching? No, no: Their proceedinges appear
to be of greater wisdom, knowledge, judgment, discretion, and Godliness.
They appointed, by the same their consultation, three kinds of offices to be
in the Church: Deacons, Ministers, and Bishops, appoynting severally, to
every officer his several duetyes, and has expressly appointed reading
Homilies, to be the office of a Deacon. For in the ordering of Deacons, the
Bishop, by virtue of the Statute, pronounces these words unto the Deacon.
[It pertayneth to the office of a Deacon in the church, where he shall be
appointed, to assiste the Priest in divine service, and specially when he
ministereth the holy Communion, and to help him in the distribution thereof,
and to read holy scriptures, and Homilies in the congregation,] etc. I take
it, and hold it for a principle, that the Bishop has no authority, by his
Lordship, to alter or transform an Act of Parliament, and therefore I take it,
that I may safelye conclude, without offense to his Lordshippe, that he can
not by law appoint any minister, to read any Homilies in any Church,
Statute law is Stricti Iuris, and may not be extended.

What will you then by law positive, bar reading of Homilies in the Church?
No. But I would have the Law, positive observed, and so bar reading of
Homilies from a Minister, because the Law positive, has appointed that office
to a Deacon. For it is not lawefull, for one private man, and fellow servant,
to transpose from his fellow servant, an office committed unto him by public
authority.

And it is verily to be thought, the bishop him self, will challenge as much
unto him self by this statute from the minister; and plainly tell him, that by
this statute, he alone has authority, to make Deacons, and ministers, and to
govern them, and that therefore, it beseems not a minister, to be ordered
otherwise, then according to the form of the book, and no otherwise to
preach, then as he shall be licensed thereunto, by him the Bishop. As touching
the injunctions, the aduertisments, and the articles of religion, wherein
mention is made sometimes: that Parsons, Vicars, and Curates; sometimes that the
minister shall read Homilies, they may easily be reconciled by this statute.
For the injunctions set forth primo Elizabeth, the aduertisementes and
articles set forth septimo Elizabeth, and this statute, being made 8.
Elizabeth, and so since, does bound, and limit the meaning of the injunctions
and aduertisementes. For whereas before, the names were used in them
confusedly; this statute, does aptly distinguish them, applying properly every
proper office, to his proper officer, and bringing those names before recited,
unto two principal heads. For though there be parsons, Vicars, Curates and
ministers generally in the Church, of whom mention is made in the injunctions,
articles, and aduertisementes: Yet these, and every one of these, must by this
statute, be either a Deacon or a minister specially. And being a Deacon, he
ought to execute the office of a Deacon, and being a minister, the office of a
minister by this statute: and so a Deacon if he be a Parson, vicar, or Curate,
he must execute the office of a Deacon only; that is, he must read the
scriptures and Homilies by this statute. Likewise, a minister if he be a
Parson, Vicar, or Curate, he must minister the doctrine and sacraments, and
discipline of Christ: he must be a dispensor of the word of God; and he must
preach only, and yet in saying that he must preach only, I do not exclude him
from doing those other duties, Sine quibus illud fieri non potest. Without the
which he cannot preach, as from reading the scriptures, and praying with the
people: but I exclude him from those things only, which are not incident to
his office, as from reading of Homilies: for he may preach, and never read
Homilies: but he can not preach profitablie, unless he read the scriptures
and use prayer. What will you then by law positive bar all ministers, that be
Parsons, Vicars, or Curates, and yet can not preach, from reading Homilies? I
answer, that whether they can preach or can not preach. Currat lex, Let the
law run, and let him that has defiled his hands by laying them upon such a
one, contrary to the commandment of the Lord, and contrary to the laws of
his governor under whom he lives, and by whom he has his preferment, hold
up his guyltie hands unto the Lord; for mercy in the day of the Lord, and
fall down before her highness for her gracious pardon, in so abusing her
highness laws. And to the end, you may see more apparauntly, these two
offices, by the law it self, to be thus distinguished, I have set down the
By. words pronounced by virtue of the statute unto the ministers, as
follows. [You have heard brethren, as well in your private examination, as
in the exhortation, and in the holy lessons taken out of the Gospel, and out
of the wrytinges of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how great
importance this office is, whereunto ye be called: and moreover, exhort you in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to have in remembrance into how high a
dignity, and to how chargeable an office ye be called: that is to say, to be
the messengers, the watchmen, the Pastors, and the stewardes of the Lord, to
teach, to premonish, to feed, and provide for the Lords family, to seek for
Christ his sheep, that be dispersed abroad, and for his children which be in
the midst of this nuaghty world, to be saved through Christ for ever: have
always therefore printed in your remembrance, how great a treasury is
committed to your charge, for they be the sheep of Christ, which he bought
with his death, and for whom he shed his blood: the Church and congregation
whom you must serve, is his spouse and his body, and if ye shall see the same
Church or any member thereof, to take any hurt or hinderauuce, by reason of
your negligence; ye know the greatness of your fault, and also of the
horrible punnishment which will ensue. Wherefore consider with your selves, the
end of your ministry toward the children of GOD, toward the spouse and
body of Christ, and see that ye never cease your labor, your care and
diligence, until you have done all that lies in you, according to your
bounden duty, to bring all such as are, or shall be committed to your
charge, unto that agreement in faith and knowledge of GOD, and to that
ripeness and perfectness of age in Christ, that there be no place left among
them, either for error in religion, or for viciousness in life. As here you
see the whole sum of the office of a Minister recited by Act of Parliament,
and pronounced by the Bishop: So in the whole action of ordering Ministers
both the bishops interrogatories, and the parties aunsweres, and all tend to
admonish the Minister still of his duty, in teaching and instructyng the
people, and in preaching. Where the whole action of ordering Deacons, tends
to admonish the Deacon of his office in reading: As thus. [Will you diligently
read the same unto the people assembled in the Church, where you shall be
appointed to serve.]

Answer. I will.


And again. [It pertains to the office of a Deacon to read holy scriptures
and Homilies in the congregation. And again, [take thou authority to execute
the office of a Deacon in the Church of God, and take thou authority to read
the Gospel in the Church of God.] And the^ one of them appointed by the
Bishop, shall read the Gospel of that day. And no doubt the whole house of
Parliament, had a singular care to have these offices distinguished by their
law, even as they are distinguished by the law of Christ him felfe, as
appears both by the places of scripture, appointed by the statute to be read
for every office: And also by appoynting the provision for the poor unto the
Deacons. And furthermore, it is his office, says the bishop by the same
statute, where provision is so made, to search for the sick, poor, and
impotent people of the parrishe, and to intimate their estates, names, and
places where they dwell to the Curate, that by his exhortation they be relieved
by the parrishe, or other convenient almose. And therefore I conclude again,
that the Bishop can no more appoint the office of provision for the poor unto
a Minister, then he can change or alter an Act of Paliament: And therefore, that
he can no more command a minister to read Homilies, then he can command
him to make provision for the poor. For as touching these words toward the
latter end of this action. [Take authority to preach where thou shall be
appoynted]: Whereby they take hold, no otherwise to suffer them to preach,
then as they shall be licensed afterward by writing, has neither head nor tail.
They make, by their favorable patience, a construction thereof, without all
ryme or reason. They expound ( Where) which is a word signifying place, and
referred to a place, for ( When) which is a word importing time. But had this
word ( When) been placed instead of ( Where) they might perhaps, have had
some cloak for the rain, for so the word ( When) and the word ( Shall) might
both have had relation to the time to come. And yet notwithstanding, this kind
of speech, would have been but a harshe kind of speech: namely, to say; [Take
thou authority to preach, when thou shalt have authority to preach]
couplinge the present tense with the future tense, the time present, with the
time to come, applying that to them selves but men, which is only proper and
peculiar to the holy Ghost: using the future tense, and the time to come, for
the certainty of the event thereof, instead of the present tense, and the time
present: But these words [take thou authority to preach the word to the
congregation, in the place where thou shall be appointed] is a very proper
kind of speech, and the words them selves, carry with them a natural sense:
As if the statute should have precisely and absolutely said thus: In what place
soever, thou shall hereafter be appointed to execute the office of a minister,
thou have now authority given thee to preach. For in case this were not the
natural meaning of the statute, they might well forbid the minister to
administer the Sacraments, without special license in writing, or not to
pray, or not to fast, or not to say service, or not to bury the dead, and such
like. But there is more to serve their turns, and to help their cause in the
law Cano^, and in the injunctions, the law Canon being thus.

Ex. de heret. c. excom Quia vero.
QVIA VERO NON NVLLI, etc. But because some under the color of Godliness,
denying (as the Apostle says) the power thereof, challenge unto them selves
authority to preach, whereas the Apostle says. How shall they preach, unless
they be sent, all they which are forbidden, or not sent, shall (besides
authority given unto them, either from the Apostolic sea, or the Catholic
Bishop af the place) publicly, or privately presume to usurp the office of
preaching, let them be excommunicated, and unless they speedelye repent, let
them be punished, with some other competent pain.

The iniunction being this. [Item that they, the persons above rehearsed,
shall preach in their own persons once in every quar^er of the year at the
least, one sermon, being licensed specially thereunto.] Whereunto I answer,
that this decree and this iniunction requiring special lisences to preach: And
the Bishop by virtue of the foresaid statute, giving authority to preach, can
not jar much; and that one little wrest, will set them in tune, their odds is
so small. If I say unto one, by word of mouth, Sir, take here the key of the
gate of my pasture, where my Gray ambling Gelding runs, open the gate, bring
him out, take him to your own use: I give him you franckly, has he not as
good a title and interest to my horse, as if I had made him a bill of sale,
under my hand and seal? And has not the minister likewise, as well a
special license, from a Bishop to preach, that is willed openly in the
presence of God, men and Angels: as he, that has a special license given him
alone in a corner: the one is pronounced, solemnly in the midst of the
congregation: the other is done secreatly, by a goose quill. Moreover, neither
does the foresaid Canon, neither yet the Iniunction, require a special license
in writing, to the end, that the minister should have power thereby only to
preach. For so should you take away the form and order, appointed by act of
Parliament, whereby authority is given to a minister to preach, and commit the
making of a minister to the Bishop, without a congregation. But the end, why a
special license, ought to be had, is not so much, for the party him self to
preach within his own cure, as for them, that shall admit him to preach out of
his own cure: And that appears manifestly by the eight Article of the
injunctions. The words are these. [Also that they shall admit no man within
any their cures, but such as shall appear unto them to be sufficiently
licensed thereunto, etc.] And in the end of this Iniunction, it is expressly
permitted, to every minister, to preach within his own cure, though he be not
specially licensed thereunto. The words are these: [And that no other be
suffered, to preach out of his own cure or parrish, then such, as shall be
licensed, as is before expressed] therefore, a minister to preach within his own
cure, yea though he have no license, is commanded. In the time of Henry the 4.
at what time Wyckliffe preached the Gospel, the very same laws were
established against him and his brethren, to stay the course of the Gospel
and yet were never any forbidden to preach in their own parrishes, as
appears by that, that follows [Let no man within this Realm, or other the
kings Dominions, presume or take upon him to preach privily or apertly, without
special license, first obtained of the ordinary of the same place, Curates
in their own parrish churches, and persons heretofore privileged, and others
admitted by the Canon law only excepted. And that no manner of person, seculer,
or reguler, being authorized to preach by the laws now prescribed, or
lycensed by special privilege, shall take upon him the office of preaching the
word of God, or by any means preach unto the clargy or layety, either in the
church or without, in Latin or english, except he first present him self and
be examined of the Ordinary of the place where he preaches: And so being found
a fit person, as well in manners, as in knowleg, he shall be sent by the said
ordinary to some one church or more as shall be thought expedi ent by the said
ordinary according to the quality of the person. Nor any person aforesaid,
shall presume to preach, except first he give faithful signification in due
form of his sending, and authority: that is, that he that is authorized, do
come in form appointed him in that behalf, and those that affirm they come
by special privilege, do show their privilege unto the parson or Vicar of
the place where they preach. And those that pretend themselves to be sent by
the Ordinary of the place, shall likewise show the ordinaries letters, made unto
him for that purpose under his great Seal. Let us always understand, the
Curate having perpetuity to be sent of right to the people of his own cure.
Furthermore no clergy man, or Perochia^s of any parish or place, within our
province of Canterb. shall admit any man to preach with in the churches,
churchyardes, or other places whatsoever, except there be first manifest
knowledge had of his authority, privilege, or sending thither, according to the
order aforesaid. Touching the first protestation to be made, promised and
subscribed, by the^ that shall hereafter be admitted to any office, room or
cure in any church, or other place ecclesiastical, contained in these words in
the book of aduertisements. In primis I shall not preach or publikly interpret,
but only read that which is appointed by public authority, without special
license of the By. under his Seal, though her May. most excellent name, be
used by the publishers of the said aduertiseme^ts for confirmation of the^,
and that they affirm her M. to have commanded them thereunto by her highness
Letters, yet because the book it self, comes forth without her M.
privilege, and is not printed by her M. printer, nor any in his name,
therefore, it carries no such credit and authority with it, as whereunto her M.
subjects ar necessarily bound to subscribe, having other laws, and other
Iniunctio^s under her M. name, and authorized by her M. privilege, contrary to
the same. For her M. by her Injunctions co^ma^deth every minister to preach
within his own cure without license, as before you have hard. But let us go
forward. It has bin showed before, that every one, to be made a Deacon, or a
minister, ought to be called, tried, examined, known to have such qualites, as
were requisite, and that mention also has bin made of the face of a church, of
the latin tongue, and of many other circumstances, necessary to that actio^: al
which things set down rather generally, the^ particularly described, require a
larger discourse. Panormitan, and the Doctors, upon the civil and Canonical
law, have these conclusions.

Ex. n. ca. dictus de consuetu. nu. 2^.
Statuta debent interpretari secundum (...) commune sieve debent
interpretationem recipere a iure communi, and statuti verba dubia, debent
interpretari, vt minus ledat ius commune quam sit possibile. Statutes ought to
be interpreted, according to common law, or statutes ought to receive their
interpretation from common law, and doubtful words of a statute, ought to be
so construed, that they be as little prejudicial, to the common law, as is
possible. Out of which conclusions, I collect this rule: Namely, that where a
statute shall establish an office, practiced and had in use before the making
of the statute, and shall require a calling, a trial, an examination, and
qualities in an officer, meet to execute that office, and shall not specify
and declare any particular kind of calling, of trial, of examination, and
such qualities, etc. That then such manner of calling, of trial, of
examination, and such qualities, are required by that statute to be in such an
officer, as by common right were requisite for such an officer before the
making of that statute. And because by the view of the former order it self,
it is very apparent that the same form and order was appointed, by men very
desirous to promote, as much as in them lay, the honor and glory of God, and
to abolish all superstitions and trumperies brought into his Church: Therefore
because I ought by duty, to conceive their meaning to the best, and most
agreeable to their profession: I say, that they meant herein, only such
calling, such trial, such examination, and such qualities, as are requisite to
be in a Deacon, and in a minister by the law of God. Which is evident both by
the order of prayer used at the time of their orderinges, and also by the
scripture read for that purpose. The prayer follows. [Almighty God, which by
thy divine providence have appointed diverse orders of ministers in the Church,
and did inspire thine holy Apostles, to choose unto this order of Deacons,
the first martyr S. Steven with other; mercifully behold these thy servants,
now called to the like office and administration: replenish them so with the
truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that both by word and good
example, they may faithfully serve thee in this office, to the glory of thy
Name, and profit of the Congregation, through the merits of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, now and ever,
Amen.

After this prayer, follows the Epistle out of Timothy. Likewise, must the
Ministers be honest, not double tonged, not given to much wine, neither greedy
of filthy lucre, but holding the Mystery of the faith with a true conscience.
And let them first be proved, and let them Minister so that no man be able to
reprove them. Even so must their wives be honest, not evil spekers, but sober
and faithful in all things. Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, and
such as rule their children well, and their own houshouldes. For they that
minister well, get them selves a good degree, and a great liberty in the
faith, which is in Jesus Christ. etc. or else this out of the 6. of the Acts.

Then the twelve, called the multitude of the Disciples together, and said, It
is not meet, that we should leave the word of GOD and serve tables:
wherefore brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, and
full of the holy Ghost and wisdom, to whom we may commit this business,
but we will give our selves to continual prayer, and to the administration of
the word. And that saying pleased the whole multitude, and they chose Steven,
a man full of faith, and full of the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Procorus, and
Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a convert of Antioch. These they
set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on
them, etc.

The Communion ended, shall be said this Collect
Fol. 1. page 8.
Almighty God, giver of all good things, which of thy great goodness, have
vouched safe to accept and take these thy servants unto the office of
DEACONS: make them we beseech thee, O Lord, to be modest, humble, and
constaunt in their Mynistration, to have a ready will to observe all Spiritual
Discipline, that they having always the Testimonye of a good Conscience, and
continuing ever stable and strong in thy Son Christ, may so well use
themselves in this inferior office, that they may be found worthy to be
called to the Higher ministeryes in the church, through the same thy son our
Savior Christ, to whom be glory and honor world without end. Amen.

The Epistle appointed at the time, of ordering of ministers, shall be read out
of the twenty chapter of the Acts.
Fol. 8. page 1.
From Mileto Paul sent messengers to Ephesus, and called the elders of the
congregation, which when they were come to him, he said unto them. Ye know
that from the first day, that I came into Asia, after what manner I have been
with you at all seasons, serving the Lord withal humblenes of mind, and with
many tears and temptations which happened unto me, by the layings awaite of
the Jews, because I would keep back nothing that was profitable unto you, but
to show you and teach you openly through every house, witnessing both to the
Jews and Greeks, the repentance that is toward GOD, and the faith which is
toward our LORD Jesus. And now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto
Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall come to me there; but that the
holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that bonds and trouble abide
me: but none of these things move me, neither is my life dear unto my
self, that I might fulfill my course with joy; and the ministration of the
word, which I have received of the Lord Iesue, to testify the Gospel of the
Grace of GOD. And now behold, I am sure that henceforth you all, through
whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of GOD, shall see my face no more.
Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all
men. For I have spared no labor, but have showed you all the counsel of GOD.
Take heed therefore to your selves: and to all the flock, among whom the
holy Ghost has made you overseers, to rule the congregation of God, which he
has purchased with his blood, etc.

Or else the third Chapter of the first Epistle to Tymothie.
THis is a true saying. If any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires
an honest work. A Bishop therefore must be blameles, the husband of one wife,
diligent, sober, discreet, a keeper of hospitality, apt to teach, not given
to overmuch wine, no fighter, not gredi of filthy lucre: but courteous, gentle,
abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness, one that rules well his own
house, one that has children in subjection with all reverence. For if a man
cannot rule his own house, how shall he care for the Congregation of God?
He may not be a young Scholar, lest he swell, and fall into the judgment of
the evil speaker. He must also have a good report of them which are without,
least he fall into rebuke, and snare of the evil speaker.

After this shall be read for the Gospel, a piece of the last Chapter of
Matthewe.
Fol. 9. page 2.
THen Jesus came and spoke unto them saying. All power is given unto me, in
heaven and in earth: Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, Baptizing them,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: teachiug
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And lo, I am
with you always, even unto the end of the world.

The prayer used by the Bisshoppe, in the ordering of Ministers.
Fol. 11. page 1
Almighty God, giver of all good things, which by thy holy spirit, have
appointed diverse orders of Ministers in the Church, mercifully behold these
thy servants, now called to the office of priesthood, and replenish them so,
with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life, that both by word and
good example, they may faithfully serve thee in this office, to the glory of
thy Name, and profit of the congregation, through the merits of our savior
Jesus Christ, who lives and reygneth, with thee and the holy Ghost, world
without end. Amen.

These prayers, and these places of scripture appointed by the whole consent of
the Realm, to be made and read at the time of making Deacons and ministers,
most strongly prove, that their intent and purpose was, to have such men
placed in the office of Deacons, and ministers, as whom the holy scriptures
has commanded should be placed, and as they pray might be placed. But suppose
that they, being not so faithful to the lord, as were expedient for them,
account not the Lords ways to be the best ways, his councels not to be the
wisest counsels, to interpret the meaning of the statute, because they are such
ways, as wherein the Lords servants apply them selves precisely to walk,
and therefore ignominiously are termed Precisians: Suppose this I say, yea and
suppose that they have preferred their own inventions, and set the
consultations of the grauest Senators, and wisest counselors, and chiefest
rulers of the land behind their backs: yet if reason might have ruled them,
and their will might have been no law, there was and is an other manner of
calling, of trial, of examination, other qualities, an other face of the
church, an other Latin tongue, by other positive laws required, which as
(partly by sequel of their proceedinges, and partly by their own records
appears) was never or very seldom used by any of them. The manner of calling
ought to have been thus.

The manner of calling.
QVANDO EPISCOPVS, etc. When the Bishop is disposed to make an ordination, all
they which will come to the holy ministry, the fourth day before the
ordination, are to be called to the City, together with the Elders, which
ought to present the^. And this kind of calling, is a solemn publishing the
bishops purposes, either by some process openly fixed upon the doors of the
Cathedral Church, or proclaimed Voce Preconis, by the voice of an Apparitor,
to make the Bishops intent known, that happily such a day he will make Deacons
or ministers, and therefore cites such to be present, as will offer
themselves, meet men for that service. Which manner of calling, is briefly also
commanded, by order and form of the book of ordayning ministers. First, when
the day appointed by the Bishop, is come, etc. Fol. 2. p. 2. 27. Article.
And in the Articles of religion, the self same is expressed. It is not
lawful for any man to take upon him the office of public preaching, or
ministering the Sacraments in the congregation, before he be lawfully called,
and sent to execute the same. In the title. Articles for certain orders in
ecclesiastical policy.
In the aduertisementes likewise, you have these words. First against the day
of giving orders appointed, the bishop shall give open monitions to all men, to
except against such as they know not to be worthy, either for life or
conversation. The manner of trial follows, and ought to be after this sort.

The manner of trial.
ET TVNC EPISCOPVS, etc. And then the bishop ought to choose him ministers, and
other men skillful of the law of God, exercised in Ecclesiastical functions,
who first of all, ought diligently to enquire out the life of them that are to
be ordained, their kindred, their Country, their age, their bringing up, the
place where they were borne, whether they be learned, whether instructed in the
law of God, whether they firmly hold the catholic faith, and in plain
words can utter the same: and they to whom this charge is committed, ought to
take heed, that they do not for favor, or for desire of reward, decline from
the truth, to present any to the hands of the B. either unworthily, or not
meet to take holy orders. And therefore let them continually three days
together be examined, and so on the sabbath in the which they are approved,
let them be presented unto the B. Constitu. Otho Sacer.
Out of the constitutions of Otho, I have before cited this decree following,
which may aptly be repeted again, to prove the having of a scrutine to be
necessary before the making of ministers, as it was there to prove what
qualities were requisite in them. Quare cum ninus periculosum sit, etc.
Considering that it is a thing very perrillous, to ordain men unworthy,
Idiotes, illegitimate, irreguler, persons unlearned, persons vagrant, and such
as have not any certain or true title: in deed we ordain, that before the
conferring of orders, diligent inquisition and search be made by the Bishop of
all these things. And the gloss upon the word ante. Est ergo necessarium, etc.
It is therefore necessary, that this scrutynie of the examina^ts, preceed the
conferring of orders, even as the commandment of the father, or master, must
necessarily prevent the taking of an inheritance by the son, or by the
servant, and this must be so done for the irreuocable prejudice that otherwise
might happen. And because this collation hangs on the disposition of law, any
preposteration contrary to the order appointed by law, shall annihilate the
whole act. Again, an other gloss has these words. Ordinandi ita sunt,
subtiliter examinandi, and inquirendum est, de natione in qua nati sunt, an
sint de illa diocesi, an legitime nati, an bouae famae. Glos. in cap.
constitutus ver. ordinan dos ex: de purgacione cap.
Men to be ordained, are narrowly to be examined, and there must inquiry be
made, what country men they are, whether they be of the same Diocese, whether
they be legitimate, whether they be of good fame. Quia in nullo debet eorum
opinio vacillare, Because their credit ought not to be shaken in any case.
Distinct. 33. Laici.
And the Pope in that Chapter reprehending the curiosity of the Bishop, unto
whom he writes, for too too narrowly inquiring after the manners of certain
compurgatours. Vtinam (says he) sic discuteres ordinandos. I wish thou
would make such inquisition of those, whom thou preferrest to holy orders.
An other reason, why a minister should be tried, is because he must be learned:
Glos. de elec le. 6. cap. si forte. ver. scientiae.
but qualitas extrinseca, vt literatura no^ presumitur, nisi probetur An
outward quality, as learning, is not presumed to be in a man, unless it be so
proved, and therefore, he is to be examined upon the same. ff. De ritu: nup.
l. qui liberos.
Et vbi dare volo filiam meam, id est, ecclesiam in sponsam, debeo inquirere de
dignitate sponsi; ratio, quia eligens tenetur inuenire condicionom debitam
filio. Extrauag. com. c. ad cuiuslibet de prebend. and dig.
And where I mind to give my Daughter, that is to say, a Church to be a Bryde,
I ought to enquire of the worthiness of the Brydegrome, viz. af the prelate, the
Brydegrome of the Church: and the reason is, for that every Father choosing an
hushand for his daughter, is bound by law, to choose one of condition meet for
his daughter. The trial of ministers.
In form and manner of ordering Deacons, by the book of Edward the sixth, a
certain trial is likewise commanded, the Bishop using these words to the
Archdeacon. [Take heed that the Persons whom ye present unto us, be apt, and
meet, for their learning, and Godly conversation, to exercise their ministry
duly, to the honor of God, and edifying of his Church]. This manner of trial
can not better appear, then by a comparison to the proceedinges and
Commencementes in Oxenforde, or Cambridge, familiarlie known to schoolmen in
both Universities. Whosoever is to take any degree in school, either Bacheler,
Master, or Doctor, in any faculty, he must first set upon the school
doors, his questions where in he is to answer: He must publicly answer to
every one that will oppose him: he must afterward in the University church,
submit him self privately, to the examination of every one of that degree,
whereunto he desires to be promoted: He must afterward be brought by his
presenter into the congregation house, to the judgment and trial of the whole
house, and if he shall there have a sufficient number of his superiors voices
allowing his manners, and pleased with his learning, he is then presented, by
one of the house to the vicechancellour, and Proctors, and by them as Judges in
the name of the whole house, admitted to his degree. The examination whereof,
mention is made in the book of king Edward the sixth, somewhat varieth from
this kind of trial, and consists in the interrogatories between the Bishop
demanding, and the party aunswering. For says the bishop. [Doe you think,
etc. Do you vnfaynely believe, etc. Will you apply, etc.] Fol. 7. p. r.
And the party answers, I think so: I do believe: I will, etc. For says
the book, then shall the bishop examine every one of them that are to be
ordained in the presence of the people, after this manner following. [Do ye
trust, etc. Do ye believe, etc.] There is also required by the book, that the
bishop should have knowledge of the party, to be made a Deacon or minister.
Which knowledge, every man will guess should not be a bare view, or external
sight of the comelines, and proportion of his bodily shape and personage, but a
sure and steadfast judgment, grounded upon substantial proofs, of the virtues
and ornaments of his mind: and the same also should be a far more
exquisite knowledge, then only to know the man to be an honest man, because
the book requires him also, to be an apt and meet man, to execute his
ministry duly, for which, one amongst even the meanest of us all, having
upon a sudden, espied one like an honest man, yea, or one happily commended
unto us to be a right honest man in deed, which one (I say) of us, would
forthwith familiarly greet this man, clap his hands upon his head, and
liberally entertain him, to teach his sons Demosthenes in Greek, or Cicero
in Latin, the party him self being such a one as never had learned the
Greek Alphabet, or the Latin Grammar? would we not be thus circumspect trow
you, as to try his cunning, ere we trusted his honesty in this case? With what
qualities, such as are to be made ministers, or Deacons, ought to be adorned,
has been already sufficiently declared, out of the laws positive in force.
And now what is to be understood by the face of the Church, whereof mention
also is made in the said book, that that follows may sufficiently instruct
us. Distinct. 24. c. quando.
The Canon law touching this point says thus. Alias autem, etc, But otherwise,
Let not a B. presume to ordain any, without the council of the Clergy, and
the testimony of the people. 70. Distinct. c. ordinationes.
Again, see that solemly, at a convenient time, and in the presence of many
standers by, you make ordinatio^ both of Elders and Levites: And again. The
other priests, let the^ be ordained of their own B. so that the citizens and
other priests give their assent, and so likewise must the Deacons be ordained.
24. Distinct. c. Episcopus.
And again: Let not a B. ordain any Clearks without the advice of his
Clergy, and so to, that he seek the allowaunce and good liking of the
Citizens. And again: let the requests of the Citizens, the testimony of the
people: the judgment of the honorable: the election of Clearkes, be had in the
ordination of Clearks. And note that these texts and many other mo do al
affirm, that elections and ordinatio^s must be made by Citizens, and Priests
or Clearkes in the Plural number, and not by one Citizen or one Priest in the
singular number, Neither are these decrees to be understood of the chief Priest
of every Diocese alone, but are verified of every Priest thorough out the
country, as appears by the Canon following. Distinct. 64. c. Si forte.
Sed nec ille deinceps sacerdos erit, quem nec clerus nec populus propriae
ciuitatis eligit. But he shall be no priest henceforth, who^ neither Clergy
nor people of his own proper city has elected. Whereunto also the civil law
accords. Authen. de sanct. Epis clericos colla nona.
Si vero, etc. But if holy rules shall prohibit such as be chosen by them, as
men unworthy, then let the most holy B. procure to ordain whomsoever he shall
think best. A bishop alone, may then ordain says this law, when the people
and clergy have chosen unworthy me^: it says not that he may always ordain
alone without contradiction, or that the people and Clergy have no interest in
the actio^. But this, law only provides in this case a remedy, to supply the
negligence of those unto who^ the election appertains, if they shall do
otherwise therein then becomes them. And to make this matter, whereof we
entreat, more plain and evident, even by the statutes and ordinances of the
realm, the choice and ordination of a minister, is not apropried to the B.
alone. First by the statu. 25. H. 8. these law, Canons, and decrees before
specified, being then in force, in as much, as they be neither contrariant, nor
repugnant to the laws and customs of the realm, nor derogatorie to the
Queens prerogative royal, are confirmed, ratifyed, and in force now. Yea
because they are agreeable to the laws and customs of the realm, and
maintain her prerogative royal, as afterward shall be declared, they ought
now to be executed. Secondly by a statute made 21. of H. the 8. cap. 13. It is
enacted. that a By. may have 6. Chaplains, because six ministers at the least,
ought to be present when the By. gives orders: Thirdly in the book of making
priests, etc. are these words: there shall be an exhortation unto the people,
declaring how the people ought to esteem them (meaning the ministers) in their
vocation. And these words: the B. shall say unto the people. Brethren if there
be any, etc. And these words the by. commending such to the prayers of the
congregation, with the Clergy and people present shall say, etc. Then shall the
B. examine every one of them that are to be ordered in the presence of the
people. By which words and branches of the book, it is evident, that, that
people, over whom the minister is to be placed, ought especially to be present.
For what profit can a people, dwelling at York reap, by exhortation of the
preacher unto love and obedience of their minister, when their minister shall be
made at London? Her highness, the nobility and fathers of the land, were of
more wisdom and understanding I am sure, then to imagine, that a people
dwelling at Carlyle, could be taught or instructed by a sermon made at Exeter.
And by the former decrees wherein mention is made of people and citizens, the
same people and citizens (if we will know what citizens be properly) are not
taken for the Quiristers, the Singers, the Organ players, the Canons, the
Archdeacon of the Cathedral Church (for all these by the Canon law bear the
names of Clearkes) neither are the bishops servants, taken in these Canons,
for Citizens, because Citizens, by these rules, must give their consentes, and
as having a principal interest in the action, must not only be eye witness,
and ear witnesses to the bishops upright dealing, but also must be agents and
cohelpers themselves. But serui and domestici in re non domestica. Servants,
and folk domestical, in a thing not domestical, are not allowed fit
witnesses, neither have servants, as servants, any interest: And therefore
Citizens in these former Canons are Citizens, Et re, and nomine, Citizens in
deed, and in name. And as I proved before out of the statute of the land,
thatas the people of the place, destitut of a Pastor must be present, and give
their consent at the choice of their minister, so is the same also stablyshed
by Cano^ law, and confirmed by act of Parliament. Glos. in c. 1. de reb. eccle.
non alienand ver. tractatus lib. 6.
For this word consensus, sieve collaudatio, consent or approbatio^ described
to be multorum voluntas, ad quos res pertinet simul iniuncta: The will of many;
unto whom, the matter appertains, jointly linked together, proves that not
only Citizens in deed, but also, that Citizens of the place, where the party
should afterward serve as a minister, ought to give their consent and
allowance, to the making him a minister, because the matter of having a
minister, appertains properly unto none other, but chiefly and altogether
concerns them. And therefore the law wills, Vt quod omnes tangit, ab
omnibus approbetur. That, that be allowed of all, which touches all. Bishops
Canons fol 5.
Whereat our bishops them selves, in their English Canons of Discipline, have
aimed, and whereunto in words they have agreed. The bishop shall lay his hands
on none, (say they) nor at any other time, but when it shall chance that some
place of ministration be void in the Diocese. And therefore I conclude, since
none must be made a minister, but when it shall chance some place of
ministration be void, and since the consent and allowaunce of the people,
whom the matter does concern, must by the Canons, and statutes in force, be
had, that therefore the people of the place, where such place of ministration
is void, have in the choice and appointment of there minister, a special
interest, and prerogative. Neither ought those ridiculous Canons of that
foolish pope Adryan the proud: Nullus Laicorum principum, etc. 63 did. cap.
nullus. etc non est.
Let none of the lay princes or potentates join him self to the election, or
promotion of a Patriark; Metropolitan: or any bish. etc: Neither ought this
and such like Canons, (I say) any whit impeach the truth of my former
assertions. First for that these latter Canons are directly opposite, and
contrary to the ordinance of almighty God: And the Apostles (says the holy
scripture) Act. 6.
calling the multitude of the disciples together, said unto them, choose
therefore brethren out from among you, seven men of good report, etc. whom we
may appoint to this business: and this speech pleased the whole multitude then
present, and they choose Steven, etc. Which ordinance of the Apostles
whosoever shall think, that the same may receive a counterbuff, by an Angel
coming from heaven, much less by a pope coming from the bottomless pit, for
my part I hold him accursed, and so utterly unworthy the name of a Disciple.
Secondly, the said Canons of Adryan, plainly and in flat terms are
derogatorie to her majesty's prerogative royal, and therefore by the statute
of 25. Henry the 8. utterly abolished. Thirdly, they are against the customs
and statutes of the Realm. For by all the customs of the Realm, where any
Mayor, Bayliffe, Shreiffe, or head officer of any Borough, Town, or any
incorporation is to be elected, or where any knight of the sheire, any
Burgess, any Constable, any Crowner, any Vergerer within any forest, and such
like are chosen, the same officers, are always chosen, by the greatest part of
such men's voices, as have interest in the action. And as touching the statutes
of the realm, it is likewise evident, that they confirming the book of king
Edward the 6. and the Canons, not prejudicial to her highness prerogative
royal, give unto the prince, nobility, gentry, and other faithful of the
land, an interrest, in choice and allowance of their pastors. And who can be
so void of reason or understanding, as to imagine that men renewed with the
spirit of wisdom, in the Gospel of Christ, should be careful and diligent,
in the choice of discreet and wise men, to be dealers for them, in matters
pertaining to this transitory life, and yet should be remiss and negligent,
what guides they approve of, to conduct them in the ways of eternal life? Or
that they should be less provident over their spirits and souls, then over
their bodies and goods? Every man whether he be in the ministry, or out of
the ministry, contrary to that blind popish distinction, of Layetie and
spirituality, if he be a true believer, is the servant of Christ and has the
spirit of Christ, and in the choice of his Pastor, shall have a Spirit given
unto him, to discern, whether the same be a man apt to teach or no. The
confusion therefore so greatly feared by popish Idolatours, is not once to be
suspected amongst Christians. They had cause to fear and be affrighted,
having put away faith and a good conscience: But we have boldness with
confidence to approach unto our GOD, who is able, and will assuredly stay the
rage of the people, and fynishe our actions, with a quiet and peaceable issue.
And thus much of the face of the Church, and of the choice and consent of the
people and Clergy, to be had in the ordering of ministers. Touching the
Latin tongue required to be in every minister, as the laws have always had
respect, to a competent and sufficient knowledge therein: so the Act of
Parliament, made the 13. Elizab. cap. 12. has fully and at large expounded the
same, and limited the knowledge thereof in these words: [None shall be made a
Minister unless he be able to answer and render to the ordinary, an account
of his Faith in latin according to the said Articles.] And if any shall be
ordained, contrary to any provision of that Act, then is he no Minister at all.]

And thus as breefly as I could, I have examined these words, mentioned in
the Book viz. calling tried: examined: known: qualities: the face of the
Church; and the Latin tongue, what meaning and signification by Laws in
force the same words have And also what order, and form our Bishops ought
by Law positive to have used, in making Deacons, and Ministers: and what
credit and fidelity, her Highness, and the whole body of our Church, and
common weal have reposed in them, for an orderly, upright, and sincere
disposition of these things. Unto which trust, how aunswerable there service
and government has been, I doubt not, but upon there Examinations they will
approve the same, to have been faithful, just and equal.

But by way of supposition. If any shall deny, their fidelities to have been
such as is pretended, what remedy then? or what is to be done then? Hereunto I
answer, since the peril happening unto others thorough their negligences in
time past, is unrecoverable, that therefore the Law established against such
excesses, would be executed in time to come, the punishment of one, is a
terror to many: and by fear of punishment, a man is made good. The sum and
effect of which Law, confirmed by Act of Parliament, is this. viz. Tam indigne
promouens, quam indigne promotus est deiiciendus. As well the man unworthily
promoting, as the man unworthily promoted is to be deposed. Proofs and examples
whereof are these. In the Cap. NIHIL EST? EX. DE PREBEND. Order was taken, as
you have seen before, that not only men unworthy, should not be admitted to
regi-ment of souls, but it is also in that place provided, incase any thing
shall be otherwise unadvisedly attempted, that then not only the man
unworthily promoted, but also the unworthy promotor should be punished. Ex de
aetat. and qualit. c. penult.
And again, it is decreed thus. If they shall henceforth presume to ordain
any that are unskillful and ignorant, which may easily be espied: We decree,
that both the ordaynours, and the ordained be subject to grievous punishment.
So. did. c. ex penitentibus and 5r did. c aliquantos
Again, Qui ex certa scientia indignum ordinat, aut deponitur, aut priuatur
potestate ordinandi. He that wittingly ordayneth an unworthy man, is either to
be deposed or depryued from power to ordain. 1. q. 1. c. si qui epis.
Again, Si qui Episcopi, etc. If any Bishop have consecrated any such Priest
as ought not to be consecrated, although in some sort they escape infamy, yet
they shall not thencefoorth have ordinations, neither shall they ever be
present at that sacrament, which they unworthily have administered. Upon which
decree, and the word ordinations, the gloss flatly concludes, Quod semper est
veritas, quod qui promouet indignum depositionem meretur. That the truth
evermore is this, viz. that whosoever promoteth an unworthy man, deserves to
be deposed: Quia culpa reus, etc. glos. in constable. otho. de scru. in ord. facien
c. 1. ver. ab.
Because he is culpable, committing an order, charge or office to such an
unworthy person: And because he is unfaithful, communicating his ministry
unto an unworthy man, to the hurt of the Church and honor of God, which by
good ministers ought to be furthered. ff de exercit. l. 1. magi^rum.
A shipmaister or an Inn keeper, using the service of an evil mate, or ship
boy, or of an unthrifty Tapster, or Osteler, is to make restitution, if any
thing imbezeled from his passengers, or Guestes: for the negligence of either
of these, in this case is punishable, Quia opera malorum seruorum vtitur.
Because he uses the service of evil servants. By which laws the gloss
proves, that though an Archdeacon have authority by his office to examine,
and do present unfit men to the Bishop, that yet the bishop notwithstanding
ought to be punished, because the bishop is answerable for the fact of the
examinor, sithence the examination is made by his commandment, and also for
that reseruatum est episcopo ius examina^di illum. Right is reserved unto the
b. to examine him, examinatus enim examinatur in hiis precipue iniquibus
vertitur periculum animae. Glos. c. ad haec ver. examinentur. Extrauag. de
offi. Archid. Glos. 1. l. non est.
A man once examined is to be reexamined, especially touching those things,
wherein perril of soul consists. Et factum quod est, mutatur ex
superuenienti causa. And a deed once done is altered upon a new cause. ff. de
transact
An Archdeacon having by law the custody of candlestickes, copes, and
vestmentes, and other Idolatrous garments, was remiss in safe keeping these
things, whereupon the Pope wrote to the Archbishop, and willed him straightly
to require the said ornaments at his hands: Extrauag. de statut. regul. c.
cum ad Monesterium penul.
and further commanded him to be punished, and to make restitution, if
thorough his negligence or default, any thing were perished, in so much as by
his office he was bound to the safe custody of them. Neither did he behave
himself, Vt bonus pater familias in re sua gessisset: As a good Father of an
household, would have done in his own household affairs. And thus far
touching the bishops unworthily promoting unworthy men unto the ministry,
touching unworthy persons, unworthily promoted, the decrees following, tell us
what in like case should be done with them.

Extrauag. de aetat. and qua. cap. vlt.
QVAMVIS MVLTA FVERVNT, etc. Although many things were proposed against the
Bishop of Calinea, yet because he him self has confessed before us, that he
never learned Grammar, neither ever had read Donate, and by evidence of the
fact, his ignorance of learning and insufficiency is so apparaunt unto us,
that it were against God and Canonical constitutions, to tolerate so great a
defect in a Bishop, we have thought good, utterly to remove him from the
execution of the office of a Bishop, and also from the Administration of the
Church of Calinea. If it might stand with the good pleasure of the Lord, to
move once Iehosaphat First with the book of God; secondly with the laws of
the Realm, to make a general visitation by men of sound and sincere religion,
and by men of valiant and stout courages, I dare boldly avouch, that the
valewe of the first fruits of benefices, that might be made void, by the just
deprivation of unjust possessors, even by the evidence of the fact it self,
would amount to a greater increase of her highness treasure, then the best
subsidy she has levied of them, since the time of her gracious government.
Neither is this Chapter impertinent to this purpose, though herein express
mention be made only of a bishop. For if you weigh and consider, why the
bishop was deposed, the same reason is sufficient likewise to deprive any
inferior person offending in the like case. The cause of the bishops
deprivation, was his insufficiency and defect of learning, and why then should
not insufficiency and defect of learning, be as just a cause to deprive a
minister of an inferior calling, being infected with the same disease? The
charge and function of the bishop was, to teach and govern others: The same
end is allotted to every one that takes upon him the cure of souls. The
bishop wanting skill and ability, to perform an office taken upon him, is
degraded and cast out: and an inferior minister destitute of the same
furniture is maintained and kept in. Again.

Epis. de statu Monacho cum ad Monast Abbas.
ABBAS VERO, etc. But the Abbot (whom all men ought reverently to obey in all
things) how much more should he be frequent with his brethren in all things,
having vigilant care, and diligent circumspection, that he may be able to give
an acceptable account unto God of his office committed unto him. But if the
said Abbot be, a preuaricator or a despiser of his order, or negligent or
remiss, let him know for a surety, that he is not only to be deposed from
his office, but also some other way to be chastised, considering not only his
own fault, but the fault of others is to be required at his hand.

And again. 18. q. 2. si quis abbas.
Si quis Abbas cautus in regimine, humilis, castus, miserecors, discretus,
sobriusque, non fuerit, ac diuina praecepta verbis and exemplo non ostenderit,
ab episcopo in cuius territorio consistie, and a vicinis, etc. If any Abbot,
shall not be circumspect in government, humble, chaste, merciful, discreet
and sober, and shall not show forth godly precepts, both in word and example
of life, let him be removed from his honor, by the bishop in whose territory
he dwells, and by the next Abbots and others fearing God, notwithstanding all
the congregation consenting unto his sin, would have him to be Abbot. And
therefore both these constitutions may serve to deprive all such ministers, as
in life, learning, manners, and conversation, are like unto such Abbots. Yea,
and touching inferior ministers, the law has likewise specially provided as
follows. Quod si forte necessitas postulauerit, vt sacerdos, tanquam
inutilis, and indignus, a cura gregis, debeat remoueri, agendum est ordinate
apud Episcopum, etc Extrauag. de hereti. cap: cum ex.
But if happily necessity require, that a priest as unprofitable and unworthy,
ought to be removed from the charge of his flock, you must ordinarily repair
unto the bishop. Again. Dictum est nobis presbiteros propter suam negligentiam
canonice degradatos. It is told us, that certain Elders were canonically
degraded for their negligence. And here it appears (says the gloss) Quod
quis aeque deponitur propter negligentiam, sicut propter dolum. That one is as
justly deposed for negligence, as for collation, according to the tenor of the
Canon following. 1. q. 1. si qui epis.
Non modo pro haeresi vel pro qualibet maiori culpa, sed etiam pro negligentia
remouebitur. He shall not only be removed for heresy, or other greater
offense, but for negligence also. Whereunto also the laws of the Empire agree.

QVI NON SERVIT, etc. He that does no service to the Church, or fayneth him
self to be a Clearke, when in deed he is none, he ought not to enjoy the
privilege of Clearkes, but an other is to be surrogated in his room. And
again. Ne argenterorum vel numulareorum munera, etc. 47. page 2.
We command that the charge of Bankers, and such as lend, and exchange money
for gain, be not left off by those which only hastily desire to be called
collegiat men or Deanes. If any therefore under the bare covering of a name, or
title, term himself a collegiat man, or one of a brotherhood, let him know
that an other is to be deputed in his room, who may be approved sufficient to
execute the same office. Extrauag de institu. cap. ex frequentibus.
The reasons and principal grounds of which laws and Canons are these. ^ola
possessio non sufficit in beneficiis ecclesiasticis, nisi adsit canonica
institutio. A sole possession is not sufficient in ecclesiastical benefices,
unless there concur also a Canonical institution. ff de decurio l. Hereminus
Sola possessio non facit aliquem decurionem sed iusta electio. A sole
possession, makes not one a Senator or Captain, but a lawful election. Et
prescriptio non prodest, cum habent malam fidem. Extrauag de prescript. c. 51.
dilige^ti etc. cum omne
A prescription does not profit, in case it be grounded upon an evil
conscience, and therefore sithence men so ordained, be male fidei possessores
unjust possessours, fraus and dolus eorum sibi patrocinari non debet, Their
deceit and collusion ought not to support them. Neque debet quis locupletari
alterius iactura. Neither ought any man to be enriched, with the loss and
hinderaunce of an other: For these considerations, the law I say, has
provided, that both the promotor, and the promoted, Agentes and consentientes,
pari poena puniantur, As well the abettours as the deed doers are to sustain
equal punishment: And once again, as touching the displacing of idol
sheepeheardes, and remoouing of unpreaching hirelinges, besides these former
laws, there are many mo notable conclusions to be drawn from the Civil
laws, for the proof thereof. ff. de munerib. and honor. l. vt gradatim.
reprobari authen. de col. iube mus colla. 9.
Reprobari posse medicum a repub. qua^uis semel probatus sit Dives magnus
Antoninus cum patre rescripsit. That a physician once proved, and admitted by
public consent, to the practice of Physic, may be removed again, from that
function, in case afterward he be found rechlesse, the holy and great
Antonie and his Father before him have aunsweared; ff Ioh. dudie.
and that Propter hominum sanitatem tuendam, for the preservation of men's
health. The Emperor Justinian commands thus: Cod. de offic praefec orient.
l. 3.
SI QVOS IVDICIS, etc. If thine excellency shall find any Judges, either for
their long and tedious infirmities, or for their negligence, or for any other
like defect, to be unprofitable, thou may remove them from their
administrations, and place other in their stead. Si carceri praepositus (says
the same Emperor) Cod de cust. and exhibi. ceo le. carceri.
Praetio corruptus. If a keeper of a common layle corrupted with money, suffer
a prisoner to go without fetters, or to bring any weapon, or poison into the
prison, he is to be punnished by the office of the Judge: but if he shall
unwittingly suffer these things, he is for his negligence to be displaced.
Again, the same Emperor says, Cod de. profess and medi. l. 2. lib. 10.
Grammaticos sou oratores, etc. If Grammarians, or Orators, once appointed by
common consent to teach Grammar, or Oratorie, approve not themselves
profitably to the students of Grammar and oratorie, for them to be again
reproved, is not a thing unaccustomed. For says the same Emperor, Cod de
profess. and med. l. reddatur.
Reddatur, etc. Let every one be admitted home to his country, which is
known unorderly and insolently to use the exercise of philosophy. In bello,
etc. A soldier who in time of war, does any thing forbidden by his Captain,
or does not keep his Genneralles commandment, is to be punnished by death
though his enterprise take good success. And shall then a pretensed minister,
that forsakes his standing, and only wears the Ensign of the proclaimed
enemy to his Lord and master: maugre the Law of his Lord and master, and
maugre the Law of man, enjoy life and lands, and livings and all. Extrauag. de
renunc. c. fin. l. 2.. ignominiae ff de hijs. qui nol. inf.
Panormitane, a famous Canonist, concludes, that a doctor allowed may be
disalowed again: yea, rather says Bartoll, a more famous Ciuillian, he may
be degraded as a soldier, and as a cleark: For those things says he, which
I have spoken in the degrading of souldiars, the same is to be verified
touching the degrading of doctors and Clearkes. And this is a common and
infallible conclusion, by all the learned in the Law; Vid ca. degradatio de
paenis lib. 6. Vid foeli. de rescript. ex literis.
that Doctors which by their readings or Lectures, do not approve them selves
beneficial and profitable, unto students and scholars of their profession,
may and ought well and rightly be removed, from their office of reading and
teaching. Yea moreover, whatsoever he be, that takes up on him the office of a
doctor, wearing the arms and ensigns of doctors, when as indeed he is no
doctor: Tenetur poena falsi, is to be punished by pain appointed for forgerie.
ff. de fall. l. eos infi. vid. Bart. in l. reddatur. Cod. de poss. et med. lib 10
In like case, by like reason, if an idol minister take upon him by stealth
and lying, the office of a true Pastor, and carry the name and title of a
true pastor, being in deed but an hyreling and profane gentile: why should
not he be punished with pain appointed for theeuerie. Panor. in c auris.
extrauag. de aetat. ^t qua^.
In the court of conscience, a Doctor giving advice, but through ignorance or
want of experience, not following in his counsel, the rules and precepts of
Law, is bound by equity unto his Client: for that through his
unskillfulness, he is damnified. A physician in the same court, who, without
perrill of soul, or danger to incur irregularitie, would safely cure his
patient, must be learned: he must practice according to the actions of physic,
he must be diligent in the exercise of his faculty: he must not minister after
any vnked manner, but only according to the usual and ordinary opinion of the
learned in physic, he must be circumspect, and not sluggish to search out the
disease, he must be prudent and careful, both before, and at, and after the
ministering of his medicine. When he is ordained he solemnly voweth to
preach, therefore he promises to become a doctor.
A minister then taking upon him to be a Doctor of far greater wisdom: to
be a physician of much more excellency: namely, to instruct, and cure the
souls of men with the doctrines of the Gospel; can he unblameably consulte
without knowledge, or safely, practice without skill? can he teach being
unlearned? or heal being not experienced? And here if the magistrate would
know the manner already set down to redress the same; and how and in what
sort he may safely proceed against an ignoraunte and unlearned man. In. c.
vlt. extrauag de. aetat. and qualit.
He must says Panormitane, see that the witnesses depose, how the party did
never read any books of learning: or that he did never go unto any school
of learning, because no man can attain unto learning, unless he have been
taught by one endued with learning: or spent his time in the study of books
of learning: for without a teacher, and without books, no man can be learned,
which may be proved, as well by the confession of the party, as by the
notoriousnesse of the fact. And here Panormitane wills the practisioner in
Law, diligently to mark how insufficiency, inability and unskillfulness of
a Clearke, may be proved evident and notorious, by not reading of books. As
thus, Seius never read any book of Physic: or Seius never resorted unto
any Physic Lecture. Therefore Seius is no Physician. Titius never studied
any books containing the doctrines or controversies of the Gospel, or has
not heard any preacher of the Gospel: Therefore Titius knows not the
truth, or glad tidings of the Gospel.

Our idoli Ministers, neither in times past have had, neither now have any
books of Scriptures: Therefore they neither have been, neither now can be
learned in the Scriptures. They have not gone, neither now do go to any
school of Divine learning: Therefore they have not been, nor yet now are
any scholars in Divinity. And therefore their insufficiency and inability,
being by this means palpable, are therefore notoriously depriueable, yea,
degradable from their benefices and offices.

The distinction of a simple Curate, or of a cural priest, or of a plebeiane
prelate, if law were law, and reason, reason, could not serve to maintain
the contrary practice. The law Civil, the law Ecclesiastical, the law of
reason, the law of nations, the Law of God, in all places, at all times, and
among all people, without any favor or friendship, under any pretense, or for
any respect, do absolutely, directly, and precisely inhibite every man
whatsoever: to take upon him, either by the name, title, or office, whereunto
he is altogether unfit, and whereof by law he is made incapable. And how then
can this monstrous and damnable usage be tolerable for such a man, to be
placed and continued, in the room of Aaron, to be the mouth of the people unto
God: or in the place of Peter to feed the flock of Christ, who knows
neither for what, or how he should rightly present his supplication unto his
prince, neither what kind of viand, or manner of diet, he should set before his
people. Grammarians and Poets, though they have bin trained up, at Winchester
or Eaton. Philosophers and Rhetoritians, though they have spent many years at
Oxforde or Cambridge, are not fit straightwayes to be made Physicians of
souls, and leaders of the people into the ways of righteousness. They must
shake of vanities, and forsake their ungodliness wherewith they have infected
their minds in those places, before they thruste themselves as laborers into
the Lords vineyarde, or take upon them to be messengers in the affairs of his
Empire. Yea, popish and Idolatrous priests, are unmeet, and by the laws in
force, made unable to enter into the Lords Sanctuary, though popish Lawyers
stand never so much opiniated to the contrary, falsely and traitorously
surmising her Highness, her Nobility, and all the professors of the gospel
within the land to be heretics, and sismatiks, and themselves only with their
crewe and rabble of Seminaries, to be catholics, as though the laws in force no
whit appertained unto us: but were only reserved by themselves against their
day of Iubilye, long sithence gaped for by them, and hitherto by the infinite
mercies of the Lord denied them. The Lord make us thankful, pardon our
ingratitudes, and continue these his mercies long toward us and our
posterity. I hope our prelates and ministers of the gospel, and all true
Christians, are thus persuaded by the word of God, that papists are
heretics and schismatiques, strangers from the common wealth of Israel, and
aliants from the covenant of God, I take this I say as granted, and hold it
for a principle in the school of Christ, that papisme is heresy, and
therefore a papist an heritique. Again, I hope our Prelates and ministers of
the Gospel, will grant the act of Parliament made 25. Henry the eight,
touching the submission of the Clergy, etc. and confirmed in the first year
of her gracious reign to be in force, and effectual to bind all manner of
people within the land. Again, it is manifest, these Canons following, to
have been established, and never abrogated, before 25. Henry the 8. Extrauag:
de elect. quia.
Non debet quis schismaticus etiam abiurato schismate aligi. A schismatique
though he abjure his schism, ought not to be chosen a bishop. Lib. 6. de
heret. c. 2., heretici
Heretici autem credentes, receptatores, defensores and fautores eorum,
istorumque filii ad secundam generationem, ad nullum ecclesiasticum beneficium
seu officium publicum admittantur. But believing heretics, their receivers,
defenders, and abettors, and their sons unto the second generation, let them
be admitted unto no ecclesiafticall benefice, or public office. And therefore
from these principles, Canons, and Act of Parliament. I argue thus. 1 No
schifmatique or heretic, though he abjure his schism or forsake his heresy,
may be chosen a bishop, or admitted unto any ecclesiastical benefice, or bear
any public office. 2 But every popish priest is a schismatique or heretic. 3
Therefore no popish priest, though he abjure, etc. may be chosen a bishop, or
admitted unto an ecclesiastical benefice, or bear any public office. The
Mayor proposition is the law of popery. The Minor, the law of the Gospel.


NEither does this rule of law: Multanon sunt facienda, quae tamen facta
valent, any whit gain say the truth of this argument. For though it seem
probably by this rule, that a popish priest being once admitted, unto popish
priesthood should not be removed: Yet thereby it follows not, that religion
being restored, and Idolatry abolished, he could not at the first
restitution of the Gospel, and entry of her gracious reign, have been
secluded from the office of a minister under the Gospel. For what though an
Heretic, by the judgment of an heretical Synagogue, obtain the room of a
Sacrificer in the same Synagogue, and having once obtained it, may not be
removed from the same room, by the former rule of law: Though this be true I
say, what avails it to confirm that a sacrificing priest, by virtue of his
admission unto the Synagogue, ought to have a place of ministration in the
Church of Christ? For though he were admitted in the one, yet was he never
admitted in the other. And therefore it rests firm, that they ought not to
have been admitted then, when as the whole manner of the government of the
Synagogue should have been altered. For as at that time their laws were
unadvisedly translated from them unto us: So by their laws we might advisedly
have transformed them from amongst us. They were Schismatiques and heretics
by the laws of our religion, and therefore not to have been admitted by the
laws of their own profession. Yea if they remain Idolaters still, or keep
back from the people of God the word of God, they are to be removed still:
their ietting up and down in their square ruffling and white philacteries, or
mumbling their mattens and euensong, are not so forcible to keep them in, as
their insufficiency, negligence, contempt, and idolatrous hearts are to thrust
them out. And yet no part of good, wholesome, and christian government and
policy changed. For though Josiah, moved by compassion beningly suffered
the priests of Baal (repenting of their idolatry) to receive tithes and
offerings with their brethren the Levites: Yet he straightly charged them not
to enter into the Lords sanctuary to do any manner of service there: Neither
did this his religious fact, any whit hinder the outward peace of his kingdom.
Wherefore if a B. an Abbot, an Archd. an elder, a physician, a Judge, an
advocate, a Iailor, a tutor, a schoolmaster, an Orator, and a philosopher, by
justice and equity of law, for inability, insufficiency, negligence, or other
defects, ought to be deposed, and removed off and from their rooms, places,
offices and honors: how should a pretensed minister, only intruding him self
to an office of most high calling, and excellency, and utterly destitute of all
gifts and graces fit for the same, be suffered to keep and retain the proper
right and title of an other, as his own lawful possession and inheritance.
Had the worshippers of the false Gods, care that their idolatrous priests,
should have knowledge of their idol service: and shall we, the worshippers of
the true God, be blameles before his judgment seat, in case we mayntain such
to serve him in the ministry of his holy gospel, as whose service, the veriest
Paynymes and idolators would refuse to have in their idol temples? Cod. de
epis. co. and cleri l. Si quis curialis. l. 12.
And though these be sufficient proofs to every one, not adicted to his own
will (preferring the same to al reason) that prohibitus clericari, debet
reuocari ad pristinu^ statu^, per manus iniectione^; and that serui vita^
monastica^ deserente^, ad prioris domini seruitute^ restituuntur, Cod. de epis.
co. and cleri. l. serui.
one prohibited to be a clark, ought to be reduced to his former estate, by
authority of the magistrate: and servant, forsaking their monastical life,
to be restored to the bondage of their former master. Cod. de decoren l
infamia. li. 10. and de dignita. l. Iudices. lib. 12.
And that Infamia non solum impedit praefici, sed etiam remoueri facit, a
dignitatibus habitis. And infamy does not only hinder a man to be preferred,
but also causes him to be removed from dignities already recovered. Though I
say, these former proofs be sufficient, to confirm these assertions, yet to
make the matter somewhat more plain, I have thought good, to reexamine the
order and form appointed by the former statute, for the making of Deacons and
ministers: that, if upon examination thereof also, there do appear such a
defect by statute law, as whereby our dumb and idol ministers, be no
ministers, in deed and truth, but only in show, and appearaunce; that then,
therevppon order may be taken by her majesty for the displacing of them, and
for the placing of other lawful and godly ministers in their rooms. For as
the statute has limited a certain order and form of making Deacons and
ministers: so has it appointed, that all that are made according to that order
and form, should be in deed lawful Deacons and ministers. The words of the
statute are these. [And that al persons, that have been, or shall be made,
ordered or consecrated Archbish. bishop, priests and ministers of God his holy
word and sacraments, or Deacons after the form and order prescribed in the
said order and form, how Archbish. bishops, priests, Deacons and minsters
should be consecrated, made and ordered, be in very deed, and also by
authority hereof declared and enacted to be and shall be, Archbishops,
priests, ministers, and Deacons, and rightly made, ordered, and consecrated,
any statute, law, Canon, or other thing to the contrary notwithstanding.] Which
statute has two branches: the one appoynting the form and manner of making
Deacons and ministers, the other authorizing Deacons, and minsters, made, and
ordered, after the form and manner prescribed in the said book, to be in very
deed, rightly and lawfully Deacons and ministers, and so to be taken and
reputed. It follows then, that if the first branch of the statute be broken,
and that the form and order be not observed, that the second branch can take
no place: for that in deed the validity of the latter, depends altogether
upon the observation of the first. For it is plain and evident by law, that
if you would have a second, or latter action to be good, and effectual,
because it is done (say you) according to a form and order precedent, you must
first prove, that the Precedent was accordingly done, or else the consequent
can take no place. And therefore if the form and order prescribed by the book,
be not observed in making unlearned ministers, I say then, that unlearned
ministers, by law, are no ministers at all. And why? ff. ad leg. fall. l. si is
qui. quaedam.
Neque eum vllum balnieum, aut vllum theatrum, aut stadium fecisse
intelligitur, qui ei propriam formam quae ex consumatione contingit non
dederit. Neither can he be thought to have made any bath, or any Theater, or
any race; who shall not give it that form which perfecteth the same. Again.
Vbi ad substantiam, alicuius actus, exigitur certa forma, fundans se super alio
actu, debet quis probare formam precessisse. Panor: in ca. 9. extra. de
Iudicijs.
Where to the substance of any act, a certain form is required, founding it
self upon an other act, there a man ought to prove the form to have passed
before. As for example. In an evangelical denunciation, if thou seek to have
thy brother cast forth of the congregation: First it is required, that thy
brother have offended thee: Secondly, that thou privately admonish him, and
brotherly wish him to amend: Thirdly, if he continue obstinate, thou must
tell it him before two or three witnesses, and if he hear not them, then thou
must tell it to the Church, before whom, if thou desire (I say, that thy
brother by them, should be cast forth of the Church) thou must first prove,
an offense committed against thee by him: Secondly, and thirdly, that you did
both privately by himself, and publicly before witness, admonish him,
otherwise you can not have him excommunicated, because Forma quoticscunque non
est seruata, actus est ipso iure nullus. How often so ever, the form of an
act is not kept, the Act by mere Law, is no Act at all: because (says the
Canon) a solemn and diligent entreaty required in such perpetual grauntes
and alienations of Church goods; has not been observed therein; we, by the advice of our brethren Decree, the same grant to be void.

By Civil Law, Cod. De Sacrosanct. eccles l. hoc ius and l. praedium.
Church goods, can no otherwise be pawned, or laid to gage, then as the Law
formally prescribes, because a due solemnity ought to be observed. In fines
and recoueries leuyed by the common Laws of this Realm, Attorneyes on both
sides, must be warraunted; there must be vouchers and vouchees; there must
be writtes, and retornes of writtes; there must be proclamations, there must
be warraunties, and many other circumstaunces, which being not observed, the
parties in reuersion or remainder, being grieved, may bring their writtes of
error, and recover the lands passed by erroneous fines or recoueries.

In the first year of Henry the seventh, Chapter fifteen: a statute was
made, that the party playntiffe, shall find pledges, to pursue his playnt, as
are known there in that Country; In the case of this statute, if the Sheriff,
take one surety alone, or men of another country, as pledges, the bond is
void; because by the common Laws of the Realm, as well form as matter, is
necessary. If in the sale of any pupilles goods, or alienation of the
Emperors patrimony, the sorme and manner appointed by Law, be not exactly
and diligently kept, the sale and alienation is in effect no sale, and no
alienation. The reasons of which Laws and ordinances (as I said before) are
these. Forma dat esserei Panor. in. c. nulli. nu. 7. de rebus eccle non aliae.
fol 59. Specula in. tit. de aduoc 5. verse. cum ante. Panor, in. c. fin vt lit
non contest nu. 20. Panor. in. c. publicat. de elec nu. 9. Panor. in. c. super
questionum. veru^ nu. de off. deleg. and id in. c. prudentiam. nu. 5. eod.
and eius omissio inducit nullitatem actus. The form gives being and
essence to a thing, and the omission thereof, induces a nullitie of the act.
Si deficit forma in priuilegio, res caret priuilegio. If a privilege want the
form of a privilege, the thing lacks privilege. And again, Solemnitates quae
requiruntur in alique actu, sinon scruentur, actus corruit sole^nities required
to be in any act, if they be not observed, the act fails. And again, Ferma
non seruata in vna part actus violat totum actu^. The form not kept in on part
of the act, violateth the whole act. Quia verum est dicit, excessisse istum
fines mandati. Because it is true says he, that this man has passed the
bounds of his commandment. And therefore in an other place, Panormitane
concludes thus: Forma certa procedendi vbi datur processus corruit, non solum
quando est attentatum contra formam. sed etiam citra, vel preter formam: quia
vbi forma certa datur paria sunt aliquid facere contra, preter vel citra
formam. Where a certain form of process is limited the process fails, not
only when any thing is attempted against the form, but also either without or
besides the form; the observation of which solemnities and form of an act,
are of such force and necessity by Law, that neither custom, or yet a
consent of parties, can alter or change the Law herein. Panor. in. Greg. nu
14. fol. 17.
Solemnitatis omissio ex sola consuetudine inducta violat actum. The omission
of a solemnity brought in only by custom, marreth the Act. Ea quae inducunt
certam solemnitatem in actibus hominum, non possunt consensu partium tolli,
quia pacta priuatorum iuri publico non derogant. ff. de pactis.
And those things which induce a certain solemnity in men's doings; cannot be
abolished by consent of parties, because private men's compacts, cannot be
derogatory to common right. In so much that in this case. Forma debet seruari
ad vnguem, and specifice and non per equipolens. A form ought to be kept at an
inche, and specially, and not by any thing equivalent, though in many other
cases, this rule takes place. Nihil interest quid ex equipollentibus fiat. It
is no whit material, whether of the things that are equivalent be done.
Moreover, Forma data a lege, vel statuto, debet seruari a rustico, muliere, and
iuniore. A form given by law or statute, ought to be kept by an husbandman,
by a woman, and by one under age, though in many other things these three have
their several privileges. And to make this more plain, and the certainty
thereof to be infallible: you shall understand, that the law has been
executed according to these rules, even in this selfsame case of making
Deacons and Ministers. And first, touching their trial and examination. Glos.
c. quando: distinct. 24. ver. in vest gent.
Si quis presbiter, aut Diaconus, sine aliqua examinatione, ordinati sunt,
abiiciantur ex clero. Et si non fuerit in aetate, literatura, and honestate
examinatus, deponendus est. If any be made an Elder or Deacon without
examination, let him be cast out from the Clergy. And if he shall not be
examined touching his age, his learning, and his honesty, he is to be deposed.
Secondly, touching the time. If a Minister or Deacon have been made at any
other time, then at the time appointed by law, it has been decreed against
them as follows.

Extrauag. de tempo: ordinand. c. cum quidam.
EPISCOPVM, etc. A bishop that celebrateth orders in a day wherein he ought
not, do thou correct with Canonical discipline, and until they have received
grace from us to be restored, so long oghtest thou to make them to be void of
orders received. And again, Sane super co. etc. Truly concerning that the
manner is (as thou say) in certain Churches of Scotland and Wales, to
promote Clearkes unto holy orders, in the days of the dedication of Churches
and Altars, out of the four times appointed for fastes: We declare that that
custom, as enemy to Ecclesiastical institutien, is utterly to be improoued.
And had we not regard unto the multitude and ancient custom of the land,
men ordained should not be suffered to minister in orders so taken: for with us
men so ordained should be deposed, and the ordaynors should be deprived of
authority to ordain: Thirdly, Fol. 1. page 2.
touching the presentation of Deacons to be made by the Archdeacon or his
deputy, Fol. 1. 1.
and of ministers by the Archdeacon only, out of many particular laws, this
general Maxim is verefied.

Panor. in. c. fin.. is autem nu. 5. de offic. deleg.
SI PRINCEPS, etc. If the Prince commit a cause to any, and command him
personally to execute the same; if in this case consist public commodity, this
his commissary can not substitute an other, no not even with consent of
parties, because where the Prince either covertly, or expressly, does make
choice of the industry of any one particular person, there the party so
chosen, can not surrogate an other. For the Prince herein does personally
qualify the man, and gives unto him the form of his commission. De offic. c.
deleg. l. 6. c. si cui etc. fin. extra. de offi. delegat.
An example of this may be thus. De offic. delegat. li. 6. c. si cui. and ex.
de offic. deleg. c. vlt.
Suppose that the treasurership in Paul's were void, and that her highness, had
commanded the B. of London to provide a fit man for the same room; whether now
the B. may commit this his charge, to be performed by an other, then by him
self or no? And it is answered negatiuely, because in the choice of a fit
person consists great danger, and therefore the B. being but an executor of
her May. pleasure, he may not substitute any other, But suppose, that her
highness, had commanded the same B. of London to have given the same prebend to
Lucius Titius, whether the^, might the B. in this case subdelegat Archdeacon
Sempronius. And the answer is affirmative, that he might, for now her May.
by her self, has nominated the party to be placed, and has not chosen the
B. industry for that purpose, and therefore he may assign this provision unto an
other. But it is otherwise, where the industry of a Person is chosen,
concerning one to be elected, for then: he may not set over that his office to
any other. Now then out of these rules and laws I conclude, that sithence it
has pleased the high Court of Parliament, particularly and expressly by name,
to make choice of the Archd. and has personally qualified him, as their
meetest man for this charge, chosing the industry of his own person in
presenting fit men to be made ministers, or of his deputies in presenting fit
men to be made Deacons: and for so much also as in this action, consists the
public benefit of the whole church, and on the which hangs the greatest
peril and danger of the whole church: For these causes I conclude, that an
Archd. only, must and ought of necessity present one to the B. to be made a
minister, and that the B. can not dispense with him in this case, and that
neither the B. neither the Archd, neither the party to be made a minister;
neither the clearkes and people present, by their consents, can alter or
transpose any thing herin. ff. de pact. l. ius publicum
Publica vtilitas est pars agens, Public utility is the party agent in this
business and Parta priuatorum inri publico non derogant, The covenants and
agreements of private men does not derogate from common right. And if the
contrary have been practiced, what may be concluded thereof shall follow
immediately. And again by these proofs, you may evidently see, that the
calling, the trial, the examination, the time, the person appointed to
present, and the age of one to be presented, have not been things mere
contingent, but rather essential, not causas sine quibus non, but causes
formal to the making of Deacons and ministers, and such causes as being
omitted, have been sufficient causes both to depose from their functions, those
that have been contrary wise ordained, and to punish the ordainers for their
negligence in that behalf. And therefore that our tongue tied ministers, not
made according to the order and form of the statute, be in deed and truth no
ministers at all, the act it self, whereby they be made, and whereby they
challenge their dignities, being in deed no act in law, having no law to
approve the same, and therefore to be punished by the law of man, as well for
entering into a calling against the law of man, as also for profaning the holy
and sacred mysteries of God. For what if respect be had to one, or two, or
four, or more, of the solemnities and circumstaunces before rehearsed, and
those too, perhaps of the least weight and moment, as unto the age, the time,
the B. particular interrogatories, and the Archd. presentation: and yet the
rest of the greatest weight and importance, as their learning, their honesty,
their aptnes to teach, etc. be neglige^tly or wilfully omitted: Shall the
proceedinges by such as please them selves in their own inventions, and be
both judges and parties, thus in show and appearance, only supposed to be done,
by them that are wise and upright justices, and whom public profit ought to
move to the redress of disorders, be reckoned to be don in deed and verity?
Yea if all the former solemnities, yea even those also of the least moment, and
such as in truth might have been reputed accidental, rather then substantial,
(had it pleased the law makers to have appointed them so) have been and are
oftentimes omitted in the making of ministers, and one never called, never
tried, never examined, never known to the B. before that day, to be of any
virtuous conversation, not qualified as is requisite, not learned in the latin
tongue, not sufficiently instructed in holy scriptures (as he that came to the B.
of Winchester to serve in his Diocese, borne at Norwich, and made a minister
at Peterborow: knew not how many Sacraments there were, and requested a days
respite to answer the bishop, what the office of a Deacon was, not made
openly in the face of the congregation, but privately in the bishops Chamber or
Chapel: not having any Sermon: not apt to execute his ministry duly: not
presented by the Archdeacon, the Bishop making ministers at Exceter, and his
Archdeacon at Oxenforde, or the bishop making ministers at Leichfielde, and his
Archdeacon at Durham: not moved by the holy Ghost, not admitted on a Sunday
or holy day, not of 24. years of age, not persuaded of the sufficiency of
the doctrine of the scriptures to salvation, not an example in him self and
his family to the flock of Christ: not a minister of the doctrine and
discipline of the Lord Christ, not a peacemaker, but quarrelling at law for
tithe Oynions, apples and cheryes: not a dispensour of the word of God: Fol.
11. p. 2.
not a pastor and steward to the Lord, to teach, to premonishe, to feed,
and provide for the Lords flock: if such a one I say, yea if too too many
such, have been admitted into the holy ministry, and all these solemnities
vnsolemnly abused: may it not be rightly concluded, that such by our statute
law be no lawful ministers at all? Was the word of any Bishop (only the word
of the high bishop Jesus Christ excepted) in any time or in any place, a law
against the Law of a nation? Was the law of a whole Empire, ever tied to the
will of one man in a Diocese? If the thing it self were not manifest to the
view of the whole Realm: and that the unlearned mimisters in every part of the
realm were not glasses, to see these deformities by: and that the daily and
lamentable complaints, in the ears of her honorable council, were not
evident testimonies thereof: Yet were their own registers and records
thoroughly perused, they would teach us sufficiently, that these things (yea and
worse to if worse may be) are neither feigned nor forged. And therefore I
conclude thus. 1 Whersoeuer a certain form and order to proceed, is appointed
to any, having no authority before his commission, that there, if the form be
not kept, the process by law is merely void: 2 But our bishops, before the
making of the statute of Edward the 6. and the confirmation thereof 8.
Elizabeth, had no authority to make Deacons or ministers: 3 Therefore, their
process not made according to the order and form of the statute, is void,
and therefore our dumb and idol ministers, no ministers at all.


Herennius Modestinus, answered that a Senator was not therefore a Senator,
because he had his name only in the table or register, where the names of
Senators were written, unless he also were made a Senator, according to law. And
the gloss upon that law, verifieth the same to be an argument, Contra eos qui
non sunt r^cte in ecclesiis constituti. Against those that are not rightly
placed in Churches. ff. quand. dies. leg. vel. fidei, sed. l. quod pupillae
iunat. gloss.
If a Legacy be given unto a Pupil, whenever she shall marry, if she shall
marry before she be Viripotens, the Legacy is not due until she be Viri
potens, quia non potest videri nupta, quae viru^ pati non potest: nec videri
factum, quod non legitime fit. Finally in the praeface of the book of ordering
Ministers, are these words. [And therefore to the intent these orders should be
continued, and reverently used and received in this Church of England; it is
requisite, that no man not being at this present, bishop, priest nor Deacon,
shall execute any of them, except he be called, tried, examined and admitted,
according to the form hereafter following.] And in the 13. year of Elizabeth,
cap. 12, it is enacted, that all admissions to benefices, institutions, and
inductions to be made of any person, contrary to the form or provision of this
act, and al tollerations, dispensations, qualifications, and license whatsoever
to be made to the contrary hereof, shall be merely void in law, as if they
never were. Another principal reason, why these idol ministers, should not
have, so much as the only name, or title of ministers in word, much less the
place and benefit of ministers in dee de may be, for that in deed and
truth, they have intruded themselves into the ministry, only by fraud and
deceit, and have not entered thereinto, Bona fide and iusto titulo, in good
faith, and by a just title. Cod. de autorita. prestand. l. cum qui. 6. q. 7. si
quis deinceps ex. de simo. non satis.
He that knows a pupil to be under age, and yet will contracte with him
without consent of his tutor: or he that will receive a Church from the hand
of a lay man: or he that will buy and sell things dedicate to religious uses,
can not in these actions mean any good faith, or use any good conscience,
because qui contra iura mercatur, bona^ fidem presumitur non habere. He that
against the law makes merchandise, is presumed not to have good faith. Cod de
autorit. presta^. l. cum qui. 6 q 7. si quis deinceps extra. de simo. non
satis. Extra. de regu. in c. qui contra.
Now in the manner and form of making ministers, and their admission, you have
heard of a solemn covenant and contract by open protestations on both sides,
made between the B. and the party: A contract made between the B. and the
minister not observed.
the B. demanding, spondes? put as? facies? do thou promise? do thou
think? will thou do? The party aunswering, spondeo, I do promise, puto, I
do think, faciam, I will do it. This contract or covenant by law Civil, is
called stipulatio verborum, a sure bond made by words, and may be called a
contract by word. By the law of England, it is called an assumption. And to
the end this contract be good in effect, as in all other contractes, so in
this especially, it is requisite, that the same be made bona fide
interueniente, good faith coming between, as well on the part of the
demaundant, as on the part of the answerer. In ff. pro solut. l. 3. Cod. de
vsur. l. venditioni. In Cod. de actio. and oblig. l. bonam.
For says the Emperor. Bonam fidem considerari in contractibus aequum est,
Equity requires that good faith be considered in contracts. And that, either
to this end. Vt cesset dolus ad eoru^ essentiam, or to this end, vt cesset
dolus ad eorum effectum, that guile may cease, to the substance of the
contract, or that guile may cease to the effect of the contract. ff de dol. l.
eleganter. ff. de verb. oblig. l. si quis ^um.
For though according to the nature and condition of this contract by word, the
party fraudulently deceived, be notwithstanding by rigor and subtlety of law
bound to the contract: yet in as much as the law provides him a remedy
against this mischief, and gives him a peremptory exception, utterly to
exclude the agent from any benefit of his action; the contract I say, in effect
being reuersible, is in effect no contract, and the adverse party to be
cleared from the performance thereof. Quia contractus non sortitur effectum,
propter exceptionem doli. The covenant takes no effect, by reason of the
exception of guile. The law it self follows. Si quis. etc. If any when he had
couenanted to be bound after one manner, yet notwithstanding, by circu^uention
is bound after another manner, he shall indeed stand bound unto thee, by the
subtilty of law, but he may use an exception of deceit, for in as much as he is
bound by deceit, an exception is given him. As for example, I have promised
unto you my ground, excepting the use of the fruit thereof, afterward by
collusio^ you persuade me to promise you the same ground, together with the use
of the fruit thereof: this promise in effect is void, because you used deceit,
in getting my promise. Ye suppose that you for your part had not beguiled me,
and that there had been no deceit on your part, but that I had been beguiled
only, because the thing it self, was wrongful and injurious, in this case also
your action shall cease, and your writ shall abate. Ide^ est. etc If no deceit
on the part of the dema^dant have been used, but the thing it self has in it
deceit, it is all and the self same one case with the former. For when so ever
any man shall make a demand by virtue of that contract, in as much as he does
dema^d it, he does it by deceit. As for example: suppose I have boght in good
faith without collusion of you, a piece of Plate, for less then the one half
of the just value thereof, as suppose for 8. Pound which was worth 20. po.
afterward I covenant with you simply, and you promise to deliver me the same
plate: in this case, if I sue you for the delivery of the plate you may use an
exception of guile against me, because I deal deceitfully in dema^ding the
performance of a contract, which in it self co^teineth iniquity. For this
contract it self is against the equity of law, providing that a man should not
be so improvident in selling his goods, as to sell the^ under the one half of
the just value. And therefore in this contract, being against law, appears a
manifest iniquity, because the plate being worth 20. Pounds was sold by you
for 8. Pound, a less sum then 10. pound, half of the just price, and
therefore in it self by law without equity: and therefore neither to be
demanded by me, neither to be performed by you. And to make this more plain,
and so to apply it to my purpose, bona fides good Faith, in this contract ought
to be in this sort. You for your part, and I for my part, and we both ought in
truth to think and be of opinion, that you have interest and right in the
plate, and so power to alienate, and to sell it unto me. And therefore
concerning the contract made between the Bishop and the party, because the
Bishop oftentimes knows the party that is to be made a minister by him, to
be a man altogether unlearned, unfit, and unapt to execute his ministry
duly, and therefore cannot think him to be a man quallified as were
requisite: And because the party that is to be made a minister, knows
himself utterly void of those graces and gifts which ought to be in him, and
therefore cannot believe him self to be truly called, or moved to that
office by the holy ghost: And because they both know that there has been no
such calling, no such trial, no such examination, no such presentation, etc.
As (by the form and order of the book) should be, I say therefore that good
faith wanting on both parts, this contract made coulourably between them is
merely void, and the one not bound by law to the other, to the perfourmance
of the same: and therefore much less the common wealth, or the Church of Christ
to tolerate their conspiracy, or to bear with their collusio^. ff. de Liber
causa. l. si pariter. Extrauag. de regni iure. c. non est. Extrauag. co
Non debet alterius collusione aut inertia, alterius ius corru^pi. No ma^s
right oght to be impaired by collusion or sloth of another. Fraus and dolus
nemini patrocinari debet. deceit and guyle, ought not to patronage any. And
therefore sithence, Non est obligatorium contra bonos mores iuramentum. An oath
made against good manners, is not obligatorie: and that Nemo potest ad
impossible obligari. No man can be bound to a thing impossible, and that
Impossibilium nulla est obligatio, of things impossible there is no band. ff de
reg. in l. impossibilum. Extra. de reg nu. in malis.
And that, In malis promissis fidem non expedit obsernari. It is not expedient
that Faith be kept in wicked promises, I conclude that the impossibility or
iniquity of conditions to be performed by him that is made a Minister, make
the contract between the Bishop and him, merely void and of none effect in
Law. The impossibility of the contract made between the Bish. and the
minister, cause that the contract is void.
And that the Bishop according to the true intent and meaning of the Laws,
whereof he has the execution, ought to cite, and Ex officio, to proceed, and
obiecte against him in this sort. You A. B. Parson of C. about twenty four
years passed, at what time I had appointed a solemn day for making of Deacons
and Ministers, and had called by my Mandat, men meet to serve the Lord in his
holy services, to teach his people, and to be examples to his flock, in honest
life and godly conversation, came before me, making a great brag and fair
show of zeal and conscience, and of your knowledge in the holy Scriptures,
and that you would instruct them faithfully, and exhort them diligently in the
doctrine of Salvation by Christ, and in holiness of life: that you would
exercise his Discipline according to his commandment; and that you would be
a peacemaker: And all these things you faithfully promised, and took upon you
to perform, joining your self openly to the Lords people in prayer, with a
solemn vow. Now so it is; as I understand by your demeanor ever since, that
in truth, you had no other end, but to steal a living from the Church,
though it were with the murder of many souls. You dishonored the Lord: you
made an open lie in his holy Congregation: you circumuented me by guyle, and
by craft deluded me: you have ever since falsified your word: You have not
preached one Sermon these many years: you have not instructed one of your
parrishe in the doctrine of Salvation by Christ alone: you have not governed
your family, as became one of your coat: you have not exercised the
Discipline of Christ against any adulterer, any swearer, any drunkarde, any
breaker of the Lords Sabbothes: you have been and are a quarreller among your
neighbors: you cite them to my consistory for toys and tryfles, and so abuse
my judgment seat: you are an example of evil, and not of goodness unto your
flock: you meant no good faith at the first: you wittingly took upon you a
charge, which in your own conscience, you knew was impossible for you to
discharge: you profaned the Lords most sacred name, in praying hypocritically
before him: you have not since repented you of these iniquities, but have
continued obstinate in the same, and therefore in as much as you for your part
without any good conscience, have gotten you a place in the ministry: I for
my part, mooned by a good conscience, and for the same my conscience sake, to
discharge my duty to the Lord, have summoned you publicly, lawfully and
rightly, to disposse you of that place, and depose you from that function,
whereof though publicly, yet unlawfully and unrightly, you are possessed:
neither ought you, or any other to think me rash, light, or unconstant in so
doing. For I tell you plain, that herein I will both say and do that thing,
which the noble and wise Emperor, sometimes both said and did, in a matter of
far less wayght then this. Quod inconsulto fecimus, consulto reuocamus, That
which we unadvisedly have done, we advisedly will revoke and undo. And Sir
for your part, it is very necessary and expedient for you, that we depose you
in deed, because Tanto grauiora sunt tua peccata, quanto diutius infelicem
animam detinent alligatam. So much more grievous are your sins, by how much
longer they have your unhappy soul fettered with their boultes. To do this,
or the like, were in my simple understanding, a noble and famous practice of a
good and godly Bishop, laboring to procure peace and prosperity unto
Jerusalem. What? may a Bishop deprive an honest poor man from his benefice,
dispossess a faithful man of his ministerye, stop the mouth of the Lords
watchemen, and imprison a paynefull teacher in the Clincke in case he wear
not a Surplesse, in case he marry not with a Ring, in case he cross not in
Baptism, or in case he subscribe not to every new Article invented by his
Ordinary? And may not the same Bishop, remove a man that has openly played
the hypocrite, publicly falsified his word; ympiously committed sacrilege,
yea, and that which is worse, has made an open mock at the Law of GOD and
deluded the Laws of her Highness Empire? Is the first a lawless and
rebellious PVRITANE, (I use but their own terms) and is the second a
dutiful and loyal vassal? If a PVRITANE (as they call him) making conscience
not to offend his God in any small thing, for his conscience sake be worthy
to be whipped and excommunicated; is a Foolitane making no conscience to
offend his GOD in all things, not worthy once to be summoned? Etrauag. de
elec. c. cum dilectur.
Concerning an old objection, perhaps by some old Canoniste to be
objected, that every sentence of the Bishop, whereby he pronounces any
man fit and capable of the ministerye, is a definitive and irreuocable
judgment, in case no appeal be made from the same: though my former answer
were sufficient for the same election, yet to answer LAW with LAW: I
answer, with the gloss, that propter aliquam causam post a emergentem potest
quaeri, quia quae de nouo emerguut, nouo indigent auxilio; and ita semel
probatus, iterum probatur and reprobatur. For some cause afterward arysing,
inquisition may be made: because things newly happening, do want a new
supply; and so one being once allowed, may again be allowed and disalowed.

And therefore to conclude, if such as be in authority, love the peace and
prosperity of the Church of Christ: if they desire the good success of the
Gospel: if they will preserve the state of this Realm: if they think it
necessary, to have good Magystrates, to have good Laws and orders in a common
wealth: If they esteem learning, and seek to prefer it: If they hate
confusion: if they allow of their own conditions, and like of a kingdom
better then of a tyrannous state: then are they to provide betime some speedy
remedy for these and such like kind of men, and such manner of abuses. And if
the religion they have established be good: if the orders and laws they have
made be convenient; it stands them in hand, to see the same reverently
received and executed, and not openly to be contemned and broken, without
sharp and severe punnishment: they are not to suffer such as execute them not,
to be vncontroulled, unrebuked, and vnpunnished: they are not to suffer such as
speak for them, preach for them, call for them, and write for them, any more
to be checked, tanted, frumped and shopped up: either let their laws be laws
indeed, and maintained as laws: or else deliver us from our duties, in
desiring their execution and obeying them.

If by these former conclusions, any shall surmise, that by them I slily, and
covertly, as one captious over the whole state of the Church, should insinuate
no lawful ministry to be in England, because some one of these points
perhaps, have been and are daily omitted in making even the best men that are
in the Mynisterie at this day: I answer, touching as well the whole Church, as
the learned and unlearned minister: the preacher, and him that is no preacher:
the pastor and him that is no pastor: I answer (I say) touching them all,
as follows. First, I confess that our Lord Jesus Christ has a true
Church, and a faithful spouse in England, receiving the doctrines, and
Sacraments of Christ, publicly taught and administered in the Church of
England, wherein we have ELIZABETH, by the grace of God, Queen of England,
France and Ireland, a foueraigne, a sole, and a lawful gouernesse, in all
causes, and over all persons, Civil and Ecclesiastical. Moreover I confess
that the doctrines delivered unto her out of the word of God by the ministers,
for the abolishing of all and all manner superstitions and abuses, retained in
the Church, and for the establishing of a perfect government of the said
Church, ought to be faithfully embraced, and diligently put in execution by his
Majesty, according to the prescript rule of the blessed word of God. And
again, that the ministers ought evermore, in a reverent and holy fear, to
teach what so ever they know, to be commanded or forbidden by the same word,
and to show the danger as well to the magistrate, as to the people, if either
or both of them shall be negligent, or remiss in the Lords service. And
again that the people in all holy and honorable obedience, should yield unto
the magistrates, and ministers, all such love, reverence, fear, and obeisance
herein, as the Lord by his sacred word prescribes, and their own salvation
requires. Again, that neither the magistrate without true instruction from
the ministers: Nor the ministers without due authority from the magistrate,
ought to wrest any thing into the gournement of the Church. For both offices,
and governments, Magistracy, and ministry are very holy and honorable, and
being several, tend to several ends, and bring forth several events in
the administration and government of the Church: the one is the mouth: the
other is the hand of God: the one by word, the other by sword, ought to
execute the Lords judgments in the Lords house. The Prophet Esaias at the
commandment of the Lord, teaching that the Princes of Judah and Jerusalem,
should cast away the rich ornaments of gold as a menstruous cloth, did stay
him self with the publishing of this his doctrine: he only reformed him
self, and taught and exhorted others to do the like. The Prophet Jeremy used
only this weapon of reformation. Of a truth says he, the Lord has sent me
unto you, to speak all these words in your ears: he has sent me to
prophecy against this house, and against this City, all the things that ye
have heard: as for me, behold I am in your hands, do with me as ye think good
and right. And though Iehoiakim the king, with all his men of power, the
priests and the prophets slew Vriah with the swoorde: yet ceased not
Jeremiah to stand in the Court of the Lords house, to speak unto all the
cities of Judah, all the words that were commanded him to speak, and kept
not a word back. 2 Kin. 23. 3.
When Hilkiah the priest had found the book of the law, and caused Josiah to
read the same: it is written that the KING stood by the pillar and made a
covenant before the Lord, that he the KING, and the priests, and the
prophets, and all the people both small and great, should walk after the
Lord, and keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes,
with all their heart, and with all their soul. And that the KING commanded
Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, to bring out of
the Temple of the Lord, all the vessels that were made for Baall, and for the
grooue, and for all the host of heaven, and that the KING burnt them without
Jerusalem, in the fields of Kidron: and that the KING carried the powder of
them into Bethel: and that HE put down the Chemerym, and that HE brake down
the houses of the Sodomites: and that HE brake the images in pieces, etc. When
the spirit of the Lord came upon Azariah, to tell Asa and all Judah, and
Benjamin, that the Lord was with him, whilst they were with him, encouraged
them in their affliction, to turn unto the Lord God of Israel, for that
their confidence and trust in him, should not be frustrate, but have a
reward: Asa hearing these words of the prophet, was encouraged, and took
away all the abominations, out of the land of Judah and Benjamin. And King
Asa deposed Maachah his mother from her regency. And Asa brake down her idol,
and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron: 2. Chro^.
and king Asa did all these things at the council of the Prophet. Neither can
the holy doctrine of the Gospel, be said to be repugnaunt hereunto. God is
ever more one, and the self same God in all ages: he is evermore the author
of peace and order, not of discord, or disorder. If therefore the Lord, have
not yet graciously opened her majesty's eyes, to understand all and singular
mysteries of his Testament: or if he will some blemish to remain in the
government of a faithful Queen, under the Gospel, as it pleased him to have
blottes in the reign of good kings in the time of the law: or if he will that
the adversaries of Judah and Beniamyn, hyre counselors to trouble their
building and hinder their devise, all the days of Cyrus: or if he will the
Temple to be built in the days of Esra the chief priest, but the walls to be
reedified by a Eliashib and his brethren: or if he will have his Church tarry
his holy leisure, and appointed time: or if he have any other glorious purpose
to work in our days by her highness: what is that to him that is a minister of
the Gospel? Only it behooves him to be a faithful Steward in his function.
For an woe hangs over his head if he preach not, because necessity is laid
upon him. And let him be assured, that whatsoever is either bound or loosed
by him in earth: the same is bound and loosed by the Lord in heaven. The
repentaunt and faithful shall be forgyuen: The obstinate and impenitent shall
be hardened. And thus having delivered my mind touching these things, which
otherwise by synister construction, might have been dangerous to my self,
and offensive to others. Touching the former cavil, I answer as follows.
First, I confess that every one meet and apt to teach: that every one
qualified as is requisite: that every one moved inwardly by the holy Ghost,
and outwardly called and appointed by the bishop, having authority by the
order of this church of England in this behalf, is in deed and by law, a
minister. First, because he is indeed and truth a messenger, sent and appointed
to this office by the Lord him self. Secondly, he is a minister by the law of
this land. For the state of this man, learned, qualified, and inwardly called:
and the state of the unlearned, and vnqualified, and not inwardly moved,
differ as much as light and darkness. For where the life, the learning, the
conversation, the pains of the former, do appear in deed to be sincere,
sufficient, honest, and diligent, even such as the law it self requires
should be in him, and so the end of the law satisfied in that behalf, in this
case, and for this man, there is a presumption Iuris and de iure, of law and by
law, that in his outward calling, and trial, etc. all things required by
law, were accordingly performed by the bishop, and so he a lawful minister.
But touching the other man it is quite contrary, and therefore this
presumption by law must cease. Glos. extrauag. de prebend cum secundum
Apostolum verdiceat.
For where his life, his learning, his conversation do appear manifestly to be
vile, corrupt, and dishonest, and not such as the law requires, and so the law
frustrated, in this case there is a presumption, Iuris and de iure, of law and
by law against him, that he came to his office per surreptionem, by stealth
and unorderly. Letters obtained for enjoying benefices until it appear, they
were obtained, either veritate tacita, or falsitate expressa, truth concealed
or falsehoode expressed, are good and to be obeyed: but if afterward, either
of these appear, they shall be accounted surreptitious and void. A Bull or
dispensation from the Pope authentically sealed, is presumed to have been
gotten bona fide, in good faith: but if in the tenor thereof appear false
latin, it is then presumed to have been obtained per surreptionem. A sentence
given by a judge is presumed to be a just judgment, and every one for the
authority and reverence of the Judge, ought so to deem of the same. But in
case the matter be appealed, and there be found a nullitie in his process, the
former presumption cease, and the sentence as an injurious sentence, is to be
reuersed. In like manner, if a By. should make an hundredth ministers in one day,
for the authority and reverence of the bishop, and the good opinion I ought to
conceive, of his upright and sincere dealing, of his holy religion and fervent
zeal to the lords house (were I absent and saw not his proceedinges to be
contrary to law) as I ought, so I trust I should both esteem his doings
therein, to be lawful and orderly, and also reverence those whom he had so
made, as messengers sent from the Lord. But if afterward, when any of them
shall come to execute his office of ministry: when he came to teach the
people, he should then manifest him self to be but an Hipocrite, but to have
feigned a certain kind of holiness and zeal, when he shall him self discrie
his own unableness, and displaye his wantes: were it reason that having now by
mine own experience, certain knowledge of his misdemeanour, and dishonest
conversation, of his unaptness and unskillfulness, and of his ignorance, I
should presume notwithstanding, that he was at the first orderly called and
examined, and found to have such qualities as were requisite? But to answer
another objection, concerning the administration of the sacraments by these
kind of men, and execution of their offices, because hitherto no controversy
has been moved, touching the validity of their calling, of their state and
condition, and because, Cum incertum est aliquid, perinde est ac sinec illud
sit. When any thing is uncertain, the same is as though it were not at al: Cod.
de test. lib. 1.
That therefore (I say) as well in this case, and and in this respect, as also
propter communem vtilitatem, and publicum errorem, for common utility, and a
general error, the things done by them, are rightly and duly done.

Cod de sentent. and interlo. iud. l. si Arbiter.
SI ARBITRER DATVS a magistratibus cum sententiam dixit, in liberate
morabatur, quamuis postea in seruitutem depulsus sit, sententia tamen ab eo
dicta, habet rei iudicatae authoritatem. If any arbiter given by the
magistrate, were a free man, when he gave sentence, though afterward the same
Arbiter be brought again into servitude, the sentence notwithstanding given by
him, has authority of judgment. And again. ff. ad Maced. ^ si quis.
Si quis patremfamilias esse crediderit, non vana simplicitate deceptus, nec
iuris ignorantiae, sed quia public patremfaemilias plerisque videbatur, sic
agebat, sic contrahebat, sic muneribus fungebatur, cessabit senatuconsultum. If
any shall think one to be a father of any household, not deceauing him self
through a vain simplicity, or ignorance of law, but because he seemed to many
to be a father of an household indeed, he did as a father of an household did,
he did covenant, he executed offices, etc In this case the Senates decree
shall cease. And again. ff. de supp. l. leg. l. 3.
Hod e propter vsum imperatorum si in argento relatum sit candelabrum
argenteum, argentum esse videtur, and errorius facit. Now a days (because of
the use of Emperors) if a silver candlestick, be accounted amongst his
money, it s^emeth to be money: and this error makes law, etc. And again.
Serui liberi non in hac causa tractari oportet, cum eo tempore, quo
testamentu^, etc. When a testament is to be proved by witnesses, it is not
material whether the witnesses be bond or free at the time they be produced,
if at the time that the Testament was signed, they were by consent of all,
reputed in the place of free men, and that no man at that time moved any
controversy of their estate. Digest. do officio. praetoris. l. barbarius.
Propter publicam vtilitatem and communem errorem, praetura seruo decreta, etc
For public utility and a general error, a Pretorship given to a bondsman,
makes him Praetor: business dispatched by him are of force, and he made a
freeman. And therefore I answer, that things heretofore done, and executed
by our idol ministers, by law to be rightly and duly executed. And yet
notwithstanding I urge still, that they are not in truth any lawful
ministers, and that they ought, and may justly be deposed from their
ministeries, and deprived from their benefices. An Arbiter reputed to be a
freeman, if in truth he be a bondsman, obtayneth not by this common opinion, or
by giving judgment, his freedom and liberty, but continues still a bond man
unto him, whose bond man he was, before any judgment given by him; or that
any such fame went of his freedom, the decree of the Senate ceasseth against
me, for contracting with one under rule and government, so long as he is
generally reputed to have power and authority over himself: but if I
willingly contract with him afterward, it shall appear, that in deed he was
a Son under the guarde and tuition of his parents: then the decree shall be
effectual, and take place against me. Witnesses at the time of signing any
Testament commonly reputed freemen, after a controversy moved of their
estate, may in other matters be refused, as unlawful witnesses. For though
common error make a law in respect of public profit, yet common error
plucketh not from any private man, the possession or interest of his private
goods. And therefore though Barbarius Philippus in that the people decreed
unto him the Pretorshippe, was by the decree made a Freeman, (the people of
Room having authority to make a Freeman): yet for that he was in deed a
servant fugitive from his master, his master was by law to have the price
of the same his seruannt at the peoples hands: much less can common error
of a few in authority, or a common error of a few in their own right,
bar the public wealth, or the Church from a public benefit due unto them.
But there is a defense commonly used by some, to excuse the Bish. and to exempt
them from just reprehension, for placing unlearned men in benefices. The
Patrons (say some) are covetous, they will present none, but such as from whom
they may (...) lawful for me a poor Gentleman in the country, having the
patronage of a benefice, to bestow the same upon some honest poor man,
conditionally to let me have the profits thereof at a reasonable price,
allowing him a reasonable stipend for his service and pains in the ministry,
though he cannot preach; as it were for me to give the same benefice unto you
an Oxenford man, and a great scholar and able to preach, and yet will not, or
do not preach? Is it not as lawful for me to place such a one (as I have
spoken of) in a benefice of my gift, and to allow him his wages sixteen or
twenty pound by the year, and to get quarter sermons preached for him: as it
were lawful for you (had I frankly bestowed the same benefice upon you) to hire
the same person, or some other more ignorant, and to give him less wages, and
scarcely to preach quarter sermons your self? Had not this man suddenly
been strooken dumb and dead as a door nail, you should as well have heard
his reply, as you have read the demand. And in good sooth what greater loss,
and hinderaunce has the people of W. by an unlearned man, their parson not
preaching, and hiring out his benefice to his patro^ for 15. pound by the
year, then has the people of P. by a learned man, their parson not reside^t,
not preaching, and hiring out his benefice of the same value to his curate for
40. pound by the year? Surely, as there comes no greater good to the people
of the one place, by the one, then comes to the people of the other place, by
the other: so is the one both less hurtful to the common weal, and also less
sinful to the lord, then the other. Less hurtful, because the pore and needy
of the one, have often a good sliuer of bread: a good dish of drink at the
patro^s door, yea sometimes, a good meals meat at his table, and a good fire
in his hall. But touching the Hospitallitie and housekeeping of a non resident,
his Kitchion Chimneis, are ever like the Nose of a Dog, ever cold, never
warm; his Baylye plays Sweep Stake, he purseth his Wheat in a Six penny
Bag, and carries his Barley in a little Budget, sometimes Forty Miles,
sometimes an Hundred, sometimes three hundredth from his Parsonage: yea out of
Ireland into Cambridge, out of Wales into Oxenford: from beyond Lincoln to
Salisbury: from besides Leycester to Comberland: from Malburne to Harley: Less
sinful to the Lord, because the Patron enjoys his right by couenauntes and
good will of him, that by Law is reputed the lawful person, and whom he has
presented: yea oftentimes also, with the consent of the people, whose Clearke
they willingly receive to be placed amongst them. But the person Nonsident,
against his promise to his patron, against his oath to his Ordinary, without
consent of the people, against the law of man, and against the Ordinance of the
Lord, robs and spoileth the people of the tenth of their labors, and lives
idely, by the sweat of other men's brows. But to let pass the answer made
before to the Plurality man; and to speak no more of the Bishops own wilful
negligence in making unlawful ministers, and that therefore, he has no cause
to complain against patrones for preferring unlawful men to benefices, who^ he
has unlawfully preferred to so hie offices, and therefore not to be pitied, in
case by law he were punished, because he should have looked before he had
leaped: I say to let this pass, yet the objection made before in their
defense, is an objection in truth not to be objected. The trial of the ability
of the person presented, whether it consist in learning or in life, is and ever
has been only in the authority of the Church, and never in the power of the
Laitye. Authent. de sanct epis.. clericos. col. nona.
First touching the enquirye of their ability for learning, (to leave to speak
of the Canon Law, which altogether attributes the same unto the clergy) the
civil law, and the Canon Laws of this realm, agree herein together, and
attribute the enquiry thereof to the clergy only. The Civil law says thus:
Authent. vt clericus qui reced illud quoque. coll. quint.
If they which are chosen by them as men unworthy, be forbidden to be ordained,
then let the most holy B. procure such to be ordained, whom he shall think
meetest. And thus we decree moreover, that thing to belong to the honor and
worship of your seat, that none buylding a Church, or otherwise bestowing
alms upon them that minister therein, be thus bold, as by power to bring
unto your reverence, men to be ordained: but our mind is, that by your
holiness and judgment, they be examined touching the Idoneitie of a parson
presented to an Ecclesiastical benefice, by the laws of the Realm, the
examination of him likewise pertayneth to the Ecclesiastical judge, and so it
has been hitherto used, and so let it be done hereafter. Articuli. cleric. c.
13.
And again, Where the Ordinary refuses the Clearke for non ability which is
in issue, and the Ordinary is party, that shall not be tried by him, because
he is party, but by the Metrapolitane if the Clearke be alive, and if he
be dead, then by the Country where the examination was had. 39. Ed. 3. fol.
1. Brook title Trial. 25. case.
And again. Where the Ordinary after the patron has presented, does inquire
and find the Clearke to be criminous, and the time of the lapse by this means
pass, there he shall not make any collation by lapse, but first give notice
unto the party, if he be a layman, but contrariwise, if he be a spiritual
man, note the difference, For he may know his own Clearke. Brook, Title
Notice. 6. case.
But were it so that the Laietie had power therein, and that the Archbishop
were excluded: Yet if the bishop after he were compelled by process from any
of her highness temporal Courts of justice, to admit an unable Clearke, did
forthwith call this unable Clearke into his consistory, and object against
him his inability, and for the same degrade him of his office: What remedy
had the same Clearke, against his Ordinary in this case? He being once
deposed from his office by his Ordinary, the common laws should have now no
remedy to help him, he being no more to be called a Clearke, and therefore
not to bring any writ, or commence any suit against his Ordinary in the name
of a Clearke. But we will conclude. Since the statute of 25. Henry 8. has
authorized all Canons, constitutions, and Synodalles provincial, made before
that statute, not being contrariant or repugnaunt, to the laws and customs of
the Realm, nor derogatorie to her Majesty's prerogative Royal to be now in
force and executed: and also since these Canons, constitutions, and Synodalles
provincial before specified, were made before the said Statute, and be not
contrariaunt, nor repugnant to the Laws and customs of the Realm, nor
derogatorie to her highness prerogative: yea, since they are agreeable to the
Laws and vsages of the Realm, and uphold her prerogative Royal: And since
by these Canons, and other acts of Parliament, and her highness injunctions,
it is evident, that men learned; that men apt and meet to teach, are to be
placed ministers in the Church, and that men utterly unlearned, and such as
can only read, to say Mattens or Mass, are not to be admitted: That therefore
a learned Ministry is commanded by the Laws of England: And if so, then an
unlearned Ministry forbidden by the same laws: and if so, then by the same
Laws, such penalties and corrections, to be laid and inflicted upon the
contemners of the said Laws, as by the said Laws are wholesomly provided
against such wilful Law breakers.

Dispensations for many benefices unlawful.
Extra de cle. non residen. c. quia nonnulli. etc. 1. de consuet. lib. 6.
QVIA NONNVLLI, etc. For as much as some putting no measure to their
covetousness, endeavor to take many Ecclesiastical dignities and many
parrishe Churches against the ordinances of holy Canons, and being scarce able
to discharge one office, yet notwithstanding challenge unto themselves
stipendes due unto many: we straightly command, that henceforth this abuse
be not any more permitted: And that whensoever any Church or Ecclesiastical
ministry, ought to be committed: we will, such a parson to be sought that may
be resident in the same place, and discharge the cure by himself. And if any
thing shall be done otherwise; let both the receiver lose that, that he has so
received, and let the giver be deprived of power to give again. Out of which
prohibition these conclusions may be made. 1 Whatsoever tends to the
mayntenaunce of covetousness is unlawful: 2 But to suffer one man to enjoy many
benefices tends to the maintenance of covetousness: 3 Therefore for one man to
have many benefices, is unlawful.
1 Whatsoever is contrary to the holy Canons, is not to be tolerated: 2 But
for one man to have many Churches with cure of souls, is contrary to the holy
Canons: 3 Therefore, for one man to have many Churches with cure of souls, is
not to be tolerated.
1 Whosoever takes unto himself, the stipende due unto many, the same does
commit an unlawful act: 2 But he that takes unto himself many benefices,
takes the stipends due unto many: 3 Therefore he that takes unto himself
many benefices, does commit an unlawful act.
1 Whosoever is scarce able to discharge his office in one place, is not to
have the office of many committed unto him in many places: 2 But he that has
the cure of souls committed unto him in one place, is scarce able to discharge
his duty in that one place: 3 Therefore he is not to have the offices of
many committed unto him in many places.
1 Whatsoever is an hindera^ce to him that has cure of souls to be resident,
and to discharge his cure by himself, the same is not to be suffered: 2 But
for one man to have many benefices, is an hinderance for him to be resident,
and to discharge his cure by himself: 3 Therefore it is not to be admitted,
that one should have many benefices.
Again:

Etrauag. de prebend quia in tantum.
QVIA IN TANTVM, etc. Because the ambition of some has spread it self so
far, as that they are said to have not only two or three, but many
Churches, being not able duly to serve two: we with the consent of our
brethren and fellow bishops, command that this be reformed. And because the
multitude of prebends, even an enemy to the Canons, is an occasion of a
dissolute and gadding ministry, and conteyneth a manifest peril of souls,
we will therefore provide to supply the want of such as are able to do
service in the Church. The reasons of which decree, may thus be framed. 1
Whatsoever is or may be a mean to maintain ambition, is not to be
tolerated, 2 But for one man to have many benefices, is a mean to maintain
ambition. 3 Therefore for one man to have many benefices, is not to be
tolerated.
1 Whatsoever ministers matter for a gadding, roging, and dissolute
ministry, is not be tolerated. 2 But for one man to have many benefices
ministers matter for a gadding, a roging and a dissolute ministry: 3
Therefore for one man to have many benefices is not to be tolerated.
1 Whatsoever contains perrill of souls is not to be tolerated: 2 But for
one man to have many benefices contains perrill of souls: 3 Therefore for
one man to have many benefices, is not to be tolerated.
1 Whatsoever is cause, that such as are able to do service in the Church, do
want and so are kept back from doing the Church good, is not to be tolerated.
2 But for one man to have many benefices, is a cause, that diverse able to do
service in the church do want, and so are kept from doing good: 3 Therefore
for one man to have many benefices is not to be tolerated.
Again:

Extrauag. de electio. ca. dudum. 2. vnde etc. Extrauag. de prebend. ca. de
multa.
VNDE CVM IN EODEM, etc. Sithence therefore it is ordained in the same
council, that whosoever shall receive any benefice with cure of soul annexed,
if before he obtained the like benefice, should by law it self be deprived of
the same, and should also be spoiled of the second, in case he contended to
hold the first, the foresaid elected notwithstanding breaking these
ordinances by the plurality of benefices, does incur himself these vices,
which he should improoue in others, even covetousness and breach of law. And
by retayning benefices which belong not unto him, for so much, as upon the
receipt of a second benefice, the former by law is merely void, he has by
consequence contracted an other man's goods, and so committed theft or rauine;
he retayneth moreover the said parrishe Churches, both to the detriment of his
own salvation, and the health of other men's souls, for so much as he being by
law it self deprived from these benefices, the cure of their souls, did no
more belong unto him, and so were they damnably deceived. Out of which
constitution one other conclusion may thus be gathered. 1 Unjustly to take that
which belongs to an other man, and so after a sort to commit theft or rauyn,
is unlawful, and not to be tolerated: 2 But he that has many benefices, does
by unjust means take to him self that, which belongs to an other, and
therefore after a sort commits theft or rauyne: 3 Therefore, etc.


89. Distinc. c. singula.
ECCLESIASTICI IVRIS officia singulis quibusque personis sigillatim committi
iubemus, etc. We command says he, that singular offices belonging to the
right of the Church, be committed severally to singular persons. For, as in one
body we have many members, and all members have not one office, so in the body
of the Church, there are many members according to the true saying of S. Paul,
in one and the same spiritual body, this office is to be committed to one, and
that office to an other, neither is the charge of two things to be committed
at one time to any one person, be the said person never so cunning or expert.
For if all were the eye, where were then the hearing. For as the variety of
the members, having diverse offices, both keeps the strength of the body, and
preserves the beauty thereof: Even so diverse persons having diverse functions,
distributed unto them, make manifest the strength and comeliness of the whole
Church. And, as it is an uncomely thing in the body of man, that one member
should do his fellow members office: Even so is it hurtful and most wicked,
where the minesterie and function of several things, shall not be distributed
to so many several persons. And in an other Chapter. Let no Elder have two
Churches, both because it is a proper kind of merchandise, and filthy gain,
and also altogether contrary to the custom of the Church. 16. q. 7. c. per
Laicos. in si.
From whence I conclude thus: 1 Whatsoever is contrary to a good custom of the
church, is not to be tolerated. 2 But for one Cleark, to be placed in two
benefices, is contrary to the good custom of the church: 3 Therefore for one
Clearke to be placed, etc.
1 Whatsoever is a proper kind of marchaundize, and filthy gain, is to be
avoided in the church: 2 But for one man to have many benefices, is a proper
kind of marchaundize, and filthy gain: 3 Therefore, etc.
1 Whatsoever is indecent, and uncomely in the Church, is unlawful: 2 But for
one man to be placed in two benefices, is indecent and uncomely: 3 Therefore
for one man to be placed in two benefices, is unlawful.


BEside these Canons, there are many mo establishing the not having of many
benefices for one man: but to recite all, were a labor superfluous,
considering the effect of al, is contained in these. And yet Octobones
provincial constitution, wherein diverse other absurdities, the^ whereof mention
has been yet made against the unlawful retinue of many benefices, are expressly
all eaged, is not amiss to be repeated, Who says as follows.

October. de inst. seu collat. cap. 2.
EX HIIS AVTEM. etc. We suffice not to speak, how great evils proceed out of
these pluralities unto the church: For by them the honesty of the church is
defiled: Authority is naught set by: the faith of Christ is trodden under
foot: love is banished, the hope of the poor expecting any void benefice is
frustrate: The miserable and blind sinner boasting himself as a guide, does
not so much receive, as steal that, that belongs not unto him. Among the
rich themselves also strifes and contentions arise, braules and enuies are
nourished. And for this cause we chiefly fear the fire of God his wrath, to
have been kindled against men of such rule, and for the offenses of some to
have sent a fear or revenge against all, and whilst we see nothing so
perilous, we fear such or greiuouser things in time to come, unless God by
his mercy respecting us shall lay to some wholesome remedy. If the disease
and malady of pluralities, in time of ignorance and superstition was such, 5.
P. 2.
that the blind leaders of the blind, had their eyes in their heads to see
the infection there of to be most perrillous, as well to their synagogue, as to
their common wear: how is it possible, that plurified men in the time of the
knowledge and truth of the Gospel, should find any means, to escape the fire
and revenge which the idolators feared. And not only these Canons and
prouincials, but the statute laws of England also made against these
excesses, prohibit likewise the having of mo benefices, as appears by an Act
of Parliament, made the 21. year of Henry the 8. the tenor whereof ensues.
[And be it enacted that if any person or persons, having one benefice with
cure of souls, being of the yearly value of 8. pound or above, accept and
take any other with cure of soul, and be instituted and inducted in possession
of the same, that then and immediately after such possession had thereof, the
first benefice shall be adjudged in the law to be void: And that it shall be
lawful to every patron, having the aduouson thereof to present an other, and
the presented, to have the benefit of the same in such like manner and form,
as though the incumbent had dyed or resigned: Any lilence, union, or other
dispensation, to the contrary here of obtained notwithstanding: And that every
such license, union, or dispensation, had or hereafter to be had, contrary to
this present Act, of what name or names, quality or qualities soever they be,
shall be utterly void, and of none effect]. As touching any other Canons made
and in force, before 25. Henry 8. allowing certain immunities, privileges and
dispensations to be granted, for the possessing of many benefices and parrish
Churches rightly understood, are no way prejudicial unto these former
ordinances. For in things depending upon the mere disposition of man, though
the magistrate have authority, as well generally to forbid and prohibit, as
also in some cases besides the said law, to license and dispense: Yet
concerning the matter of pluralities, it will not be found. Pluralistes (I
confess) and their abettours, ground their assertions upon these and such like
rules following: viz. Eius est destruere, cuius est construere: eius est
interpretari, cuius est condero: Papa qui ius condidie, est supra ius, maiorem
enim retinuit potestatem. etc. That is, To him it belongs to pull down, to
whom it belongs to set up: and the interpretation of the law, belongs to
the law maker: the Pope that made the law, is a boue the law, because he has
retained a greater power to himself, then he has given to the law: The pope
has a fulness of power to dispose of benefices at his pleasure. And therefore
say they; As Churches were at the first by Law positive, both founded and
distinguished: so may they again by the same law positive, either be clean
taken away, or united. Which vnnecessarye and sophistical consequence, is
simply to be denied. First, for those former rules, generally understood
without limitation and distinction, be either utterly false, or else contrary
and repugnant to other principles of law. Again, concerning these or any
other like general conclusions in law, I answer and that by an infallible
maxim in law that no rule, can be so generally given in things of mere
policy and disposition of man, only devised by man, (of which sort these
former rules are) that receives not some limitations and restrictions. And
that therefore these principles, whereupon the foundation of pluralities is
laid, being weak, and easilye shaken with a little blast of man's wit, can
not stand or have any sure settling, in as much as against the same, many
challenges may be made, and many exceptions taken. Secondly, the foresaid
coherence follows not, for two apparent and principal fallacies contained
in the same, as afterward shall be manifested. But first, touching these
rules before mentioned; Eius est destruere cuius est construere, etc. He may
break a law, that may make a law, the same is not always true. It takes no
place, Vbi causa prohibitionis est perpetua, Where there is a perpetual cause
of a prohibition: For then the cause being perpetual, the prohibition ought
to be perpetual. Quia perpetuam habet causam prohibitionis, nulla est
obligatio. Because it has a perpetual cause of prohibition, there is no
obligation. ff. de verb. oblig. l. si stipuler in id and glos. extra de simo.
c. si quis. ver iuramentum.
As for example: the reason and cause of prohibition against murder, theft,
rauine, blasphemy, is perpetual, and therefore the law against murder,
theft, rauine, and blasphemye, ought to be perpetual: And therefore man having
once made laws against these vices, it is not lawful for man afterward, to
dispense with these vices, or by license to warrant any man to steal, to kill
to spoil, or to blaspheme. For whosoever shall in this sort dispense with a
law, the same also may dispense with the reason of the law, and so with the
soul and life of the law, and so make the law a vain and dead law. Ratio
legis est anima legis, The reason of the law, is the soul and life of the Law:
and therefore as none may dispense with the reason of the law, or take away
the soul and life of the law: so none may dispense with the law, or take away
the law. Now for as much as it is not lawful for all the Princes in the earth,
to change or dispense, or take away the reasons and causes of the Laws
prohibiting many benefices: Therefore it is not lawful for them to change, or
dispense, or take away the laws against pluralitites. The reasons whereupon
pluralities are forbidden, are reasons taken from the law of nature, and from
the equity of the law of God: Institutio. de iure. not genesis and ci. sed
naturali^.
but none can alter or take away the law of nature, or dispense with the law
of God: therefore none can alter or impugn or dispense, with the reasons of
either of them. For as the law of nature is immutable, so is the reason of the
Law of nature immutable: and as the will of GOD is unchangeable, Iam.
so is the equity of his Law unchangeable to. If then natural reason be the
cause and soul and life of a natural law, and the will of God the only
cause of the Law of God, and his only will the rule of all justice
unchangeably, none can challenge authority, to change or dispense with the Law
of nature, or with the law of God, but he must forth with challenge
authority to dispense both with the reason of the Law of nature, and with the
pleasure and will of God. And theeefore out of the premises I conclude thus. 1
Wheresoever the cause of a prohibition is perpetual, there the prohibition
ought to be perpetual: 2 But the cause of the prohibition against pluralities
is perpetual: 3 Therefore the prohibition ought to be perpetual.
1 Every law grounded upon the reason of nature and the equity of the law of
God is immutable: 2 But the laws prohibiting pluralities, are grounded either
upon the reasons of nature, or upon the equity of the law of God: 3
Therefore all the laws prohibiting pluralities are immutable.


Institut. de iure natu. gent. and ciui. sed naturalia.
THe first proposition of the first syllogism has been proved already: the
first proposition of the 2. syllogism is manifest, Omnia naturalia sunt
immutabilia: All natural things are immutable, James.
and there is no altering or shadowing by turning with the almighty. The second
proposition of either syllogism shall be manyfested by that that follows.
But first to answer the falacies before spoken of, because pluralities are
not forbidden by law positive of man alone, but prohibited also by the law of
nature, and by the law of God: therefore it follows, that they may not be
tolerated by law positive of man alone. And therefore if plurality men would
fitly argue to conclude their purpose, they should frame the same after this
sort. 1 Whatsoever is prohibited by the law of man alone, the same by the law
of man alone, may be licensed again: 2 But pluralities are forbidden by the
law of man alone: 3 Therefore they may be licensed by the law of man again.


THe second proposition of which syllogism being utterly false, you see
evidently, wherein the conclusion halteth, and the fallacy consists, and
therefore I conclude against them thus. 1 Whatsoever is forbidden by the law of
nature, and by the Law of God, the same cannot be licensed by the law of man
alone: 2 But pluralities are forbidden by the law of nature, and by the law of
God: 3 Therefore they cannot be licensed by the Law of man alone.
And again. 1 Whatsoever ratifieth a thing monstrous and against nature, the
same may not be privileged by the law of man: 2 But dispensations for
Pluralities ratify monstrous things, and things against nature. 3 Therefore
dispensations for Pluralities may not be privileged by the law of man.


THE second Proposition of the first Syllogism, shall be proved in his place.
The second Proposition of the last Syllogism, I prove from the etymology or
description of a privilege or dispensation: for a privilege, and a
dispensation in effect signify both one thing. Glos. lib. 6. de rescript. c.
verse. in principio. Extra. de iudic. c. At si clerici. de adulteriis.
Priuilegium dicitur, quod (...) contr^ commune in fauorem aliquarum personarum
super prohibitis disponsatur, quia permissa, iure communi expediuntur,
prohibita vero dispensatione egent. A privilege is said to be that, that for
the favor of certain private persons, comes forth against common right^
things prohibited are dispensed with, because things permitted are dispatched
by common right, but things forbidden require dispensation. By which
discriptions of a Pryueledge and dispensation, it is apparent, that a
Privilege and dispensation for pluralities, must license and authorize that,
that the Law against Plurality does infringe and disalow, and so be a Law
contrariant, and repugnaunt to the Law against Pluralities: but the Law
against Pluralities, is the Law of nature and the Law of God. Therefore a
Privilege or dispensation for Pluralities, is against the Law of nature, and
against the law of God: a more monstrous law was never established. Now that
pluralities are forbidden by the Law of Nature, and by the law of God, which
was the second Proposition of my first Syllogism, I prove thus. All the
reasons, whereupon the positive Law of man against Pluralities was first
established, are taken and drawn from the Law of Nature, and from the Law of
God: The reasons and causes of the prohibition are these: First the avoiding of
covetousness, of Ambition, of Theft, of Murder of Souls, of a Dissolute, a
roaging, and a gadding Mynistery: the necessity of comeliness and decency in
the Church, are special and primary causes for the prohibiting Pluralities:
but all these are forbidden or commanded by the Law of God: therefore the
causes of the prohibition of Pluralities, are grounded upon the will of God,
and therefore immutable, and therefore not to be dispensed with. Again: for
one man to have the Stipends of many men: for one man not able to discharge his
duty in one place, and yet to have many chardges in many places committed unto
him: for one man to hinder another man from ordinary means to do good to the
Church: all these causes I say are second causes for the prohibition of
Pluralities: but all these causes are causes of reason and nature, therefore by
the Laws of reason and nature, Pluralities are forbidden: and therefore not to
be dispensed with, no more then theft or murder or blasphemy may be dispensed
with. And if Antichriste think it Theft, Rauine, Covetousness, Ambition,
Pride, Murder of souls, for one man to have many Benefices without
dispensation: if Antichrist account the having of many benefices without
dispensation, to be a meet mean, to maintain a roauing, a gadding, and a
dissolute Ministry: to foster extortion and unlawful gain: what shall the
servants of the Lord Christ, the son of the most highest, whom he ha^
commanded to be holy and perfect, as his Heavenly Father is perfect, defend
all these horrible sins and impieties tolerable by dispensation? Can a
dispensation from a Pope, or an Archbishop make theft no Theft? rauine no
rauine? Covetousness and Ambition, no Covetousness and no Ambition? I speak
herein to Christians, which ought to maintain the Law of Christ, against the
law of Antichrist. For I know some of the Popes Chapleins, grounding
themselves upon these rules of Law, whereof mention has been made before, and
giving unto the Pope Merum imperium, an absolute power on earth, will affirm,
that the pope can make Nihil ex aliquo, and aliquid ex nihilo. Nothing of
somewhat, and somewhat of nothing. Vid. gloss. Extra de confess. prebend. c
proposuit. verse. si pra^. ius.
Sin to be no sin, and no sin to be sin. These blasphemies they spue
out, and these blasphemies they maintain, that think they may be thieves and
murderers and extortioners by dispensation.. Apostoli dispensat 34 distinct. c.
lector.
And such are plurified men by their own plurality laws, as shall further be
manifested: For as to the making of every general and public ordinance and
constitution, it is necessarily required, that the same tend, first to the
advancing of the honor, praise and glory of God: Glos in c. non est extra. de
voto verse. authoritate.
secondly that it be profitable and expedient for the peace and safety of the
weal public: even so, every superior and Potentate, to whom authority by law
is given (in some cases) to grant priueledges, ought in the same cases to
observe the like conditions and circumstances, to the end their said
priueledges may be auailable and take effect, without the dishonouring of God
and prejudice to their country and people. For, though a Dispensation be but a
fiction in law: yet is that fiction indeed, of as great force and efficacy
in that feyned case, and works as great effect, as the truth of the Law it
self in a case of truth: Cod. de coll. dec. l. liberos
And by Law it is all one in effect, whether I enjoy any Benefit by
privilege, or by common right. And therefore as a law public, must be equal,
honest, just, possible, agreeable to the Country, place and time, necessary,
profitable, not written for any private commodity; but for the common profit
of the people: Distinct. 4. c. orit.
so likewise must a Privilege have all these conditions and qualities.
Otherwise as a general and public Law, loses the name of a public Law,
unless it be such as has the foresaid coherences: even so a Privilege
loses the name of a private Law, unless it have the like Adiunctes.

The second fallacy wherein plurality men beguile themselves, is as evident and
palpable as the first. They reason thus. Churches were established, and
parishes distinguished by man: therefore Churches and Parishes may be united by
man: and if Churches may be united by man, then one man may have many
Benefices. The Antecedent of which Enthimeme is sophistical, because of the
double and trebble signification of the word Churches, and therefore the
argument limpeth after the same manner, as the former did, attributing the
establishing of Churches, to man only: for if they should mean by this word
(Churches) frames of Churches, fashioned of Timber, Wood, Stone, Mortar and
such like, then say they truly, that Churches were builded and founded by man:
as to say by Masons, Carpentors, Tylars, etc. But they will not have the name
of (Churches) in their Argument to be taken in this sense. Their meaning (I am
sure) is not so, they have no such intent: for so might they rather burden
themselves with the reparations of many Churches, then profit themselves, with
the revenues of many Churches: And by being Lords of many Steeples after that
sort, they might gape long enough upon them, before they gained ought by them.
If they mean by this word (Churches) congregations and assembles of people,
then is their assertion absolutely falls, because the Lord has willed all his
people, to gather and assemble themselves together, to the intent they should
call upon his name: And then in this sense their conclusion must needs fail
also, because it is both impossible for all the people to be assembled
together into one place, and also impossible to hear one man's voice. But
Churches again taken and understood in this sense, as they make not for their
purpose one way: so are they not curraunte to themselves and their senses an
other way. They would teach and preach little enough, and be weary of well
doing soon enough: had they not respect to grease themselves, rather with the
fat of the labor of the people, then diligently to govern and instruct the
people: And therefore I guess their meaning to be, that Churches in their
former proposition, should signify the livings of Churches, and therefore
their argument to be thus in effect. Liuinges of Churches are established and
distinguished by man: therefore livings of Churches may be taken away, or
united by man; wherein they attribute still to man alone, that, that in no wise
appertains to man alone: for as Congregations are appointed by the Lord
himself, so are pastors over Congregations, and livings for pastors likewise
appointed by him. And therefore as co^gregations of the Lords people cannot be
altogether dissolved by man alone, so ought not the liuinges appointed for the
pastors of the same people to be taken away by man alone. Do ye not know
(says the apostle) Cor. 1. 9 13.
that they which minister about the holy things, eat of the things of the
Temple: and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? So
also has the lord ordained, that they which preach the gospel, should live of
the Gospel. And therefore, in saying that livings of Churches and parrishes,
are distinguished by man, therefore they may be united by man, though in some
sense the same may be true; yet thereby it follows not, that many livings
appointed by the Lord himself for many pastors over many Congregations,
should be taken from many and be given to one. They might as well conclude that
whereas the lord had commanded the land of Canaan to be divided amongst the
children of Israel by the hand of Moses: and whereas Moses, had given unto some
one family, a greater portion, and to some other family a lesser portion: that
therefore Joshua Moses successor, might have taken both the greater and the
lesser, and given it to one alone, or to have taken all the portions and
inheritances allotted unto diverse and sundry of a family, and to have given
them to one of one family alone: or whereas Moses according to his commission,
had distributed the land into twelve parts, according to the twelve principal
and chief families: Joshua might have made but two or three, or four
Captains, over all the whole twelve tribes. As our auncesters in times past,
bounding and limitting parishes, have enlarged some with wyder borders, and
straightened some with narrower passages then was meet and convenient: So were
it very good and commendable for men of wisdom in our days; to yield to
have a better equallitie, then that some should have al, and some never a whit:
some two or three thousand pounds by the year; and some scarcely xx. Nobles,
so that the pastor that now has too little, might by some means have
sufficient: and that he that has now too much, might have a convenient
competencie. If Sempronius the tailor, should make Titius his garment too short
wasted; and Seius his garment too long wasted; it follows not therefore, that
Caius the pilferer, to make himself a garment, should by stealth convey both
garments away. By the unfolding of these fallacies, you may judge, that if
plurality men, to serve their turn indeed, could have framed their argument
skilfully, they would then have fashioned the same after this sort. 1
Whatsoever is established and distinguished by man alone, the same may be taken
away and united by man alone. 2 But Churches, that is to say: Congregations of
the Lords people: pastors of these assemblies, and the livings for the
pastors of these assemblyes, were established and distinguished by man alone:
3 Therefore Churches, pastors and liuinges for pastors, may be taken away,
and united by man alone.


Now because the Minor proposition of this Sillogisme is utterly false;
therefore I conclude against plurality men thus. 1 Whatsoever is established
and distinguished by the Lord himself; the same may not be taken away or
united by man: 2 But Churches, that is to say, assemblyes and societies of the
Lords people, pastors of these assemblies, and livings for the pastors of
these assemblies, are established and distinguished by the Lord himself: 3
Therefore Churches, that is to say, assemblyes of people: pastors and livings
for pastors, may not be taken away, or united by man.


THE Minor proposition of which Syllogism, to every man, not minded to cavil
at these words, (Established and distinguished) is infallible, and not to be
denied: for though bounds and lymittes of certain parrishes, are bordered out
by man: and that a certain number of people, called to make one Congregation,
and to hear at one time, in one place, one certain pastor, be at the rule
and disposition of man: yet that these things should be thus done, is the
special commandment of the Lord. Moreover when as this thing shall be once
thus performed by man (according to the Lords commandment) it shall be and is
lawful for man again, where the congregation is too great to make the same
less, and where it is too little, to make the same greater: and in this sense I
grant, that as it is lawful for man to establish and distinguish: so it is
lawful for man, to take away and to unite Churches and livings. But because
this is not the meaning of pluralists, for that they will have one pastor, to be
placed over many Congregations, and many congregations to find one pastor:
many bodies to have one head: and one head to have many bodies: many flocks to
have one shepherd, and one shepherd to have many flocks: Therefore mine
argument without any cauil, remains firm against the^. And for these
considerations, as before, so again I deny the consequence made by plurified
men, for the possessing of many benefices by one man. For, though by coullor
of law, they pretend right unto them: yet the law indeed yields them no such
advantage, because dispensations for many benefices and parish Churches, with
cure of souls generally granted, are, and ought by law to be utterly void
and of none effect, as partly has bin proved, and more at large appears by
that that follows. Glos. 1. q. 7. c. requiritis.
Dispensatio est iuris communis relaxatio, faecta cum causae cognitione, ab eo
qui ius habet dispensandi. A dispensation is a relaxation or release of common
right, granted by him that has power to dispense, having first taken
knowledge of the cause thereof: that is, having considered, whether there be
just cause to move him to grant a privilege or dispensation, against common
right or no. By which definition it is evident that Dispensare, is diuersa
pensare, nam omnia quae ad causae cognitionem pertinent, pensare debet, qui
Dispensare vult. To Dispense, is to ponder diverse things: for he that will
Dispense, ought to waygh and to consider all those things, which pertayne to
the knowledge of the cause. In which discriptions, three things are
principally requisite and necessary. First the person or judge that has
authority to dispense: Secondly, the causes for the which dispensations may be
granted: And lastly an examination or discussion of those causes. So that if
any dispensation or faculty whatsoever shall be granted, either A non Iudice,
by one that is no judge either without a lawful cause: or lastly without
aspeciall trial and sifting of that same lawful cause, before it pass: every
such dispensation by a necessary consequence, is merely void, because every
such dispensation agrees not to the definition of a dispensation, and
therefore can not be the thing defined. Glos extrauagant de prebend. and
dignit. c. execrabilis ver. vltima.
Concerning the party that has power and authority to grant dispensations,
and to take knowledge of the lawfulness of the causes, requisite to make
dispensations goodland auailable, the same in this Realm, is the Archdishop of
Caunterbury: H. 8.
and upon his refusal then, such as her highness shall appoint to that
office, according to the form of a statute provided in that behalf. And
therefore, touching his person thus appointed to be Judge, I conclude from the
general to the special as before: that because the positive laws of man,
against pluralities, are all grounded either upon the law of nature, or upon
the law of God: And because as the laws of nature and the laws of God, are
immutable, so should the same positive laws remain stable and unchangeable:
that therefore the Archbishop of Caunterbury being a man, has no more right
to give a dispensation against the positive laws of man, made against
pluralities, then he has to give a dispensation against the law of nature, or
against the law of God. Glos. extra. de vot. c. non est ver authoritate. Extra.
de concel. preb. proposuit ver. supra etc. cum ad monasterium: ex de statu
monocho.
For says the gloss in one place: No dispensation against the law of nature,
or against the law of God is tolerable, no not by the Pope him self. As
touching the causes whereupon the said Archbishop, or other officers, should,
and ought be moved, by remitting the rigor of common right, to grant
immunities and dispensations they are two fold. One consists in the dignity
and worthiness of the persons, the other in the waightinesse of certain
special causes. Unto what manner of persons dispensatio^s ought to be granted.
For in truth, either the defect of the quality of the person, or the want of
a just cause in law, does frustrate and make void every dispensation. For
neither can a man qualified, and in all respects capable of a dispensation,
enjoy the benefit thereof, unless he may also enjoy the same upon a good
ground, and just cause warranted by law. Neither can a just cause and good
ground approved by Law, be sufficient matter to induce a Judge to grant a
dispensation, to him that is unable and unapt to receive the same. A man well
Lettered, singularly qualified, and endued with virtue and godliness, or of
some noble house and parentage, is by Law a fit and meet man to enjoy more
benefices by dispensation then one: Neither is it a sufficient qualification,
for one destitute of learning to become a Chappleine only to some Noble man:
For the statute providing that some Noble men's Chappleines, should be made
capable by dispensation to retain more benefices, does not thereby take away
the qualities required to be in such persons, by common right, but adds a new
quality, requisite to be had of every one, and so makes the law stronger, and
of more efficacy against pluralities. Panor. in c. ex part. l. 3. de verb
signi fi. fol. 189. nu. 3.
Statuta debent intelligi, quod aliquid addant iuri communi: Statutes ought so
to be understood, that they may add somewhat to common right. Extr de
prebend. c. ff. de multa.
Circa sublimes and literatas personas, quae maioribus beneficiis sunt
honorandae (cum ratio postulauerit) per sedem apostolicam poterit dispensari.
Concerning men of Nobility and learning, who with greater benefices are to be
honored, the Apostolic sea (if reason shall require) may dispense with such.
And in an other Chapter the same is confirmed.

Extr. de elec. c in^otuit.
MVLTA ENIM in hoe casu dispensationem inducere videbantur: literarum scientia,
morum honest as, vitae virtus, and fama personae multipliciter a quibusdam
etiam ex fratribus nostris, qui eum in scholis cognouerant approbatae. Many
things in this case seemed to lead to the granting of a dispensation; his
learning, his honest conversation, his upright life, and the good report of the
person diversely commended, even by some of our brethren, which knew him at
school. These gifts and graces, these qualities, and these conditions, are
incident and appertain by common right to these men, that by way of
dispensation, may possess many benefices. Whosoever then is not commendable
for his learning, for his honesty, for his sincere life, or not of some
ancient and noble family, the same man by law is utterly barred and secluded
from this benefit. The second quality required to the validity of every
dispensation, is the waightinesse of some special cause, as appears in the
Chapter before recited in these words, Cum ratio postulauerit, When reason
requires. Extra. de voto. c. 1.
And again, we answer says Alexander the third, in a decretall Epistle
written to the Bishop of Exceter, that it belongs to the judgment of him
that is President, that he consider diligently the cause of commutation, and
so accordingly to dispense. And by the Chapter Magnae, Extra de voto, It is
plain and evident, that there must be some special cause known, for the
which every dispensation is to be granted. For as I said before, to the end
that every dispensation be good and auaylable by Law, there is required
necessarily, both the ability of the person to whom, and the justice of the
cause for which the same ought to be given. For neither may an able man
without a just cause, neither a just cause without an able man move the Judge
in anywise to dispense. And to tell you what these special causes are, in few
words they are these, urgent necessity, and evident utility of the Church.
Extra. de ele. c cum nobis.
Propter vrgentem necessitatem, and euidentem vtilitatem ecclesiae Capuanae,
quam in hac part potius approbamus, volumus ipsum firmiter perdurare.
Necessity and utility of the church, only just causes of a dispensatio^
For the urgent necessity, and evident utility of the Church of Capua, which
on this behalf we rather have respect unto, our pleasure and will is, that he
continue. It is unlawful by common right for a Monk or Layeman, to be
admitted to the government of any church with cure of soul: yet
notwithstanding, if by reason of war, famine, persecution, or other
extraordinary cause, the office of pastoral teaching did cease, so that the
people had none to instruct them in the way of salvation: 1. q. 7. requiritis..
nisi.
now in this case it is lawful for him that has authority to dispense with a
Monk or Layeman, endued with learning, to the end he might by instruction,
bring the people to knowledge. It is unlawful that children borne of a Nun,
violently taken away and married, should be admitted to any Ecclesiastical
orders: Notwithstanding, if the great profit or necessity of the church
require, they may by dispensation be admitted: Suppose there were a custom of
long co^tinuaunce, and time out of mind in the Church of Paul's, contrary to
the first foundation of the Church, that not only the Prebendaries daily
present at divine service, but also others absenting them selves, should
receive every one a like, some daily pention, either in money, or some kind of
victual: this custom by law is void, because it is unreasonable. And yet
notwithstanding any just and necessary infirmity of the body of any
prebendary, or evident utility of the same Church, may be a lawful and
sufficient inducement for the Ordinary, to dispense with the not restoring of
that which was unlawfully taken, under pretense of the former custom. If by the
first foundation of the church of Paul's, twelve prebendaries were appointed,
to be maintained by the revenues of the Church, and the said revenues were not
sufficient for the maintenance of these twelve, the Bishop then in this case,
if the necessity and utility of the Church so require, may annect certain
other Chapels for the maintenance of the said prebendaries. These examples
do sufficiently prove that every dispensation, privilege or immunitie, ought
to be granted upon some just and reasonable cause: and that the said just
and reasonable cause, ought evermore to be the urgent necessity, and evident
profit and commodity of the Church. And that the said urgent necessity and
evident commodity of the Church, ought evermore to be understood, the well
governing of the souls of the people. If therefore, neither urgent necessity,
or evident utility of the Church, require that any one should have many
benefices, yea rather, if it be most profitable and necessary for the Church,
that one man should have but a living appointed for one man, and that by
joining benefice to benefice, and Church to Church, the Church indeed is
maruailously wounded, grieved and molested: and that the souls of the people,
are thereby not governed at all, but left at randon to their own direction
having no guide, to conduct them: every one may euydently discern,
dispensations in that behalf, to be altogether intolerable, having no ground
nor foundation, of reason, equity, or law; but only granted for the private
gain and lucre, of some covetous and vain glorious persons. Whereas it may be
answered, that the statutes of the Realm, licensing diverse Ecclesiastical
persons, qualified either by degree of school, or by service unto nobility,
ought more to be respected in this behalf, then the reasons of the Canon law.
Hereunto I answer, that for my part, I heartely desire and pray unto God, that
these laws might be respected, and that the law of England might rule an
English man in this case. But alas, our laws, are bells without clappers: they
are founded, but they sound not, they are bands, but they bind not. For though
by the statutes of the realm certain noble men's chappleines, and others
graduated in the Universities, be qualified, and made capable of dispensatio^s,
yet I deny the laws of this realm to approve any manner of dispe^sations
tolerable at al, for any kind of these qualified men, unless the same be; Frst,
in cases of necessity for the peace of the common weal: Secondly, in cases of
conueniency, for the honor of her highness person: and lastly, warranted by
the holy scriptures and laws of god. For though the statute make some men, fit
men for the Archb. to work upon, and as it were anuiles for him to strike upon,
yet the same statute imposes no necessity, for the B. to work without the
word. But if it be lawful by the word, then by the law, he may if he will. But
if it be unlawful by the word, the^ he may not though he would. The law
follows. [Be it enacted that neither the king, his heirs and successors,
kings of this realm, nor any of their subjects of this realm, nor of the
kings dominions, shall from thence forth sue to the sea of Rome, or unto any
person or persons, having or pretending any authority by the same for
licenses, dispensations, impositions, faculties, grauntes, rescriptes,
delegacies, instruments, or other writings, of what kind, name, etc. for the
which any license, dispensation, composition, faculty, grant, rescript,
delegacie, instrument or other writing, heretofore has been used and accustomed
to be had and obtained at the sea of Rome, or by authority thereof, or of any
prelate of this realm, nor of any manner of other licenses, dispensatio^s,
compositions, faculties, grauntes, rescriptes, delegacies or any other
instruments or writings, that in cases of necessity may lawfully be granted,
without offending holy scriptures and laws of God: but that from henceforth
every such license, etc. aforenamed and mentioned necessary for your highness,
your heirs or successors, and your and their people and subjects, upon the due
examination of the causes and qualities of the persons procuring such
dispensations, licenses, etc. shall be granted, had and obtained, from time to
time within this your realm, and other your dominions, and not else where in
manner and form following, and no otherwise: that is to say, the Arch. of
canterbury for the time being, and his successors shall have power and
authority from time to time by their discretions, to give, grant, and dispose
by an instrument, under the seal of the said Archb. unto your Majesty and to
your heirs and successors, kings of this realm, as well all manner such
licenses, dispensations, faculties, grants, rescripts, delegacies, instruments,
and all other writings for cases not being contrary or repugnant to the holy
scriptures and laws of God, as heretofore has been accustomed to be had and
obtained, by your Highn. or any your most noble progenitors, or any of yours or
their subjects, at the sea of Rome, or any person or persons by authority of
the same, and al other licenses, dispensatio^s, faculties, etc. in and for, and
upon al such causes and matters, as shall be convenient and necessary to be had
for the honor and surety of your highness, your heirs and successors, and the
wealth and profit of this your realm: so that the said Archb. or any his
successors, in no manner wise shall grant any dispensation, license, rescript,
or any other writing before rehearsed, for any cause or matter repugnant to the
law ofalmighty god.] This act is renewed 1. Elizab. Provided always, that this
act, nor any thing or things therein contained, shall be hereafter interpreted or
expounded, that your grace, your nobles and subjects intend by the same to
decline or vary from the congregation of christ his church in any thing
concerning the very articles of the catholic faith of Christendom, or in
any other things declared by holy scripture, and the word of God, necessary
for your and their saluations, but only to make an ordinance by policy,
necessary and convenient to repress vice, and for good conservation of this
Realm in peace, unity, and tranquillity from rauyne and spoil. In which Act
is set forth unto us, what great care and circumspection, our ancestors in
the twilight of the Gospel, had for the abolishing of corruptions, and the
establishing of a sincere government, both in the Church and common weal: and
how diligently and faithfully they provided, that no manner of dispensatio^s,
licenses, or immunities, should be had or obtained, but in cases of necessity;
in cases not contrary or repugnant to the laws of God: in cases wherein the
wealth, profit, peace, and conservation of the realm requires: in cases
convenient for the honor and safety of the kings person, with a due
confideration always of the causes and qualities for the which, and of the
persons to whom, any license or immunity should be granted. And therefore out of
this statute, first I conclude thus against plurified men: 1 Whatsoever cause
or matter, is repugnant to the law of God, the Archb. may not dispense with the
same. 2 But the matter of having many benefices, or being Non residents, is
repugnant to the laws of God. 3 Therefore the Archbish. may not dispense with
the same.
Again. 1 Whatsoever is not necessary for the wealth, peace, profit, and
conservation of the realm, the same by this statute is forbidden. 2 But that
one man should enjoy, by way of dispensation from the Archbish. livings
appointed for many men, is not necessary for the wealth, peace, profit, and
conservation of the realm. 3 Therefore the same is forbidden by this statute.
Lastly: 1 Whatsoever is not convenient for the honor and safety of her
highness person, the same by this statute is forbidden. 2 But it is not
convenient for the honor and safety of her highness person, to have the
Archbish, disspence for many benefices. 3 Therefore by this statute the
Archbish. is forbidden to dispense, etc.


THe Minor proposition of the first syllogism, has been already sufficiently
proved by many in fallible conclusions of Law, and undoubted truethes of the
word of God, and therefore it is needelesse to make any repetition thereof.
Only I would have the reader diligently to mark the words of the Statute,
forbidding all manner of Dispensations, in any matter or cause, repugnant to
the word of God. For though the adversary cavil, that we find not in the
scriptures these Terms: Viz. Licenses, Tollerations, Dispensations, etc.
precisely specified in any commandment, prohibitory in the Scriptures: Yet in
as much as the matter or cause of Dispensations for many benefices, is there
generally forbidden: as ambition, pride, covetousness, peril of souls, etc. It
is against the peace and profit of the common weal, that the Archb. should
dispense.
Therefore it follows, that by this statute Dispensations in this case are
absolutely inhibited. The minor proposition of the second Syllogism, may be
confirmed by three evident reasons. First from the event, which by our own
common and daily experience, we too too well know to be true. For by the same
we see a few wealthy and rich Prelates, in pride and iolity to be maintained,
and a great number of needy Stipendary Curates and poor Ministers, to be
utterly destitute of meet and convenient allowaunces; so that sometimes after
their dissease, their distressed wives and Children, are forced either to be
relieved by the several Parishes of their aboades, to the impouerishing of the
same parishes: or else constrained to beg from place to place, and so be
chastised as rogues; or pilfer and steal, and so be punished as fellons.
Secondly, by a comparison drawn from other Statutes of the realm, providing
that one rich and mighty man, should not exercise many several mysteries,
trades and faculties, and so rob the poorer sort from the ordinary means,
whereby they might live well and honestly in the common wealth. The third reason
is taken, from an adiunct or common accident to every common weal, rightly
governed: that is, that the last Wills and Testamentes of all and singular
testators, be duly execued, especially such, as whereby the honor of God is
promoted, the Church and common weal manifestly regarded: but unto the
performaunce of the the last Wills and Testaments of many patrons endowing
many churches with large and ample possessions, to the intent convenient
living might be always provided for Pastors to be resiaunt, and to feed
their posterity with the food of life, the word of God: there can be nothing
more prejudicial, or more derogatory, then that these several patrimonies and
inheritaunces, appointed by several patrons, for several Pastors, to such
several and good uses, should by the dispensation of one man, be transformed
and given to another use, contrary to the testator his intent and purpose. And
therefore I confirm my Minor Proposition by these three conclusions. 1
Whatsoever is an occasion that poor and needy Ministers, their wives and
children do want a competent and convenient maintenance, the same is not
necessary, for the profit, peace, wealth, and conservation of the common
weal: 2 But that one man should by dispensation, enjoy many benefices is an
occasion that pore and needy Ministers, their wives and Children do want a
competent and convenient maintenance. 3 Therefore that one man should by
dispensation, enjoy many benefices, is not necessary, for the profit peace,
wealth, and conservation of the common weal.
1 Whatsoever is an occasion that one man should enjoy the offices and livings
of many men, the same is not necessary for the peace, profit, wealth and
conservation of the common weal. 2 But that one man should by dispensation
enjoy many benefices, is an occasion that one man should enjoy the offices and
livings of many men. 3 Therefore that one man should enjoy by dispensation many
benefices is not necessary, for the peace, profit, wealth, and conservation
of the common wealth.
1 Whatsoever is prejudicial and derogatory to the last wills and testaments
of Testators, disposing their patrimony to lawful and holy uses, the same is
not necessary for the peace, profit, wealth and conservation of the Realm. 2
But that one man by dispensation, should enjoy many benefices, is prejudicial
and derogatory to such last Wills and Testaments. 3 Therefore that one man by
dispensation should enjoy many benefices, is not necessary for the peace,
profit, wealth and conservation of the Realm.


It is inconvenient for the honor and safety of her highness person, for the
Archb. to dispense.
COncerning the validitye of the Minor proposition of my third syllogism;
drawn from the conueniencie of her highness honor (namely that it is not
convenient, for the honor and suerty of her Highness person, to leave any
manner of authority, for the Archb. to dispense) none may well doubt thereof, but
only such as respect more the pomp and glory of an Archb. then the dignity and
preeminence of a Christian King. For in good soth, this statute made
principally to abolish al usurped power, challe^ged by a forre^, and Romish
pope, over the king and his subjects, and yet to authorize a domestical and
English Archb. in his room, contains in it, such a contrariety, and such an
absurdity, as it is wonder how either any Archb. durst challenge the execution
thereof, or else how her highness most noble Father, and brother, and her
highness own person, could endure the same so long vncanselled and unrepealed,
especially the same being most prejudicial to their regal crowns and
dignities. For first, by the virtue of this Statute, it is enjoined the Archb.
and his successors in no manner wise, to grant any dispensation, license,
rescript, or any other writing for any cause or matter, repugnaunt to the law
of Almighty God. Secondly, it is permitted unto the said Archbysh. and his
successors, by their discretions to grant unto the K. Majesty, and to his
heirs and successors, Kings of this Realm, all manner such licenses. etc. as
heretofore have been accustomed to be had and obtained by his Highness, or
any his Noble Progenitors, or any his subjects at the sea of Rome. Which two
clauses, without dishonor to the Majesty of God, or prejudice to her highness
prerogative, cannot possible establish a sound and perfect Law. For, first in
as much as the popes person, was never duly qualified to be a Lawful
dispensor, or any lawful Magistrate in the Church of God, it is manifest that
every dispensation granted at that time at the sea of Rome, was directly
against the Law of God, as granted by one that was no member of the Church of
God. Again: In as much as the truth of the Gospel warranteth us, that symony,
Usury, Perjury, Adultery, Incest, Nonresidency, many benefices, Marriages
against the Leuiticall Law: observations of superstitious days and times, not
eating of flesh in Lent, and such like, are against the Law of God: it is
evident that dispensations granted at that time, for these and such like
things, at the Sea of Rome, were granted in causes and matters repugnant to the
law of God, and so by the former branch of this statute being precisely
dissalowed, cannot by the second branch, of the same be generally approved.
For how can one and the self same law, forbid and command, things so contrary
and repugnant in themselves? Or how can the Archbishop safely ground his
jurisdiction upon a law so contrary and repugnaunt unto it self? If the
Archbishop shall think that these two branches may be reconciled, and that the
meaning of the former may and ought simply to be understood, as the words them
selves import: and that the second branch, may and ought to be understood, to
bound and limite such an authority to him self, as whereby he might grant
such licenses, as were had and obtained at that time, at the sea of Rome, for
matters not contrary or repugnant to the law of God: yet neither by this
interpretation, is the Archbishop truly entitled unto any authority, thereby
to dispense for symony, nonresidence, many benefices, marriages in Lent, etc.
in as much, as such manner of licenses obtained at that time at the sea of Rome,
were obtained for matters repugnaunt unto the law of God, and contrary to the
truth of the doctrine of the Gospel: and so by this statute flatly forbidden.
Which things our ancestors, not thoroughly foreseeing, neither duly
examining for what manner of causes or matters, licenses were at that time
obtained at the sea of Rome: but only in a generallitie inhibiting things
repugnaunt unto the law of God, and never particularly describing what those
things were: but leaving the same wholly to the judgment and discretion of one
man the Archbishop alone, have fallen into two palpable absurdities: the one,
that one man alone, has from time to time authority by his discretion, to
determine what causes are repugnaunt to the holy scriptures and laws of God:
what causes and matters are convenient for the honor and safety of the King of
England, and what are necessary to be had for the wealth and profit of the
realm, three things of such weight and importance, as the whole body of the
realm at that time, was scarceable to conceive, much less shall ever any one
Archbish. be able to practice. The other absurdity is this, viz. that by this
statute, soueraignity is given to the Archbishop and his successors to dispense
with the king, and his successors, kings and Queens of England. The words
of the statute are plain and evident. But what reason is there for kings and
queens of England, to become wards and pupils unto an Archbishop of England?
Or how agrees it, with the word of God, that a Christian king, should in any
sort, be in subjection unto his own vassal? Or what christian subject, dares
attempt to offer unto his Christian sovereign a tolleration? For in case, the
matter of the said tolleration be pretended to concern the conscience, then
if the matter be free and lawful by the law of God, a Christian king, may as
well and as freely, use the liberty of his conscience, with out license from
his subject, as his subject may use his freedom, without dispensation from
the king. If it be contrary to the law of God, then may neither a christian
king, neither a Christian subject be dispensed with. For what man can dispense
with the Law of God? And in case the matter of dispensation concern any thing
appertayning unto this life, how then should the king receive a dispensation
from the Archbishop, without impeaching his kingly dignity and prerogative?
For either he must be dispensed with, for breach of the positive Law of this
land, and have the pain of Law, remitted him by the Archbishop, which were
to set the Archbishops keys, above the Kings arms: Or else he must purchase
a dispensation, that he may break his Law, which were against his honor and
safety. For says the Emperor. Digna vox est maiestate regnantis, legibus
alligatum se principem profiteri. C. De le. and co^stit. princ. l. digna.
It is a word worthy the majesty of a ruler, to acknowledge himself as
chief tied unto the laws.

Moreover, this case between the king and the Archbishop is far different,
from the case between the king and his Justices at law, determining matters
according to the common laws and customs of the Realm, between the king and
his subjects. For they remain still the kings underlings, and in deed give
but the kings judgments; they judge not the kings person, neither comes
any thing touching his person before them. But dispensations from the
Archbishop to the king, concern the kings own person. The king in his royal
person, or by his proctor, must appear in the Archbishops consistory: he must
allege before the Archbishop sufficient matter, whereupon the Archbishop (but a
subject) may be moved to dispense with the King, his sovereign; and finally
the Kings wisdom must be subjected, to the Archbishops discretion. And
therefore to confirm the Minor proposition of my third syllogism, I conclude.
1 Whatsoever is dishonorable, and dangerous for her highness person, the same
can not be convenient for her honor and safety. 2 But it is dishonorable and
dangerous, to have the Archbishop to dispense with her highness. 3 Therefore,
the same is not convenient, etc.


WHich reason also, may as well be applied to disprooue the unlawfulness of the
Archbishops dispensations, granted unto any of her highness subjects, as unto
her highness own person, in as much, as her kingly prerogative and supreme
government in matters lawful by the holy scriptures, is thereby impeached. The
Arch. jurisdiction only advanced, and the surety of her royal person and peace
of the common weal il provided for. Again, sithence every one of sound
judgment understands the honor and safety of her highness person, only
and wholly to consist in the protection and safegarde of our most mighty and
most gracious God: and that nothing can be so honorable and safe for her
highness, as humbly and reverently to attend, and to submit her self to the
scepter of his word. the execution of this statute by the Archbishop can not be
but most inconvenient, and perilous for her highness person, in as much as
partly through a corrupt construction, partly by a synister judgment not
rightly discerning what things are repugnant to the word of God, the said
Archbishop dispenses in causes and matters contrary and repugnaunt to the holy
scriptures, which causes the name of God to be evil spoken of, and is a
dishonor unto God, and therefore no honor nor safety unto her highness person.
And therefore, her highness is humbly to be entreated, to take the entier
dominion, and whole sovereignty due unto her by the word of God into her own
hands, and not any longer to suffer such a blemishe to remain in her
gouenement. Had her highness most noble Father, understood his kingly
person, to have undergone the Censorship of his subject, no doubt he would as
courageously have fought against an Archb. as he did against an Abbot. Poverty
of the person no cause for a dispensatio^
As concerning the poverty of certain persons, pretended and alleged in
defense of dispensations for many benefices, that because the revenues and
profits of one benefice, is now adays not a competent and sufficient
maintenance for a minister, his wife and family: that therefore, in respect
of such pouertye, they are necessary and to be borne withal. I answer
herein first with Rebuffus the Lawyer, that Licet quis sit pauper, etc.
Rebuff. de dispens. ad plu. benefi.
Though one be poor, and suppose two benefices to be very necessary and
profitable for him, yet for this cause the Pope may not dispense. But if it be
necessary or profitable, for the Church to have a teacher, to instruct,
maintain, and defend the same, then shall a dispensation be lawful. Secondly,
that whosoever has taken upon him a charge with a poor living, and stipend
belonging to the same, ought by law, to content him self therewith, and notin
respect of any poverty, to seek to have many livings, thereby to better his
estate, or augment his living: For the law in truth is as follows. 32. q.
5. c. horrendus.
Qui inodicum recepit beneficium, etc. He that has received a small benefice,
has prejudiced him self, therefore let him seek his living, by his own
craft, because whatsoever has once pleased him, ought not any more to
displease him. 70. distinct. sanctorum.
And let every one walk in that vocation whereunto he is called, and let him
do according to the example of the Apostle saying, these hands have ministered
unto me al things that were wanting. 21. q. 1. c. primo. glos. extra. de
rescrip. c. si proponente. ver. minus. ff. 91. distinct. qui autem.
And let him that is forbidden to get his living by filthy lucre, and dishonest
marchaundise, have a stipend of the oblations and offerings of the Church: but
in case the Church be not sufficient, let him after the example of the Apostle,
who lived by the work of his hands, get by his own industry or husbandry,
those things that are necessary. Out of these laws against dispensations
granted unto pryuate persons in respect of private necessity, I conclude thus.
1 If private necessytie or poverty, were a sufficient cause, to enjoy a
dispensation for many benefices, then should private necessity have been
warraunted by law hereunto: 2 But private necessity or poverty, is not
warranted by law, to be any sufficient cause for a dispensation: 3 Therefore
the necessity or pouertye of a private person is not a sufficient cause for a
dispensatio^.


THe first proposition is grounded upon the very nature and essence of a
dispensation: for the same being as is said before, of the nature of a
priuelege, can not otherwise be granted, then upon a just cause ratified by
law. The second proposition being a general proposition negative of the law,
cannot better be manifested, then by a special repetitio^ of the things
permitted by law, according to this rule. Quod in quibusdam permittitur in
caeteris prohibetur. That which is permitted in some certain things, the same
in other things is forbidden. And therefore the law allowing either urgent
necessity and evident vtilitye of the Church, or some excellent quallities of
the mind, or descent from some ancient parentage, to be only causes of
dispensation, excludes all other causes whatsoever. And as touching necessity
and poverty of private persons, the law absolutely appoints other means to
relieve the same, then by way of dispensation: Neither can it be found in the
whole body of law, that poverty a lone, is any sufficient cause to procure a
dispensation for many benefices. For the law accounts him always to have a
competency and sufficiency, 12 q. 1 c. Episcopus verse. q. 2 c. episcopus.
which has Victum and vestitum, meat, drink, and apparel, which is proved
thus: luxta sanctum Apostolum fic dicentem, habentes victum and vestitum, hiis
contenti simus: according to the saying of the Apostle, having food and
apparel, let us content our selves with that. And here we learn both what he
that has taken unto him self a charge, having but a small stipend annected
thereunto, ought to do in case it be not sufficient: that is that he ought to
labor and travail with his own hands, in some honest handy craft: and also
what by law, is reputed and taken to be a competent and sufficient
maintaynance, even food and apparel. Moreover, if a man willingly and without
compulsion enter into a charge, knowing before hand the stipend due unto him
for his travel to be small he may not Lawefullye afterward complain, but it
is whollye to be imputed to his own negligence and follye, that he was no
more circumspect, better to provide for him self at the first. If a man knowing
a woman to have led a loose and dissolute life, take her to his Wife, he
cannot for her former misdemeanour give her afterward a Byll of Diuorcement.
Quod semel approbani, iterum reprobare non possum: That which once I have
approved and allowed, I cannot afterward disprove and disalowe. Neither in
truethe, for ought that ever I perceived, by the want of any Plurality man, if
he rightlye examine his own Conscience, can he pretend any nec^ssity and
want of living for himself, to be any just cause of his foul disorder
herein. May Caietane Cardinal of Brygit, whose Annual revenues by his
Cardinalship, amounte to the Sum of two Hundred pounds: may the same
Cardinal, whose Annual profits of his Prebend in another Church, amounte to
the Sum of two Hundred Marks: May the same Cardinal, whose annual
Revenues of his Archdeaconarye in another Church, amounte to the Sum of
Fortye Pounds: May the same Cardinal, whose Annual Revenues of his own and
his Wives Patrimonye, amounte to the Sum of Fiftye Pound, complain justly
that he stands in need of sufficient living, to maintain himself, his
Wife, and two or three Children, and thereuppon purchase to him self a License
to retain a Benefice, from the which he receives yearly one hundred Marks?
May a Cardinal, I say, thus furnished with so many ecclesiastical Dignities,
affirm safely with a good Conscience, that he wants and stands in need
of a convenient living? Nay, may not the Lords people, rather cry out
against this intolerable Ambition, Rauyne and spoil? Yea, may not the
common weal, yea does it not feel to hirr ruin, the miserable poverty and
p^urie of his stipendarie Curate, upon whom he thinks to have bestowed a
large and bountiful reward for his service in the ministry, toward the
maintenance of him, his wife and family, when as his farmer shall pay him by
the year ten or twelve pounds at the utmost; Is this tolerable by law? No,
no, the pretense of poverty that this man and his fellow Cardinal, having
Church upon Church, and a personage upon his prouostship, do make to be a
cloak for their worldlines, can never shroud it self so covertly, but their
injustice by law may soon be discried and discovered. For this clause of law,
Sed etiam habentes plures ecclesias, etc. But they that have many Churches, one
not depending on the other, it is lawful for thee notwithstanding any appeal
to the contrary, to constrayne them at their choice, to leave one of them,
unless they shall be so poor that they can not conveniently have their proper
and peculiar Priests: I say this clause ( nisi ita fuerint ^ennes) can not
excuse master Cardinal or master provost, to retain his Abbey or Frierie, and
by dispensation a benefice or two besides. For that, as I say de before, this
privilege has no place, when as a man voluntarily has taken upon him a
small charge, and so contented him self with a small portion at the first: But
only it has then place, and then takes effect, when as Ex post facto, by
some after deed his Church is impouerished. Moreover those Churches are
counted, Tenues in substantia, Churches small in revenue, which have not a
flock of ten persons, families or housholdes, able to contribute to the
maintenannce of a Pastor, as appears by the Canon following.

2. q. 3. c. vnio
HOC NECESSARIVM, etc. This we have thought necessary to be ordained, that many
Churches be not at all committed to one Elder: because he alone, can neither
perform his office in them all, neither yet employ any necessary care for the
administration of the goods thereof: For this consideration therefore we
command that every Church, which has had ten housholdes, have also a pastor
over the same: and if any have had fewer then ten, let then that Church be
joined to some other Churches. By which constitution, our pluralistes, if they
were not wilfully blind, might easily understand, that the law does not permit
one man, by reason of poverty to have many Churches, that are able of
themselves to mayntaine many pastors: but that many poor Churches unable to
maintain many pastors, should be consolidated and united to one, and being so
joined together and made one, then to have one pastor over them all, that
might have of them all a competent salarie for his sustenaunce. For says
Rebuff. Papa in dispensatione, maxim respicere debet vtilitatem ecclesiae, non
personae: sed hodie ventum est, vt personae vtilit as consideretur, polius quam
ecclesiae, and potius dispensatur cum diuite, qui totam vorabit ecclesiam, quam
cum ali bona, qui (...) possit. The Pope in a dispensation, ought chiefly to
respect the profit of the Church, not of the party: but it comes to pass
now a days, that the profit of the parson is rather considered, then of the
Church, and a dispersation is rather given to a rich man, which will devour
the whole Church, then to an other good man, which might maintain the Church.
If therefore it might stand with the good pleasure of her highness godly
Commissioners, in causes ecclesiastical, within their several charges, not
only to examine the laws precedent, but also to put in execution the laws
following, they should by this their industry, speedely, and plentifully
provide many good competent liuinges, for many good men, to become good
pastors in the same: I mean not Ecclesiastical men, placed Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, for they for the most part are the greatest offenders in this
behalf: but I mean those of her most honorable Council, of her Nobility,
and of her worshipful subjects, having granted unto them from her highness,
as great authority as any of the Ecclesiastical state have. An Ecclesiastical
Commissioner is no more exempted from controulement of his colleagues and
associates, then is a Senator, from the order of the Senate, or a Counsailour
from the directions of the body of the Counsel, or a Bishop from the
censorshippe of a Lawful Synod. If therefore the Nobler, sounder, and better
part of the ecclesiastical Commissioners, did examine not only such plurified
men, as are no commissioners, but such plurified men also as are joined in
Commission, whether by virtue of any faculty, license, or dispensation, they,
or any of them, have enjoyed mo Benefices with cure of souls then one alone,
above the space of seven years, then should the said Commissioners find the
same Benefices so possessed, to be merely void, as though the incumbent were
dead. Because every Dispensation granted for more then seven years, by Law
is a void Dispensation, as appears by that that follows.

Lib. 6. de elect. licet canon is autem.
IS ETIAM. etc. The party also which is taken to such a Regiment, to the end he
may more diligently care for the flock committed unto his charge let him be
personally resident in the Church, whereof he is person. And as touching his
residence, the ordinary for a time may dispense if any reasonable cause so
require. He says well (says the gloss) Glos. verb. ad tempus.
that the ordinarye may dispense for a time, because the Pope himself, cannot
give perpetual indulgences for residence, and such as were given before by
Popes. He has revoked, as appears by the constitution following.

Lib. 6. de rescr. c. vlt.
QVIA PER AMBITIOSVM. etc. Because of the ambitious importunity of suitors, is
welwe, as some of our pre dicessours, Bishops of Rome, have given unto many,
perpetual indulge^ces for the receiving of the fruits of their benefices
(daily distributions excepted) whether they were at study, or whether they were
resident in either of their benefices, or had their abode in the Court at Rome,
or in any other certain place, or wheresoever else, by means whereof
insolences of gadding do spring forth, and a matter of dissoluteness is
prepared, the service or worship of God, (which we desire should be increased)
is diminished, and the office of Ministry, in respect whereof an
Ecclesiastical benefice is due, for the most part is omitted: we willing to
amend things passed, and as much as lies in us to provide against things to
come, do utterly revoke all such, and the like personal and not real
indulgences: And that which we suffer not Lawful in our selves, we forewarne
the same unto our successors. Glos. verb. perpetuas ibidem.
By which Canons it is plain, that every dispensation should have a certain
time limited, beyond the which, it ought not to be extended, for by this
perpetual indulgencie, is understood an indulgency for term of life: An
indulgency therefore for term of life, may not be granted, for then is it
perpetual, and so contrary to the meaning of this last constitution. Wherefore
the time of necessity must be limited, which time the Law following has
limited and appointed to be, seven years only.

Lib. 6. de elect. cum exeo.
PRESENTI CONSTITVTIONE sancimiis, vt episcopi, eorumque superiores cum hiis
qui huiusmodi subiectas sibi ecclesias obtinent, vel obtinuerint in futurum,
dispensare possint libere quod vsque ad septennium literarum. etc. By this
present decree we ordain, that the Bishops and their superiors, may freely
dispense with those that either now do obtain, or hereafter shall obtain
under thee, such Churches, that they continuing at study for learning, be not
compelled to be promoted unto orders, until the end of seven years. And
though this Law seem specially to have respect unto such, as for study sake
are Dispensed with, for not entering into the Mynisterye, before the end of
seven years: yet the reason of the Law abridging the time of continual
absence, and appoyntinge that the flock be not left without one able to govern
and teach, the same is to be extended to all manner of dispensations
whatsoever, where the like absence may breed the like danger. ff. De. vi. and
vi. arm. l. 1. quod vulgo. ff. De. legib. l. non possu^t.
Vbi eadem ratio, idem ius statuendum Where one, and the self same reason is,
there one and the self same law is to be ordained. De similibus simile debet
esse iudicium, In cases alike, a like judgment ought to be had. And it is
expressly forbidden in the Chapter. ( QVIA) before mentioned, that no perpetual
Dispensation for receiving of Ecclesiastical fruits be granted, no not by
the Pope him self. And there is express mention made of him that shall not be
resident upon one of his Churches: that shall be Student in any School of
learning: that shall be absent from his benefice, either at the Court of Rome,
or at any other place whatsoever, that even such a one shall not have any
perpetuity by Dispensation, thereby to receive the fruits and profits of that
Church, from the which for any of those foresay de respects, he may be absent.
Therefore against perpetuities of Pluralities, out of the Chapter ( Is etiam)
and out of the Chapter ( Quia) before rehearsed, I conclude thus. 1 Every
Dispensation granted for the enjoying of the Fruits of any parish Church,
without limitation of a certain time, is a void Dispensation. 2 But every
Dispensation granted for the perpetual receiving of the fruits of any
Parish Church, is a Dispensation without limitation of a certain time. 3
Therefore every such perpetual Dispensation, is a void Dispensation.


THe first Proposition of this Syllogism, is the Position of the law it self.
The minor is most plain. For whatsoever is perpetual, the same can not be
limited, and whatsoever is limited, the same can not be perpetual. And this
perpetuity in this case, an I said before, has evermore relation to the
term of life, because he is said to have a perpetuity a benefice, that has a
benefice for term of life. And to take away all synister and double dealing in
this action, you shall understand, that a dispensation granted once for seven
years, at the end of the said seven years, may not be renewed and
reiterated, for so at the end of every seven years, a new dispensation
being had, in effect a perpetual dispensation might be tolerated, and so a
man by fraud and couen, might enjoy that, from the which by equity and law
he is altogether secluded. Which fraudulent and disorderly dealing, by
certain general, principles and rules in law, is absolutely prohibited. The
maxims are these. De diuor c. quanto.. fi. and de elec. commissa. l. 5 Extr.
de regni. iur. c. cum quod. ff de ver. ad civilly. perti. l. li.. 1.
No statutum ipsum fiat ludibrio, debitoque frustretur effectu, and non rebus
sed verbis, (cum sit potius contrarium faciendum) let imposita videatur
nullatenus ea vice poterit iterato conferri. Quod direste prohibetur,
indirecte, non conceditur: cum quod vna via prohibetur alicui, ad id alia via
non debet admitti^ and quid quis in persona sua facere prohibetur, id per
subiectam personam exercere non debet. That the statute it self may not be
deluded and frustrated of her due effect, and that the law may seem to be
made, not for things but forwords (when the contrary is rather to be done) it
may not by any means be again the second time conferred. And that which is
directly prohibited, is not by another way indirectly to be suffered:
Whenever a thing is forbidden any man one way, the same man ought not to be
admitted to the same thing an other way: And that which a man is forbidden to
do in his own person, he ought not to exercise by a substituted person. So
that once again I say, if it might please God, to stir up the hearts of her
highness Commissioners, to have a mature and ideliberate consideration of the
statute before mentioned they shall find matter sufficient, to pronounce a
great number of licenses, faculties and dispensations by law, to be merely
void, and of none effect. And so many benefices to be void, and in the hands
of her highness, unto whom by lapse, right has accrued to present. For by that
statute the Archb, has no power or authority to grant any other license,
faculty, tolleration, or dispensation, the^ such as before the making of the
statute, was used and accustomed to be had and obtained at the sea of Rome, or
by authority thereof. But no license, faculty, tolleration, or dispensation,
before that time was had or obtained at the sea of Rome, or by authority
thereof, for the Fruits of any parrish Church, by way of any kind or manner of
any perpetual dispensation, or for any longer time, then for 7 years only, as
appears by the former Canons and constitutions, therefore none other ought
heretofore to have been granted, neither though they have been granted, are
they effectual or auailable being granted, Anon iudice, and contra formam
iuris scripti, by one that is no judge, and against the form of law written.
ff. quod vi. aut clam l. prohibeti. plane.
Iudex non potest vltra facere, quam ei concessum est a lege vel consuetudine.
A judge may not do beyond that, that is granted him by law or custom. Extra.
de reb. eccle. non alienam. c.
It is forbidden that church goods should be alienated without a cause, or
without authority of the superior. If therefore any alienation be made of
Church goods without a cause, and (...) by authority of the superior, the
alienation is void. (...) infectis haberi. Things done contrary (...) ought to
be accounted, as things undone. And again: Cod. de leg. l. non dubium. Cod. de
precib imper. offerend l. 1.
Sufficit legislatorem aliquid prohibuisse, licet non ad^cerit, si contra
factum fuerit, non valere.. It is s^fficient that the law maker forbid, though
he shall not add, that the thing don contrary to his prohibition shall be
void. And again. Imperiali constitutum est sanctione, (...) ea quae contra
leges fiunt, non solum invtilia, sed etiam pro infectis haberdit sint. It is
plainly decreed by an imperial constitution, that the things done against the
laws, are not only unprofitable, but also are to be accounted for things
undone. And thus much concerning the causes and circumstances of dispensations
for many benefices. It follows the^ in the description of a dispensation, as
you have seen that the same ought to be granted, cum causae cognitione, with
knowledge of the cause: the reason is this. Glos. Extrauagan. de prebend. and
dig. c. execrabilis. ver. vltima.
Duo sunt in dispensatione necessaria, authoritas dispensantis, and factum per
quod dispensatur. Nam in quolibet actu considerari debent duo, factum and
modus. Two things are necessary in a dispensation, authority of the dispenser,
and the fact whereby he shall dispense. For in every Act two things are to be
considered, the fact, and the manner of the fact. And therefore a magistrate,
having authority to dispense, ought not upon the bare assertion, and simple
allegation of any person disirous to be privileged, and to have the
Magistrate, to mitigate the rigor and extremity of common right, grant any
such mitigation, unless the party first allege, and by some lawful proof,
make manifest unto him, that both touching the ability of his person, and the
necessity of his cause there ought in equity an exemption and immunitie be
granted unto him. For, Priuilegia says the Law, ff. de minori. l. de etate
d. ex de priuil. c. sane. 7. q. 1. potuisti. bast. l. 1. de col. l. ver.
are preiudicialia, and magnum pariunt preiudicium and ideo sunt cum plena
causae cognitione tracta^de, and priuilegium non est dandum, nisi certa ratione
inspecta, and non subito sed cum magna deliberatione. Privileges are
preiudicall, and breed great prejudice, and are for this cause to be handled
with a plenarie decision of the cause: And a privilege is not to be given
unless the certain reason thereof be foreseen and not suddenly, but with great
deliberation and advise. In which deliberation and aduiseme^t taken by the
judge: first the allegation or petition of the party agent or suppliant:
secondly, the prone and manifestation of the same his perio^; is to be
co^sidred. For no dispensatio^ ought to be granted at the proper motion and
pleasure of the judge alone: but every Dispensation ought to be granted at the
instance and petition of the party alone. Hoc autem iudiciu^. ff. De dam.
infect. ff. De regni sur l. inuito. and extra de Symo. Licet heli. Cod. de
fidei com. li^ent. l. si.
Quiae laxari i^ non debet; nec solui, nisi part postulante: and inuit^ non
debet beneficium conferri: Et sententia debet esse conformis petitioni: Et
index semper debet indicare secundum allegata and probata. Because the Law
ought not to be released, or remitted, but at the petition of the party: and a
sentence ought to be conformable to the demand: and a judge ought evermore
to give sentence, according to things alleged, and things proved. And
therefore sithence no other cause by Law, may be alleged in the Court of
faculties, for the granting of any dispensation, for many benefices, then the
very apparent vtility, and urgent necessity of the Church: I conclude, that the
judge his duty and office is, in any wise not to admit any other manner of
allegation, but to pronounce the same altogether frivolous and to be of no
value in Law. The Doctorship, the Chapplainship, the worship of any
ecclesiastical person, are not sufficient causes in this behalf alone,
unless also together with the same, meet and concur the profit and
necessity of the Church. And if the said allegation, as vain and frivolous, be
to be rejected, then no Dispensation thereupon ought to be granted: for
otherwise the Judge should of necessity either allow other causes, then the
Law does allow, or else pronounce judgment otherwise, then according to the
demand, both which were too too great absurdities. And therefore out of the
former rules and principles of Law, I argue thus. 1 Whatsoever is hurtful and
prejudicial, the same ought advisedly and upon consultation to be granted.
2 But Dispensations are hurtful and prejudicial: 3 Therefore dispensations
ought advisedly, and upon consultation to be granted: Extra. de priuilig. c.
sane.
And if every dispensation ought to be granted by sentence upon some
consultation had, that then every sentence upon some consultation had, ought
to be given according to things alleged, and things demanded* Extra. de
simo. c. licet heli.



IN which allegation and demand, to the end the sentence may be conformable
to the demand, and so effectual in law, must be foreseen two things. First,
that there be expressed no false or erroneous cause. Secondly, that the same
hide or conceal no truth. Glos. in extrauag. execrabilis de prebend. ver. ex
dispensatione.
For Ea dicitur legitima dispensatio, in qua nihil tacetur, vel nihil
exprimitur, quo expresso vel lacito, princeps verisimiliter duci potest ad
dispensationem denegandam. That dispensation is reputed lawful, wherein
nothing is concealed, or nothing is expressed, that being concealed or
expressed, the prince may be likelihood, be induced to deny the said
dispensation. If then every sentence must be conformable to the allegation, and
every judgment agreeable to the demand, and that neither out of the sentence
for a dispensation any known truth, or manifest equity ought to be
concealed, neither in the same, any salse or erroneous cause ought to be
expressed, it follows of necessity, that every allegation, made for a
dispensation ought to be of the same nature, and of the same condition: (and
that every allegation, not of the same nature and condition is an unlawful
allegation, and an unequal petition. Moreover every one that has authority
to dispense, ought to keep this rule, Glos. in extrauag. co^i. col. 3. ver.
Vt statuat, vel disponsit contra ius, aut contrascriptum, si aequitas quae
mouet ipsum, mouisset legislatorem, si casus nunc emergens esset sibi
expositus. That they ordain or dispense against law, or against writ, if such
equity as moves him, might have moved the Lawmaker himself, to have
granted a dispensation, had the case now growing, been proposed at the time of
the law making, to the law maker: It follows then again, that equity being
the cause of the sentence for a dispensation, the same equity, must also be
the cause of the allegation for a Dispensation. For if the judge must give a
dispensation, where equity requires, the party must then demand a
Dispensation where equity requires. For equity is always the foundation and
grou^dwork of a dispensatio^. And what equity eue^ such equity, as might justly
have moved the Lawemaker, to have granted a dispensation. Now then, because
the Lawmaker, authorizing the Archbysh. of Cant. to give Dispensations, has
been the high Court of Parliament: It follows that the Archbysh. may
dispense only in such cases, as wherein the high Court of Parliament would
have dispensed, had those cases been alleged before the high Court of
Parliamente, which are alleged before the Archbysh. ff. De. offic. prefect.
preter. l. 1. in si.
Iudex non aliter iudicare debet, pro sapientia and luce dignitatis suae, quam
princeps esset iudicaturus. A Judge, for the wisdom, and excellencye of his
worthy calling, ought no otherwise to judge, then the Prince himself would
have judged. Suppose then, that such a Cardinal as of whom, mention has
been made, or such an Abbot, whose Abbacy, is a Nemo scit: whose two
Ecclesiastical promotions besides, are at the least worth sieve hundred marks
by the year: suppose (I say) that such a Cardinal, should come into the
Parliament house, and after low obeysaunce made, prefer this or the like
Byll to the speaker, beseeching the whole house, upon the reading thereof, and
the equity of his cause, to grant his suite. I. A. B. clearke, say, allege,
and show, before your excellent wisdoms, that the Church of S. S. by the
natural death of D. H. Late incumbent, is become vacant: and that I the said,
A. B. am qualified, according to the Statutes of the Realm: Non potest
dispensatio super pluralitate beneficiorum co^cessu impetranti prodesse, qui
aliquod quantumcuque mo dicum beneficium conticuit in eadem.
and the Patron of the same benefice, has presented me thereunto: and that I
am possessed already of such and such a spiritual promotion: and that I am
bound by the Statutes of my house, to be resyant in the same, three months in
the year: and that I am bound by the Statutes of the Church of one of my
promotions; to be present in the same Church two months in the year: and
that I am bound by the Statutes of the Church of my other promotion, to be
present there three months in the year: and that I am bound by my alleagiance
to her highness, to be present else where some whole quarter of the year. And
that the souls of the people of the foresaid parish, are in danger of the
Wolf, not having a Pastor to feed the^: and that the evident vtility and
urgent necessity of the same Church, requires a governor; may it therefore
now please your wisdoms, to award me a Dispensation, to enjoy the fruits of
the same Church, to tolerate mine absence, and to be Nonresident, etc.
Suppose, (I say) that this, or the like supplication were made by a plurified
Priest in the Parliamente house would the house trow you, be moved presently to
yield to so unjust a petition? I trow nay. For though the party should express
in his petition al things to be expressed, and conceal nothing to be concealed,
as by the first rule before repered is required: yet the house would no doubt,
be mindeful of the second rule, and dispute the equity of his cause, and so
award judgment accordingly: they would not upon so bare and naked assertion,
decline from justice and equity: And no doubt the speaker himself, would blush
to peruse such a bill, much less would he present such a Byl to the house to
be discussed, though for his fee (being a private bil) he might be very
liberally rewarded. An Archb. then ought to be rightwel advised, and take heed
how, for a trifle he either admit any such byll or allegation, or having once
admitted it, how he pass the same under his public and authentike seal. In
as much, as he ought not to admit any other allegation, or pass any other
dispensation, then such as the high Court of Parliament in their wisdoms
would admit and pass. And therefore I conclude thus: 1 Whatsoever allegation,
or dispensation the Lawemaker, viz. the high court of Parliament, would not
admit or pass unto a plurified man, the same allegation or dispensation the
Archbishop ought not to admit or pass: 2 But the lawmaker, viz. the high Court
of Parliament, would not admit or pass any allegation or dispensation, to such
plurified priests, making such a petition, as has been mentioned: 3
Therefore the Archbishop ought not to admit or pass any such.


THe mayor proposition is a rule of law: the minor proposition is evident unto
every one, that dutifully considers, with what wisdom, justice, and equity
the high court of Parliament determines matters amongst them discussed. They
are not contented to have a bill barely read unto them, but they thoroughly
examine the reasons and proofs of him that prefers the same. For as I said
before, truth, equity, and diverse circumstances, must not only be alleged,
but the law requires, the same to be proved also. He that has right, and
interest to an inheritance, oftentimes loses it, for want of proof. Bart. and
alij doctores. in l. 1. Cod. de prob.
He that alleges him self to be borne of some noble parentage, and he that
alleges him self to remain at study, must prove the same. If a pupil
damnified by any contract, made by him under age, shall require aid of the
Praetor to be restored to his former right, he must prove that he was under
age at the time of the contract, and also that he has sustained detriment by
the same contract. Authent. Colla teneantur. Glos. and doc. in prohe. l. 6.
Glos. extra. de restitu. spoliat. c. olim. verse. restitutione. Extra. offic. de
leg. c. consultationem.
Otherwise the praetor ought not to give restitution, where one by force is
spoiled of his passion, and requires to be restored thereunto, he must not
only allege but also prove force and possession. The Church that by
negligence of any Proctor or Sollycitor shall allege her self, by his
negligence to be hurt, and to suffer loss in her substance, and for that
cause seeks help at the hands of her superior, to be restored to her
former estate, must prove as well the negligence committed, as the damage
sustained in that behalf. The like is verified of one that is dispossessed of
his goods, in the time of his absence beyond the Seas. And so it is required
in granting any priuelege immunitie or dispensation for many benefices. The
party desirous to have a mitigation of the rigor of common Law, ought to
prove, that as well in consideration of his person, as for the reasonableness
of his cause, the judge in equity and conscience, ought to grant an immunity.
And this proof that it be substanciall and good in Law, must be made either
by the confession of the party, either by witnesses, either by some Authentike
and public instrumente, either by the evidence and notoriousnes of the fact
it self. Extra. de restitu. spol c. cum ad sedem.
Touching which proofs, how substantially they have been made; I refer the
Reader to the Records of the Prerogative Court, where, no doubt for the judges
own credit, they are safely kept: and as public Records, to be seen of
any man, desirous to know Antiquities. For my part, though I confess that the
dignity and worthiness of a person to be priueleged, may easily be proved,
yet can I not imagine, by which of these proofs, the causes required by Law,
as urgent necessity, and evident vtility of the Church, destitute of a Pastor,
should in these our days be manifested: the Church it self Viz. The
congregation, (I suppose) will never confess it behoouefull for them to have
their pastor absent, and to give their temporal things, to enjoy spiritual
things, and yet to be deprived of both spiritual and temporal. As concerning
proof by Witnesses, or by public instrument, because Witnesses must yield a
reason of their sayings, and a public Instrument ought to be made, by a
faithful man, at the request of the party: and because no witness can yield
any reason, why his neighbor should not be taught, and every Faithful man
will do all things for the truth, and nothing against the truth: and because
the truethe is, that his Neighbor should be taught, and no man will desire to
be untaught: therefore as concerning these proofs, I cannot imagine (I say)
how they should be made. It rests then, that the evidence of the fact, must
be the proof, whereon plurified men rely, that the urgent necessity, and
evident vtility of the Church, for the having of many benefices, is a thing so
notorious and evident to all the world, that none may deny the same. Wherein
how gross and palpable their error is, I leave to the consideration of
indifferent men, through out the whole world. Now, if you ad this last part of
the definition of a Dispensation, and suppose that it must be granted, Cum
causae cognitione, with knowledge of the cause, that is by alleging and
proouing things just and equal in the sight and judgment of the Parliament
house, you shall find either all, or the most part of dispensations granted in
the Court of faculties for many benefices, not to be the things defined, and so
to be nothing in effect at all, and therefore though they as yet seem to stand
good by Law, yet to be such as ought to be revoked and made void by Law.
Distinct. 10. c. vides.
Quicquid contra leges accipitur, per leges dissolui meretur. Whatsoever is
admitted against Law deserves to be loosed by Law. Extra. de priueg. c.
porro. etc. p^.
Et sic eos volumus priuilegiorum suorum seruare tenorem, quod eorum metas
transgredi minime videantur. And we will them so to keep the tenor of their
priueledges, that they seem not in any cause to pass their bounds. Extra. de
priuelig.
Nam qui permissa sibi abutitur potestate, priuilegium meretur amittere: Et qui
malitiose priuilegium, principis interpretatur, infamis, efficitur. Cod. de
leg. and constitu. l. 2.
For he that abuses power granted unto him, deserves to loose his
privilege: and he that maliciouslye interprets the privilege of a Prince,
is made infamous. Besides these there are diverse and sundry other causes, for
the which also, a privilege as unlawful, is reuocable. 3. q. b. c haec
quippe. 1. 1. q. 3. priuelegium. Extra. de Decret. Suggestum. 25. q. 1. c. de
ecclesiasticis ff de vulg and pupil. Substitu. l. ex pacto. and gloss. c.
imperator. ver. quod non. 25. q. 2. XCIX. distinct ecclesiae. ff. de constitu:
princ. l. penult De glos. in c. quid per. nouale. Extra de. ver. 6. signifi c.
magis. lib. 6. De rescrip statutum.
Priuatur quis priuilegio propter scandalum: and qui non exercet ad subditorum
vtilitatem, sed ad suam voluntatem. etc. A man loses his privilege, if an
offense grow by means of his privilege: and he that does not exercise his
privilege to the profit of such as are under him, but at his own pleasure,
such a man loses his privilege: And a rescript ought to be such, that it hurt
none: and at what time soever a privilege turns to iniquitye it forthwith
preuayleth not: neither ought the Pope for the increase of his own honor,
diminish the right of the church, or of any other. And the reason is this.
Propter euidentem vtilitate^ and enorme, damnu^ receditur ab eo quod diu vsum
and obtentu^ est. For some common profit, and some inordinate hurt, we forgo
that, that a long time has been used and observed. Now, whether the lawful
bounds of dispensatio^s be passed; whether they be abused or maliciously used?
whether any offense grow by them: whether they be used rather to the profit of
the people, then to the pleasure of the parson: whether any injustice be
committed, and the right or title of any other be impeached: or any great
damage ensue by the^, I refer it to the judgment of men of experience in our
time Sure I am that the Lords servants speak against them, preach against
them, and writ against them: Sure I am, that the vices growing by them are as
rife, as ever they have been in any age heretofore: Sure I am, that the
prosperous state of the Mynistery is impouerished by them: Sure I am, that the
people are untaught by them: And sure I am, that the Lord is dishonored by
them, and his Gospel hindered by them. And therefore I conclude thus against
them. Cessante causa, cessare debet effectus, the cause ceassing, the effect
ought to cease. The assumption is manifest, For equity grounded upon vtility
and necessity of the Church, was the cause of Dispensations: but the equity
cease, therefore the other should cease. What is more contrary to natural
reason (says a lawyer of singular judgment) then that one and the self same
man, should take unto himself diverse stipendes of the Church in diverse and
far distant places: What common wealth of man (says he) suffers her
Judges, her rulers, her notaryes, and other officers to gadde abroad, and in
their absence to enjoy their stipendes? What man though his House be ample and
very rich, does pay to his servant absenting himself, the wages due to many
servants: or admits to serve in his room, whom soever the same his
servant shall appoint him in his room: only the house of God, the holy
Church, is by such inordinary dealing deprived of her ministry, and defrauded
of her lawful duties. What? shall the Church of God, the best beloved Spouse of
Jesus Christ, which he has redeemed by whippings, by buffets, and by the
sheading of his blood, feed Hawks? bring up Dogs? pamper Horses? nourish
Whoores, Flatterers and seditious men, which trouble the common wealth; Rebuff.
de dispe^satione ad plura benefic. fo. 149. 64.
and in the end concludes thus, Effectus dispensationis est, vt si perperam
concessae sit, tam animam concedentis, quam dispensantis, ad infernum deducat.
The effect of a Dispensation is, that if it be granted unorderly, it carries
the soul, as well of him that gives it, as of him that receives it to Hell:
Whereas it may be supposed, that fees paid into the Hanaper, by passing of
Dispensations under the great seal, are a great increase of her highness
treasure, and an augmentation of her revenues. I answer that Dispensations
for Symony, Nonresidency, and many benefices, are so far from being any
increase of her Majesty's treasures, as that they are indeed a great
diminishing of the same. For first, as touching Dispensations for Symony,
whereas by every dispensation granted unto a Symoniacal person, her highness
receives into her hanaper at the most (...) Shillings: the greatest ordinary
fee limited by the said statute, for any Dispensation to be granted her
Majesty for the same, (...) loses 10. 20. 30. 40. or 50. Pounds, to be paid
into the court of tenths and first Fruits. For, were the party committing
Symony, for the same offense by law deprived from his benefice, her highness
were then to have of the next incumbent, the whole first Fruits of the said
benefice, even ten times so much at the least, as is paid into her hanapire: Or
were the Symoniacall person a plurality man, and so deprived from all his
benefices and ecclesiastical promotions, her highness were then to have, the
whole first Fruits of all his Benefices and promotions, fortye times so much
as she enjoys by granting his dispensation. And as touching the fees due
for Dispensations, granted for many Benefices, though the same fees may
happilye amount in some one year, too many hundreds: yet by means of the
said Dispensations, her highness is impouerished yearly by many thousands.
The oftener every benefice or promotion is void, by death, resignation or
deprivation, the oftener is another admitted unto the same, and the oftener
does her highness receive the first Fruits of any such benefice. Now, it is
evident that the conioyning of two, three, four or five thousand benefices or
promotions unto one thousand men by dispensations, is a manifest impediment to
the avoiding of so many incumbents from so many benefices, as which by death,
resignation or deprivation of the said incumbents, might and were likely to be
made void. And so the said dispensations, being an hinderance to the avoiding
of benefices, they must necessarily be also a very direct means, to keep from
her exchequer that treasure, that otherwise should ordinarily be brought unto
it. And though by the death, resignation, or deprivation of every plurality
man, every of his benefices be made void: Yet his said benefices are not so
often made void, as otherwise they should be. And therefore though her
highness have the first fruits of two, three, four or five benefices in the
hands of one pluralitye man, dying, resigning, or being deprived: Yet has she
not the first fruits of the said benefice so often as otherwise she might
have, whereby her revenues are lessened. Since therefore, for one man to enjoy
many benefices by dispensation, maintains covetousness, and is contrary to
the ancient canons: mainteineth ambition, and ministers matter for a roaging a
gadding, and a dissolute mynistery: since it conuayeth stipends due unto many,
from many unto one: Since it is an hinderance of residence, and contains
peril of souls: Since it is a kind of theft, rauine and spoil: Since it is
indecent and uncomely: Since it is contrary to the good customs of the Church:
Since the honesty of the church thereby is defiled, the authority thereof
contemned: the truth of Christ trodden under foot, and love banished: Since
among the rich Prelates and plurified men them selves, strifes, contentions,
brawles and enuies arise, and are nourished: Since the fire of God his wrath is
kindled against us by them: since it is against the law of nature, and
repugnant to the law of God, and therefore nourishes a Monster in nature:
since it is against the weal, peace, profit and conservation of the Realm:
since it is against the vtility of the Church, and that the necessity of the
Church requires the clean contrary. Since it is prejudicial and derogatory to
the last Wills and Testamentes of our ancestors: since it is dishonorable and
dangerous for her majesty's person and safety: since private necessity and
poverty, is no sufficient cause for the maintainaunce thereof: Since the
miserable penury of our stipendary curates, thereby is made intolerable. And
again, since al these things are offensive, and that a privilege so soon as
it becomes offensive, and not exercised to the profit of many, but to the
will of one: is forthwith to be with drawn: Since every privilege ought to be
such, that it damnify none: and since it forthwith loses the name of a
privilege, if once it turn to any injustice: since that nothing is more
contrary to natural reason, then that one and the self same man, should take
unto him self diverse stipendes of the Church, in diverse and far distant
places: since it is against the policy of every good common wealth of man:
since it is contrary to the government of every good and provident householder:
since it carries headlong the souls, as well of him that gives it, as of him
that takes it, to hell: yea and since it is an impouerishing of her Majesty's
treasure, and diminishing of her revenues: Let us conclude, for one man to
enjoy two or more benefices by dispensation, to be a thing altogether
intolerable, and utterly unlawful.

Excommunication, by one alone forbidden.
15. q. 7. c. Episcopus.
EPISCOPVS NVLLVS, etc. Let no Bishop hear any cause without the presence of
his Clergy: Otherwise the Bishops sentence not confirmed by the presence of
his Clearkes shall be frustrate.

Extra. de excessis prelat. c. 1.
MANDAMVS, etc. We command that in any wise you presume not to exercise
against the Clergy, any unlawful tallages and exactions: Neither that
henceforth you unreasonably greiue them, or unhonestly entreat them, or else
suspende them, without the judgment of the chapter. And again.

Extra. de hiis quae. fi. sine. consen. cap. c nouit.
NOVIT, etc. Your discretion and wisdom knows, how that you and your
brethren are one body, so that you are the head, and they approved to be the
members: wherefore it becomes not you, to leave your own members, and to use
the advice of others, in the dispatch of your own Church affairs, because
without all doubt, the same is both against your honesty, and the institution
of the holy fathers. For it has been manifested unto us, that you, without
the council of your brethren, do place and displace Abbates and Abbases, and
other ecclesiastical persons. Therefore we command, etc. For we ordain that
such placinges and displacinges be of no force. And again.

Extra. de hiis quae fiunt. si. consen. cap. c. quanto.
QVANTO, etc. We command your brotherhoode, that in grauntes and confirmations
and other business of your church, you require your brethrens presence. And that
with the Council of them, or the sounder part of them, you handle and finishe
those matters: and that you ordain such things as are to be ordained, and
correct errors and abolish and root out these things that are to be
abolished. And besides these Canons there are many other constitutions,
confirming, that a bishop, ought not by law written and common right, to
exercise any jurisdiction, without the special advise, council, and presence
of the Chapter. Glos extra. de offic. iud. ordi. c. irrefragabili. ver. per
capitulu^.
The reasons whereupon these and such like decrees were grounded are these.
First, that the injuries, extorsions, violences, the cruel and uncivil
entreatie used by the Prelates against the inferior Clergy, should cease and
be extinguished: Other reasons, etc, vid. c. 1.
Secondly, as the head in every natural body, has the use and consent of
all the other members to every natural action: even so says the law, the
bishop being the head, that is to say the chief and principal member in the
spiritual body, ought to have the use of his fellow members to every
spiritual action: The bishop without his fellow members may not excommunicate.
And mark the reason of the law, for in that it says the bishop is but a
member, it concludes that he is not the body. For he and his other brethren al
members, make but one body. Corinth. 1.
Now every member though it be the principal member, whether it be the head, or
the heart, or the brain, stands in need of the help of every inferior
member, whether it be the hand, the foot, the finger, yea or the very
excrements of the body as the nails or the hair. And therefore out of these
Canons, I argue thus. 1 No chief member of any body, can do any thing in the
body, without the consent, and assistance of his fellow members. 2 But every
bishop is a chief member of a body: 3 Therefore no bishop can do any thing in
that body, without the consent and assistaunce of his fellow members.


THe reason of the first proposition is this. Whatsoever is good or evil for
one member, the same is good or evil for every other member: And being good
for one, it must needs be allowed of all, and being badde for one, it must
needs be disallowed of all. Which natural reason taking place in the natural
body, the law translateth unto the political or spiritual body, and wills
that the same be allowed of all, that touches all: Quod omnes tangit ab
omnibus approbetur. And if any thing once touch and concern all, it can not
by an other rule in law, be translated to one-Quod semel meum est, sine mea
voluntate, a me auferri non potest. That which is once mine, can not without my
will be taken from me again: Et vnaquaeque res per quascanque res nascitur,
per easdem dissoluitur: Every thing by what causes soever it is begun, by the
same it is dissolved. Moreover, touching excommunication, there is one other
special reason, why the bishop may not excommunicate alone, without the
consent of the Chapter: namely, because this kind of punishment, is the
greatest punishment in the Church: Glos in c. 1. extra. de excessib. prelat
ver. capituli.
For it is said by law to be Eternae mortis damnatio, and Satanae traditio, A
condemnation unto eternal death, and a delivery unto Satan, then the which
there can be no more grievous punnishment. Excommunication the greatest
punishment.
And therefore I conclude thus. 1 The greatest punishment ought not to be
inflicted but by great advise. Glos. p. edic. extra. de.
2 But excommunication is the greatest punnishment: 3 Therefore excommunication
ought not to be inflicted but by great advise.


COncerning such as being once placed in any ecclesiastical function, and who
for their misdemeanour are to be displaced again; the law to prove the
necessity of the Chapters consent herein, uses this comparison.

15. q. 7. c. vlt.
SI ENIM HII, etc. For if they which in this world, have received from their
Lords the honor of liberty, are not delivered again into the yoke of bondage,
unless they be publicly accused, before the tribunal seat of the Pretors or
presidentes: how much more ought they which are dedicated to the service of the
holy Altar, be consecrated with ecclesiastical honor, who verily may neither
be condemned, neither be deprived, from the priuileage of their honor, by the
judgment of one man. But being presented unto a synodall judgment, ought in
the same, to have decreed against them, whatsoever the Canon has commanded.
Now because these laws and ordinances are sufficient, to prove what common
right and law written is in this case, and that every bishop exercising
jurisdiction, without the advice and presence of the Chapter of his Church,
ought to have some other ground for the maintenance of his proceedinges then
law written: it follows to be discussed, what the same ground is or may be.
The pope reserving a power unto him self (as he says) above his law, has
power to break every of his laws, and so has no law but his will, and so
making him self a God on earth, has made provisions, that both this law,
touching the not exercising of Ecclesiastical discipline by one man alone, and
the laws of non residency, and the not having of many benefices may be in
truth no laws at all, and so in effect has allowed a monster, and a
contrariety in nature, that one member should be all the members: and that the
head should be the whole body. And what have they done else, that have
maintained by public wrytinges, the like proceedinges now a days to be
lawful? For though they have been no Popes them selves: Yet herein they can
not deny, to have been the Popes Champions, having no other warraunt for such
their doings then the Popes will, whose lawless will they maintain, to the
utmost for a lawful law, that maintain excommunication by one man alone to be
any whit lawful. Well then, as these laws have been made to rule and govern
the Church by, so these laws have been a long time unmade, to vnrule and
vngouerne by, and that not without coullour of law to: As first by way of
privilege: secondly, by means of custom and long usage. To speak in this
place of privileges granted to this effect were superfluous, and very
impertinent. Custom the ground of excommunication and not the law.
For though our bishops may have remaining in their old records, privileges
from the Pope, to give them immunities in this behalf, yet for two respects, I
suppose they will conceal, rather then reveal them. First, for that they
seem to maintain their doings herein, rather by the scriptures then
otherwise, wherein how manifestly they err, both the scriptures, and the
custom of the Church repeated by these Canons, are evident witnesses.
Secondly, for that their privileges being granted by an usurper to her
majesty's crown and dignity, and not confirmed by the laws of her Empire,
would yield them very little advantage. I mind therefore in this treatise
specially to handle the matter of custom in declaration, whereof you may by
the laws recited, perceive the same to have been as lawful by privilege as
by custom. Institu. de iure natu. gent. and ciui.. sine scripto.
The reasons of which custom are these viz. Diuturni mores consensu vtentium
comprobati, legem imitantur. Daily or continual manners approved by consent
of such as practice them, do imitate a law.

ff. de. leg. l. de quibus.
CVM IPSAE LEGES, etc. In as much as the laws themselves by no other means do
bind us, then for that they be received by the judgment of the people, even
as rightly shall those things also bind all, which the people without any
writing has allowed. For what difference is there, whether the people declare
their will by voices, or by deeds, and the things them selves. Wherefore this
thing also has been very rightly received, that the laws should not only ^e
abrogated by the voice of a law maker, but also through the secreat consent of
all by growing out of use. Instit. de iure not. gent. and ci. sine.
The Lacedaemonians, whatsoever they by experience found behoueful for their
government, put the same to memory, and kept the same as a law.

ff. in c. quanto etc. nouit extra de hiis quae fi. sin. consensu ca. c. 1. de
consuetud lib. 6. Panor. in c. fi. extr de consuet.
QVAMVIS (says PANORMITAN) ius induxit, etc. Though the law have ordained,
that a Bishop should determine matters with the Chapter, because the Bishop and
the Canons make one body, and therefore that judgment is to be reckoned more
strong, that is ratified by the consent of many: Yet notwithstanding a contrary
custom may be established, namely that by means thereof business might be
speedely dispatched. Upon which reason, this law following touching this
controversy was made.

Extra. de hiis quae fin. si. c. consen. cap. c. ca. noscitur
NISI EX ANTIQVA, etc. Unless by some ancient and approved custom, or
liberty granted, some of them prove, that the consent of the College
committed to their government, ought not to be required in conferring Churches
or benefices. And again. Lib 6. de consuet. c. non est.
Dum talis sit prescripta Canonice consuetudo, etc. So that such a custom be
canonically prescribed, which the Bishop does allege, that in the inquisition
and correction of his subjects excesses, he is not bound to require the
council of his Chapter. These reasons, and these laws, being the reasons and
the laws alleged for custom in this case to govern and rule, are
particularly to be examined and applied to this action. No cause for this
custom to be continued.
Touching the reason of the Canon law (namely) that by means of this custom,
the affairs of the church should easilier be dispatched. If we in these days
had the like multitude of Church matters to be dispatched as the papists had,
and that the Clergy now, were laden with the like burdens, as at the time of
these ordinances they were, there might be then some show of reason, that the
same custom for the same cause, should still remain. Many Monasteries,
Priores, Frieries, Nunneries, and other irreligious houses under the
jurisdiction of popish bishops, had many businesses and many blind matters to
be decided. It was combersome for every baudy matter of a friar, and a Nun, to
call a Chapter: it was troublesome for placing or displacing every Abbot,
friar, Nun, Dean, prebend, parson, vicar, or any other of the Clergy to call
a Chapter. In our churches (God be praised) we have no such tumultuous Clergy,
continually to trouble the chapter: we have no such number of bad matters as
they had. And therefore the cause in this respect ceassing, the effect also
might right well cease. Moreover the common and usual dissension amongst
them, were special means that elections, institutions, confirmations,
collations, and such like, were hindered. Many frustratory appeals and other
delays made and long suites commensed. But our Clergy are better instructed
in the ways of the Lord: they teach the people peace, and exhort them to
brotherly amity and love, and therefore it is to be coniectured, that causes
amongst peaceable men, would speedely and peaceably be ended: and therefore in
this respect also, the cause ceasing, the effect should cease. Lastly, the
case stands not now with us at this time, as it did then between the bishop
and the Chapter. The law written then was, that the bishop and Chapter should
excommunicate, etc. Quia firmius est iudicium quod plurimorum sententia
confirmat. Because a judgment confirmed with the opinion of many is more
strong. The reason of the custom for the By. without the Chapter was this, Vt
facilius expediantur negotia, That business might more easily be finished. In
which cases you se the matter to stand whollye between the bishop and the
Chapter: As whether the bishop with the Chapter, or without the Chapter for the
foresaid several reasons, might have the rule and government in Church
matters? To the which demand I answer thus. If the controversy were between
the Bishop of London, and the Deane and Chapter of Paul's, whether a sentence
of excommunication denounced by the bishop alone against any persons
contumacie, within the Diocese of London, without the advice of the Dean and
Chapter, were good and forcible in law, and that the bishop were able by proof
in law, to confirm, that time out of mind and memory of man, he and his
predecessors bishops of London, without contradiction of the Dean and Chapter
used, whenever opportunity served, to excommunicate alone, without the
presence of the Dean and Chapter: I say that in this case by Canon law, a
sentence given by the bishop alone, were good, and not reuersible, by means of
the Dean and Chapters absence. For that herein now they have willingly lost
their own right, and deprived themselves of their interest. For the bishop
always giving sentence in the Chapter house, where the Dean and Chapter might
continually be present and have their advise, they voluntarily absenting
themselves, has gotten unto himself this jurisdiction, whereunto they have
also yielded, by giving their secret consent, that the B. alone should execute
those things wherein they had an interest, and which otherwise he might not have
don. In like manner, if the Archdeacon should make the like assertion against
the Bish. to prove and insynuate wills and Testaments, and were able to prove
the same his assertion: I would consult, that he likewise by the Canon law had
right herein against the B. For in these cases the Bishop, and the Archdeacon
are in place of private men, the Dean and Chapter has the room of a private
man, because, were the matter in controversy to be decyded between them,
they were to commence their Actions before superior Magistrates. But the
matter of Excommunication mentioned by the Law written, and of right
Excommunication indeed, is not of this nature: it is not of the nature of a
private action, between man and man, nor of suite commenced between party and
party, but the case herein stands between a mean person, or a mere
periuate man, and the whole Church: yea between the Lord of Heaven and earth,
and a Bishop his pore creature: It is not (I say) whether the same should be
executed by man only, because Firmius est iudicium, quod plurimorum sententia
confirmatur, or by few vt facilius expedirentur negotia, But whether the same
should be executed only by many, and not by one, because the ordinance of God
is so. And therefore the case stands in effect thus, whether a lawful
prescription by an Archbysh. or Bishop, against a Deane and Chapter, or the
custom of an Archdeacon, against Archbysh. Bysh. and Deane and Chapter by the
Canon Law, be a sound, and substantial prescription and custom, against the
whole Church, against the family of the Lord, and against his ordinance. For at
the beginning it was not so. Whereunto I answer, that as Nullum tempus currit
Regi, nullum tempus currit reipub. No time runs against the King, no time
runs against the common wealth: so in this case, and all other of the like
nature, Nullum tempus currit ecelesiae, nullum tempus currit domino. No time
runs the Church, and no time runs against the Lord. And therefore,
though the Bishop may perhaps affirm, him self to have obtained right by
prescription, to excommunicate without any advise of the Deane and Chapter: yet
shall he never be able to prove, that he has therefore lawful authority to
excommunicate alone, sithence the vsadge of the first Church, and the
ordinance of the Lord are quite and clean against his said assertion. Yea,
I say more, namely, that even by the Canon Law it self, neither Archb. nor B.
can truly justify any Excommunication by one man alone at all: the said
popish custom now ceasing, to be any more a custom. For, in deed the reason of
this custom cease to be any more a reason for such a custom in our time: and
the reason of the former laws, made before this custom, urges the same laws
to be practiced again now a days. And therefore as Cessante causa, cessare
debet effectus, the cause ceasing, the effect ought to cease: and vrgente
ratione legis, vrgenda est lex, The reason of the Law urging, the Law is to be
urged: So the said popish custom ought in deed to cease, and the said
Canon Laws ought to be observed. Neither is the Canon of Boniface the eight,
made for the said custom, any impediment hereunto. First, for that the said
custom, is merely against the word of God: with which no Pope could ever
dispense. And therefore, as contrary to the Apology of the faith of the Church
of England, by no intendement of any statute, or statute makers in England
confirmed. Secondly, the Canon of Boniface made to confirm a custom; not
participating the nature, properties, and inseparable accidents of every good
and laudable custom, but only made by a lawles and absolute power, contrary
to the principles and axioms of Law, is not confirmed by the statute of 25.
unless we absurdly grant, either the said statute to confirm lawful
Canons, and a law less custom: or severally to establish a lawless custom,
and to infringe lawful Canons. For this decree of Boniface, approoueth and
ratifieth such a custom, as has no manner of fellowship or society with any
lawful custom. But to let these things pass, and no further to urge the
defecte of the reason of the custom, to abolish the custom, or the efficacy
of the reasons of the Law, to establishe again the law: Let us return to the
laws and decrees before rehearsed, authorizing custom to bind as effectually
as a law: and by them let us, see whether this custom, (that one should
excommunicate alone) authorized by Boniface the 8. participate the nature and
proprieties of every such custom, as whereof mention is made in the laws and
decrees; and if not, then let us conclude the same to be no custom at all:
Every usage is not a custom.
and if no custom, then no manner of excommunication, either by law or custom
to be used at all. For every use creptin and continued some long space, is not
therefore by and by a custom, and so of the nature of a law, and of such power
as forthwith it may sholder out written law, and control common right. ff. de
consti. princi. l. in rebus. Extra. de prebend. c. liceat and de cleric. non
residen. c. consuetudine^.. statuimus lib. 6. ff. de legi. l. Quod non. Glos.
in c. aqua extra. de consecr. eccle. ver. consuetudine.
In rebus nouis constituendis, euidens vtilitas esse debet, vt recedatur ab eo
iure quod diu obtentum est. In ordeining new policies, there ought to be an
evident commodity, for that law to be left, that a long time has bin observed.
And again, Quod non ratione introductum est, sed errore primum, deinde
consuetudine obtentu^, in aliis similibus non obtinet: that, that at the first
was not begone by reason, but by error, and afterward obtained by custom, has
no place in other like cases: Consuetudo quae est contra iuris naturam, non
prodest, and contra illudius, non potest prescribi. A custom that is against
the nature of law, profits not and against that law no prescriptio^ may be.
For if the same shall be erroneous, unreasonable, and not lawfully prescribed,
then is it of sufficient force to expel the law written, and therefore as
hurtful and prejudicial for the government of the church here after to be
abrogated, and abolished. For custom is no more priueledged then a law: but
as a law may be made dead, and taken away by a custom: so like wise may a
custom, be made dead again by reviving a former law. And though here might be
used a peremptory challenge against this custom begun and continued in the
popish Synagogue, contrary to the custom of the Church of Christ, that for
that cause, and in that respect only, the same is far unmeet for us, and
therefore by us to be utterly abandoned: Yet because we are as yet (I can not
tell how) not altogether freed from the laws and customs of the popish
synagogue, Let us use the reason of the same laws to overthrow the same
custom. Neither yet should any man think, that therefore the former popish
laws, are to be approved as meet laws, for the Church of Christ, to be
governed by. For wear there no other ground of truth, that one should not
Excommunicate alone, but the reason of the Popish law, the observation thereof
would not be urged. But because we have the truth it self confirmed unto us,
at the commandment of the Lord by the Apostles mouth, practiced by the most
ancient fathers, and by their authority and example drawn into the popish
Synagogue, until the year of our Lord, 1295. (as the Canons before mentioned
do witness) for this cause, and in this respect only, are these former laws
to be put in execution, and the former custom is to be abrogated. The laws
would be kept because in effect they contain the purity of the truth: the
custom would be left, because the same degenerateth, from the simplicity and
practice of the former times, and is but a mere corruption, and a lawless
devise of a lawless Pope, Boniface the eight. And that every one may be well
and thoroughly instructed, touching the reasons of the laws following, to
overthrow the former custom, he is diligently to consider, that as the
Papistical synagogue always fashioned and framed her self, in obedience to her
King, his laws, and evermore liked that, that her King liked, and misliked
that, that he misliked: so the congregation of Christ, has always humbled
herself unto the will and pleasure, of her Lord and King Christ, she has
consented to that only, that has been pleasant in his sight, and has
dissented from whatsoever was displeasing unto him: every one ought to
consider, that the Popes clergy, are not the Lords people: their errors
cannot agree with our truth: their ignorance with our knowledge: their fury
with our peace: their devil with our God: their Beliall with our Christ. And
therefore though the foresaid custom be begone, and still continued in the
popish synagogue, as ratified by the secret consent of the popes subjects:
Yet the same custom, ought not either to be begone, or to be continued in the
Church of Christ, as indeed, a custom never yet, by the consent of the Lord
himself, nor any his faithful servants, approved to be, any whit expedient, or
necessary, for the good government of his church. And having thus laid this
foundation, it is farther to be understood, that every reasonable custom,
every custom not erroneous, and lawfully prescribed, ought to have these
properties following: The first is this, viz. It must be begone, and continued,
ff de leg. l. sed et.
Tacita ciuium conuentione, by a secret covenant of the citizens, agreeing
together a long time, and by many years using the same, and doing some
certain acts therein: For, Gloss. institu de iure nature. sine script. ver.
consensu.
consuetudo, est quasi communis assuetudo. A custom is as it were a common
usage, unto which use, the consent of the people is necessary: and therefore
error, being contrary to consent, evermore hinders and lets a custom.
Extr. de Do. and contum^. c. 1.
Consuetudo, quae apud quosdam irrepserat, impodire non debet, quo minus
preualeat veritas and vincat. A custom crept in amongst certain, ought not to
hinder, that the truth prevail not and overcome. And therefore, though the
Popes clergy a long time, and by many years passed, have observed and used
this custom, and have secretly couenaunted, given their consent, and by their
silence have agreed together, that Byshopps, and other chief officers in their
synagogues, having jurisdiction, might excommunicate alone: yet the authority
gotten after this sort by those Bishops in the time of papistrie, does little
advantage or profit our Bishops, in the time of the Gospel. For what
prejudice, can the covenant of the popish Clergy, work against the Citizens
of the Lord, the professors of the Gospel: For though those Bishops, have used
this authority, by the space well nighe of three hundred years, what is that
to our Bishops, who have not had the use, possession and light of the Gospel
scarcelye threescore years? in which time too, there has been a continual
outcry, made by the Lords servants against this abuse, and a contynuall claim
for the restitution of the Lords own order, that the Lords people, might be
governed, and ruled according to his ordinances. And therefore that this
custom cannot bind the Lords servants, I conclude thus. 1 They who have not
secretly consented to this custom, are not bound by this custom: 2 But the
servant of the Lord, have not secretly consented to this custom: ff. de
legib. l. de quibus
3 Therefore they are not bound by this custom.


THe first proposition is the law it self: the second proposition, I confirm
thus. At the beginning of this custom, it is evident, that the family of the
Lord, was very small, and the same oppressed in captivity, and it being in
servitude and bondage, could not freelye give any secreat consent to any
government, all manner of gouenrment being violently taken from them. And as
touching the time since the publishing of the gopsel, how far they have been
from yelding any privy consent hitherto, as well both the open and public
protestations, by the preachinges and writings, of many notable men, in the
churches with us: as also the use, and practice of all reformed churches else
where, do manifest the clean contrary to the whole world, by means whereof
the Bishops under the Gospel, though they have hitherto used authority to
excommunicate alone, yet thereby have they not gained any just title, interest,
or dominion thereunto. For that, as yet, they have never proved themselves to
have any quiet, and peaceable possession, of this their jurisdiction: and
therefore cannot use, this pretensed custom, as a lawful defense against
their brethren and fellow servant.

Cod de prescript. ^rigi vel quadra. anni. l. si. quis. and l. vlt. Extra de
prescript. c. sanctorum.
CONSVETVDO, sieve possessio, debet esse pacifica non violenta, and sine
interruptione, ad hoc vt prescriptio locu^ habeat: A custom, or possession,
ought to be peaceable, not forced, and without interruption, to the end,
prescription may take place. And therefore I conclude against this custom
thus. 1 Every unpeaceable and forced custom, is an unlawful custom. 2 But
this custom, that one should excommunicat alone, is an unpeaceable, and a
forced custom: 3 Therefore this custom, is an unlawful custom.


THe first proposition is the law: the second proposition, our knowledge and
experience teaches us evidently enough, for though this custom be peaceable
in the popish synagogue, yet it follows not that the same therefore is
peaceable in the church of Christ. For the quiet possession of the
predecessor, is not continued unto the successor, or any whit aduantageth the
successor, unless the successor challe^ge his possession by the same cause, and
by the same title, that his predecessor did. If the same will in his person
continue the possession of his Au^cestor, and so by prescriptio^, atcheiue the
dominion or proprieti of any thing, he must continue the possession by the same
title, that his Au^cestor began the possession. And therefore, sithe^ce our
Bishops under the gospel, and the popish Bishops by fictio^ of law, be one,
and the self same person, and therefore by all inte^ts and co^structio^s of law,
must of necessity use the self same title for the continuance of their
possession, and the prescription of their custom, one of these two things
must necessarily follow, either our Bishops must use the title of this
custom, which the popish bishops used, and so a corrupt title, the
consentes of the popish Cleargye, no sufficient title to bar the Lords
servants: or else they must challenge this custom, as prescribed by some
other lawful title since the succession, which cannot be for two causes.
First, (as I said before) they have not been in possession of their offices
under the Gospel, so many years as are sufficient to the prescription of a
custom. Secondly, whereas a continual claim by open writings and
preachinges, has been made to the contrary, it appears that the possession
they have, is altogether forced, and violent, and therefore an unjust
possession. And as touching the number of years before mentioned, I would not
have the Papiste, or any other take any advantage by those speeches, as
though I meant, that the Gospel has not been preached these threescore yeeares
(a time sufficient in Law to prescribe a custom) in as much as I know that
the Gospel now preached, is the same Gospel that has been preached from
the beginning: yea, that has been from all eternity, and preached by the
Lord Christ himself, in the days of his humanity, and continued in his
Church ever since by his true disciples: but my meaning is, that since the
time of the restitution thereof, and of the return of his people, from out of
the captivity of the spiritual whore of Babylon, there has not yet so many
years passed, as may serve for a lawful custom to the Bysh. under the
Gospel, against their fellow brethren: For though they succeed the Apostles,
and primitive Church in soundnes of doctrine, and teach the same salvation
that our savior himself taught, and so have a continuance, and a possession
of the doctrine of faith: Yet thereby, or therefore it follows not, that they
likewise have, or may challenge the like defense for the former custom. The
Apostles them selves, and the primitive Church, never using any such authority,
and therefore no such authority to be derived, or continued from them, as in
deed never begun, or practiced by them. And therefore for this cause, and in
this respect also the former custom, as an unreasonable custom, is in truth
no custom at all. For Consuetudo irrationabilis amittit nomen consuetudinis,
and appellatur corruptela. Panor: in c. cum venerabilis. extra. de consuetud An
unreasonable custom no custom.
An unreasonable custom, loses the name of a custom, and is called a
corruption. I say, this custom in the Church of Christ, is an unreasonable
custom, as never begun by the Apostles and servants of Christ, and therefore
not to be continued by the followers and successors of the Apostles; the
Apostles both teaching and practizing the clean contrary. And therefore as
every law against the law of God, is an unreasonable law, and therefore in
truth no law: So every custom against the law of God, is an unreasonable
custom, and so in deed no custom. Consuetudo says Anto. de Butuo, si tendit
ad foelicitatem animae est rationabilis, si vero repugnat fini aeterno,
consuetudo est irrationabilis. A custom if it tend to the happiness of the
soul, it is a reasonable custom: but if it repugne the end eternal, the
custom is unreasonable. Now that this custom where by the law of the
Almighty is violated, can not tend to the beatitude of the soul, every man
must confess. And therefore I conclude thus. 1 Every custom not tending to
the happiness of the soul, is an unreasonable custom: 2 But this custom that
one should excommunicate alone, tends not to the happiness of the soul: 3
Therefore this custom is an unreasonable custom.


The first proposition is the Law: the second proposition, I prove thus: 1
Every breach of the Law of God, tends to the destruction of the soul: 2 But
this Custom is a breach of the Law of God: 3 Therefore this custom tends
to the destruction of the soul: and if it tend to the destruction of the
soul: then tends it not, to the happiness of the soul.


THe second proposition of this syllogism, has been proved before, namely,
for that the Apostles have taught and practiced the contrary. And in truth, as
has been already proved, it was begun, above a thousand years after the
Apostles times, and confirmed only by a Pope, upon a politic reason, drawn
from the government of commonweals: namely, for that matters committed to
one, may in reason be easlier and speedilier dispatched, then matters committed
to many. 1. Panor. c. cum venerabilis. Extra. de consuet.
Again Consuetudo quae est inimica canonibus, prima facie presumitur
irrationabilis. A custom that is enemy to the Canons, is presently presumed to
be unreasonable. Now the ancient Canons you have seen before to be contrary;
and therefore what may be concluded, let every one judge. And hereby two other
notable defects and impediments appear again, to be in this custom, which
cannot be in any custom lawfully prescribed. A custom not begun in good
faith, no lawful custom.
The one, that it was not begun Bona fide, and iusto titulo, By good faith, and
upon a just Title: the other, that it was begun, thorough want of the
knowledge of the truth, and so ignorauntlye and erroniously: which I prove
thus.

Whatsoever is begun and continued in the Church, against or without the
commandment of GOD, as the same must needs be, begun Mala fide, and iniusto
titulo, by an evil conscience, and by an unlawful title; so must it follow
that the same is begun also, without knowledge of the truethe: for that
neither any good faith, neither any truth, can be found to be in any thing,
that is contrary or without the word of God. And therefore this custom is
again for these two respects, utterly unreasonable, and therefore does not
excuse against common right. Extra. de consuet. c. cum olim.
Quia consuetudo excusat in hiis quae sunt contra ius positiuum, dum tamen sit
rationabilis, and prescripta, Because Custom excuses in those things, which
are against Positive Law, so the same be reasonable and prescribed. Now,
that no Bishop by common right, could excommunicate, correct, or punish his
subjects alone before the time, that Boniface the eyghte had given sentence
for the Bishop of Pictauia, Lib. 6. de consuet. c. non. est.
against the Deane and Chapter of the same Church, complaining that the
Bishop had dealt iniuriouslye with them for that he had exercised
Ecclesiastical Discipline, without their Counsel, has been already
proved by the Canons and Constitutions before specified. Which Canons were
decreed long before, and nearer the Apostles time, and according to the
practice, and vsadge of the aunciente Fathers. And therefore, since this
Custom, has had a beginning, but in the time of Boniface the eyghte, (no
lawefull successor of the Apostles) and that upon a reason of pollitike
government, and not upon the word of God: and that the law before was
contrary, yea and is contrary still: where noe such custom has been so
prescribed: I conclude, that in the beginning it was not so, and therefore
contrary to the commandment of God, and therefore unreasonable, and therefore
no custom, but a corruption. Every custom must be lawfully prescribed.
The second property of every good and laudable custom in the Church, is, that
the same be rightly and lawfully prescribed, otherwise it shall loose the
nature of a custom, and be of no force to bind. And to such a custom these
two things are necessarily required. Glos. extra. de consuetud c. cum quanto.
First, the same must be begun, Sciente illo qui ius potest condere, With the
knowledge and consent of him, that has power to make a law. Secondly it must
not be Contra neruum ecclesiasticae disciplinae, and libertatem ecclesiae:
Against the joints and sinews of ecclesiastical discipline, and liberty of
the Church. Touching the former, we are first to consider the state and
condition of Pope Boniface, whether he as a lawful king, governor, or ruler,
had power and authority to inact, and publishe, a law, in the Church of Christ
or no? For had he no authority to make a law in the Church of Christ, then by
the foresaid maxim, it follows; that he had no authority, to confirm or
establish a custom. Now it is manifest, that the Popes kingdom, is an usurped
kingdom: that his power is not lawfully derived unto him by the word of the
Lord: that it is a kingdom more opposite, and altogether contrary to the
kingdom of Christ: that it proclaymeth doctrines against the doctrines of our
Lord Christ: that it urges traditions against his commandments: that it
inuenteth new sacrifices, and disanulleth his only, and all sufficient
sacrifice: that it is external, and consists in outward pompes, rites, and
ceremonies, whereas the kingdom of our Lord Christ is spiritual, and
consists in the renewing the inner man. If then, there be such division, and
dissension between these two kingdoms, because of the diverse governments of
these two kings: (I term the Pope a king, only in respect of his usurped
kingdom) the one governing his subjects, by the sword of the spirit, the
word of God, the other governing his adherents, by the inventions of men, and
traditions of his own brain, it stands us the faithful servant, and
subjects of the Lord Christ in hand, that as we are exempted by his grace and
power, from the bondage of our enemy: so to exempt our selves also, from
acknowledging any power, to be in his adversary to make a law, or to
establish a custom for us to be ruled and governed by. And as the papist, to
manifest his obedience to the Pope, will affirm this custom, to be
avayleable in the government of the popish church, and to be good, as
brought in by the knowledge of their King the Pope: so it stands upon our
allegiaunce and fidelity to our King Jesus Christ, not to confess this
custom to be commendable, but as it is, so to account the same, altogether
corrupt, as being not brought into the Church, with the knowledge of the same
our King, who has only power to make a law in his Church, but rather foysted
in, by the power of an usurper, contrary to our said King, his express will,
and commandment. In deed if our Bishops, and other Church governors, were
popish bysh. and acknowledged the Pope, for their general superintende^t, and
that he had power, to make a law: they might then seem, to have some reason by
alleging this custom for their defense? neither could I then deny the use,
and authority thereof unto them. But the case stands otherwise with them. Our
Bishops pretend themselves to be enimyes, unto the Popes usurped power: they
would be no maineteyners of his authority, they confess not him, to have
power to make a law, they account and repute him to be mere Antichrist. Yea
our Bishops are ministers of the Gospel, they are dispensers of the word of
God, they be Legates from the Lord Christ, to declare his good pleasure to his
people. And therefore the state of our question is otherwise, and stands
thus: namely, whether a custom begun, and continued in the synagogue of
Antichrist, with the knowledge of him, that in that synagogue had power to make
a Law, be a good, and a laudable custom, for the Church of Christ, being
begun, and continued, without the knowledge of the Lord Christ: And whether
the ministers of the Gospel, may safely challenge, the use, or benefit, of
any such custom in the ministry of the Gospel or no? Whereunto I answer,
and that by Law negatiuely. For, making the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the ministry of his Gospel, to be as it is indeed, a Kingdom
of power and grace, and to be a Kingdom opposite and contrary to the kingdom
of Antichrist: I say that there can be no custom brought into his Church, nor
practiced by the ministers of his Gospel, unless the same be brought in by
the knoweledge, and consent of their Lord and King Jesus Christ, who only
has power to make a law for them to be governed by. And that therefore
unless it may be justified, that this custom, (namely that one should
excommunicate alone) was brought in with the knowledge and consent of our Lord
Jesus Christ: I say, that by Law this custom is a void custom. And
therefore I conclude thus: 1 Every custom begun and continued in the Church
of Christ, without the knowledge and consent of Christ, who only in his
Church has power to make a Law, is no custom lawfully prescribed. 2 But this
custom (namely that one should excommunicate alone) is begun and continued,
without the knowledge and consent of Jesus Christ: 3 Therefore this custom
is not lawfullye prescribed.
And again:

That this custom namely, that one should excommunicate alone, is against
the force of ecclesiastical Discipline; and the liberty of the church, and
therefore not auaylable: I prove as follows. 1 Whatsoever is against the
policye, of the Church of Christ, instituted by God, for the wholesome
administration, and government thereof: the same is against the force, and
power of ecclesiastical Discipline. 2 But this custom: namely, that one
should excommunicate alone, is against the policy, of the Church of Christ,
instituted by God: etc. 3 Therefore this custom is against the force of
ecclesiastical discipline.


THe first Proposition is plain and euidente from the definition, or
description of ecclesiastical Discipline, defined to be, Christianae
Ecclesiae politia, a deo illius vecte administrandae gubernandaeque causa,
instituta: The policy of the Church of Christ, instituted by God, for the good
administration, and government of the same. So that whatsoever may be said to
be contrary or repugnaunt unto this form, and manner of Christian policy,
the same consequently, may be affirmed to be contrary, and repugnaunt unto
Christian Discipline, the said policy containing the very whole, and entire
nature and essence of the said discipline, and therefore the one conuertible
with the other, as the very true and essential definition, with the very thing
it self defined. The second proposition I prove by two conclusions. 1
Whatsoever is the only policy of the Church of Rome, the same is the policy
of the Church of Antichriste. 2 But, that one by custom, should excommunicate
alone, is the only policye of the Church of Rome. 3 Therefore the policy of
the Church of Antichrist; and if of Antichrist, then not of Christ, for there
is no communion between light, and darkness, between Christ and Belyall.


THat the policy of the Church of Rome (which is my first proposition) is the
policy of Antichriste, is evident, inasmuch as the Church of Rome (teaching
for doctrines, the traditions of men, and having her mouth open to blasphemy
against GOD, and to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell
in Heaven) is the Church of Antichrist. The second proposition shall be
proved, with the second proposition of the Syllogism following. My second
reason is. 1 Whatsoever is not instituted by God, for the government of the
Church of Christ, the same is not the policy of the Church of Christ. 2 But
a custom, whereby one should Excommunicate alone, is not instituted by God,
for the government of the Church of Christ. 3 Therefore the said custom is
not the policy of the Church of Christ:


THe first Proposition is drawn from the essence, and nature of the policy of
the Church of Christ, for that no other policy, can be the policy of the
church of Christ, than that policy, which is instituted by God, the Lord and
Father of Christ, for God is the only head of Christ, and the law giver
unto Christ: for whatsoever I have received (says Christ) that have I
commanded you. And that which I received of the Lord, (says the Apostle) that
I have delivered unto you. Now it is manifest that both our Savior Christ,
and his Apostle, 1. Cor.. 5. 4. 5. Mat. 18. 16. 17 18.
delivered a policy unto the Church of Christ, for the government thereof,
namely excommunication by many, and therefore that excommunication by many, is
instituted by God, for the government of the Church of Christ, cannot be
denied. And if excommunication by many be commanded by God, then
excommunication by one alone, is forbidden by God. The second proposition I
prove thus: 1 Whatsoever is the tradition, and invention of man, the same is
not the institution of God. 2 But a custom wherebye one should excommucate
alone, is a tradition and invention of man. 3 Therefore the same is not the
institution of God.


THe first proposition is manifest by infinite places of Scriptures, and
especially by the doctrine of our Savior, in the fiftenth after Matthew, where
he proves, that the Pharisees (reprehending his disciples, for not keeping
the traditions of the Elders, in washinge their hands) have made the
co^mandeme^nt of God, of noe aucthority, by their own tradition, manifestinge
thereby that in vain they worshipped him, teaching for doctrines men's
precepts. The second proposition of this syllogism, with the second
proposition of the former syllogism, is proved by the decree of Boneface the
eight before alleged: which Boniface, was a man: was a Pope, and Governor in
the Church of Rome, and was an enemy to the institution, and ordinance of God.
And therefore against the force and virtue of the said custom as not lawfully
prescribed, and therefore not having sufficient power and authority, of an
equal and just unwritten law, being brought into the Church about three
hundred years passed, and that by the ratification of Boniface the eight, an
enemy unto the church: I conclude thus: 1 No custom against the force of
ecclesiastical discipline, can be a custom lawfully prescribed: for the law
warranteth no such custom: 2 But this custom, namely that one should
excommunicate alone, is against ecclesiastical discipline: 3 Therefore this
custom can not be a custom lawfully prescribed. And therefore a mere and
manifest corruption.


THE first proposition is the law it self: The second proposition has been
proved from the definition of Ecclesiastical discipline. And therefore our
sole customarie excommunicatours, shall come to late to deny the conclusion. I
made mention before of one other condition properly incident, and inherent to
every custom lawfully prescribed, namely that the same should not be against
the liberty of the Church of Christ. Now, that this custom, (namely that
one should excommunicate alone) is also against the liberty of the Church. And
therefore not lawfully prescribed, I prove thus. 1 Whatsoever is against the
liberty of the congregation of the faithful, the same is against the liberty
of the Church: 2 But a custom whereby one should excommunicate alone, is
against the liberty of the congregation of the faithful: 3 Therefore the same
is against the liberty of the Church.


THe first proposition is evident, because the church comprehends the
congregation of the faithful. Ecclesia congregationem fidelium comprehendit.
And here according to the supposition of the law, and according to the meaning
of the same law, whereof I entreat, I argue from the general to the
particular thus: 1 If for the Pope (challenging unto him self absolute power,
and authority over the universal Church) to excommunicate alone, should be
contrary to the liberty, of the whole society of the faithful, and so of the
Church in general: then for a Bishop (challenging unto him self authority
over the particular Church, with in his particular Diocese) to excommunicate
alone, is contrary to the liberty of the particular society of the faithful,
and so of the particular Church within his Diocese: 2 But the first is not
lawful: 3 Therefore the second not lawful:


FOR Quod iuris est in toto, quoad totum, idem est in part, quoad partem: What
right there is from the whole unto the whole, the same right is from the part,
unto the part. Again, that this custom, namely for one man to excommunicate
alone in one place, is against the liberty of the Church in one place, (which
is my second proposition, I prove from the essence, and nature of liberty.

Libertas (says the lawyer) ff. de statu. ho. l. libertas.
est naturalis facultas eius, quod cuique facere libet, nisi quod vi, aut iure
prohibetur. Liberty is a natural faculty to do that, that every man is
willing to do, unless by force or Law, he be restrained: By which definition
though the Lawyer have properly defined the only liberty of a reasonable and
natural man, and not of the spiritual and regenerate man: yet by the self
same definition, may appear what the freedom of a man newborn ought to
be: namely, such a gracious liberty, as whereby he might thoroughly without
restraynt, perform whatsoever he would in the spiritual service of the
Lord, unless by violence or positive Law he were restrained. And therefore
wheresoever, either by violence or positive law, any one man, in any one
place, usurps power to excommunicate alone: there, the whole company of the
faithful in that place, is secluded from this franck ability, to do what it
would in the spiritual service of the Lord: wheresoever (I say) this
freedom is after this sort, by a certain violence, or positive Law, wrested
out of the power of the Church, so that she has not free liberty to execute
her will: namely, to banish from her society and fellowshippe, all such as have
by their own misdemeanour, banished them selves from the obedience of the
Lord: it must necessarily follow, that therefore, for one to excommunicate
alone, is against the liberty of the Church, bringing the Church into extreme
bondage and servitude: For as by the reason of the natural man: Seruitus est
constitutio iuris gentium, qua quis dominio alieno contra naturam subticitur:
Servitude is a constitution of the law of nations, whereby against nature any
man is subject to the Dominion of another: even so by the reason of the work
of the spirit, that, without contradiction is to be reputed a spiritual
servitude, whereby the Church of God, contrary to the Law of God, is brought
under any strange and foreign government: And therefore, I conclude thus. 1
Whatsoever is an ocasion that the Church of God is in subjection and bondage,
the same is against the liberty of the Church. 2 But that custom whereby one
should excommunicate alone, is an occasion that the Church of God is brought
into subjection and bondage: 3 Therefore the same is against the liberty of the
Church; and if so, then not lawfully prescribed, and if so, then no lawful
custom, but a corruption.


THe first is proved from the rule of contraries, that whatsoever is affirmed
in the one, the same must be denied in the other: Ye were in bondage (says
the Apostle) but now ye are free, and therefore no more in bondage: The second
proposition, has been proved as well by the description of liberty, as by
the Etimoligie of bondage, whereby has been showed the Church then to be at
liberty, when she may do whatsoever she will in the service of the Lord,
according to the will of the Lord: And so consequently, then to be in
thraldom and subjection, when she is bound to yield unto that, which is
contrary unto the will of the Lord: And therefore in this respect also, I may
once again conclude against the said custom thus. 1 Every custom which is
against the liberty of the Church, is a custom unlawfully prescribed: 2 But
this custom; namely, that one should excommunicate alone, is against the
liberty of the Church. 3 Therefore this custom is unlawfully prescribed.


But be it that this foresaid asserted custom, were not to be reputed an
erroneous custom, be it that the same were begun and continued, by the consent
and agreement of the Lords people: be it that it were not forced, and violent,
but peaceable, and without interruption: be it that it were not unreasonable,
and against the law of God: be it that it were brought in with the knowledge
and consent of the Lord Christ: be it that it were not against the liberty of
the church or against the power of ecclesiastical discipline: Though a
Bishop might excommunicate, yet a Bysh. Commissary may not.
be it I say, that every bishop a minister of the Gospel, have power to
excommunicate alone, shall it therefore follow, that every Bishops commissary,
or Archdeacons official, a man not entered into the ministry, a mere lay man
(as they call him) not capable of any such jurisdiction, may do the like? For
though a bishop, or an Archdeacon, by positive Law, may substitute, and
depute, another to execute jurisdiction, under him: yet notwithstanding by the
same positive Law, he is restrained from delegating the same, to every man
without any difference, or distinction of persons.

Extra. de elect. c.
EPISCOPI EA QVAE SVNT. etc. Bishops may commit matters of jurisdiction, as of
judgment, excommunication, and such like, to others having no jurisdiction:
but notwithstanding they must be such manner of persons, as be capable of
jurisdiction, but a lay man is not capable of jurisdiction: Therefore he may
not excommunicate, because custom can not work, that a Clearke, no Bishop
should exercise those things, which are reserved to the order of a Bishop. c.
10. Andre. in. c. ij. de preb. lib. 6.
And the reason is, Quia consuetudo non facit quem capacem: because a custom
makes not one capable. Every bishop, and uery minister, by common right, have
authority to preach the doctrine of faith, and to minister the sacraments, and
in his necessary absence, may have this duty herein performed by another: but
yet neither the Bishop, neither the minister in his absence, may leave, any
one, not called to some function in the ministry, to preach the Gospel,
though the same party were the godliest, and wisest man in the whole country.
The Emperor may appoint Presidentes, and Proconsuls in provinces, to be his
deputies, to execute justice under him, and in his name: and the Praetor may
appoint tutors and curators to pupills and orphans, but yet neither the one,
neither the other, may therefore appoint children, or madmen, or women, to
those offices. The Lord Chancellor of England under her majesty has
authority to place Justices of peace in every sheere, yet can he not appoint a
Spaniard, or an Italian borne. A bishop likewise, as he himself, by reason of
his fu^ctio^, and the ministeri committed unto him by law positive, is made, as
he supposes, capable to excommunicate, so ought he to delegate the same his
office, only to one of the ministry, and not to a doctor, or bacheler of law,
a mere lay man, though he profess the gospel; much less to a suspected, or
known popish doctor, or bacheler of law, and a mere lay man too, an enemy to
the gospel. For what authorty have these kind of men, over the ministers of the
gospel? Did ever Moses or Joshua, or David or Josiah, commanded any Ebrew, not
of the tribe of Leui to execute the priests office? did Aaron, or any his
faithul successors, ever supply their rooms, and execute their offices by one,
not of their own tribe? And if these men, may not be found to have done these
things, much less would they ever have tolerated, a priest of Baall, or a
Philistine no priest at all, to have entered into the sanctuary. It was not
lawful for Aaron, or his Son Eleazer to commit the folding up of the sanctuary,
unto any of the family of the Koathites. And therefore I say, that a bishop or
an archdeaco^, can no more commit the office of executing the discipline of the
Lord Christ, to a lay man (as they call him) or one that is no minister then he
can commit the office of preaching and baptising, to one that is no minister,
such men are altogether incapable of such offices.

For CONSVETVDO etc. A Custom cannot give authority unto private persons to
excommunicate, neither to degrade or depose: neither yet to arest Clergy men,
or bodily to chastise them. De offic. Archid. c. cum satis. Extra de elec c.
transmissa. De cleric. co^ c. cle. 10. lib. 6.
Touching the statute made in 37 year of Henry the eight, that al and singular
persons, as well lay men, as those that were then, or should afterward be
married, being Doctors of the Civil law, lawfully create and made in any
university, may lawfully execute, and exercise all manner of jurisdiction, and
all Censures and coertions, appertaining or in any wise belonging to the same.
First I answer, that the same is but a law of man, and therefore by man may be
abrogated. Secondly, that as it was made in a corrupt time, so in truth the
statute in that point is corrupt, and ought therefore in the same point, to be
repealed. For though the same statute in some respect, establishe and confirm
unto the king, and his successors, and so unto our most gracious sovereign
Lady, the Queens majesty that now is, lawful preeminence, power,
superiority and Lordship over all persons within her Dominions, of what state
or condition soever, touching punishment for any heresies, errors, vices,
schisms, abuses, idolatries, hipocrisies and superstitions, springing or
growing by means of any her disobedient and disloyal subjects, so has her
majesty by her injunctions, published, that her highness did never pretend
any title, or challenge any authority to punnishe any of her subjects, for
any of the said offenses, by censure Ecclesiastical, in right belonging to
her royal person; but that her highness meaning and intent is, and always
has been, to commit the execution thereof always, to the Ecclesiastical
state of her time. Her Iniunction is as follows.

The Queens majesty being infourmed, that in certain places of the Realm,
sundry of her native subjects being called to Ecclesiastical ministry in
the Church, be by synister persuasion and perverse construction, induced to
find some scruple in the form of an oath: which by an act of the last
Parliament, is prescribed to be required of diverse persons for the recognitio^
of their allegiance to her majesty, which certainly never was ever me^t, ne by
any equity of words or good sense can be thereof gathered: Would that all her
loving subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be meant, or
intended by the same oath, to have any other duty, allegia^ce, or bond required
by the same oath, then was acknowledged to be due to the most Noble kings of
famous memory, King Henry the eight, her majesty's father, or king Edward the
sixth her majesty's brother. And further, her majesty forbids all manner her
subjects to give ear or credit, to such perverse and malicious persons, which
most sinisterly and maliciously labor to notify to her loving subjects, how
by the words of the said oath it may be collected that the kings or Queens of
this Realm, possessours of the crown, may challenge authority and power of
ministry of divine offices in the Church, wherein her said subjects be much
abused by such evil disposed persons. For certainly her majesty never does,
ne ever will challenge any other authority, then that was challenged, and
lately used by the said noble kings of famous memory, king Henry the 8. and
king Edward the sixth, which is and was of ancient time due to the imperial
Crown of this realm, that is under God to have the sovereignty and rule over
all manner persons borne within these her realms, Dominions and Countries, of
what estate, either ecclesiastical or te^porall, soever they be, so as no
other sovereign power shall or ought to have any superiority over them. And
if any person that has conceived any other sense of the form of the said oath,
shall accept the same oath with this interpretation, sense, or meaning, her
majesty is well pleased to accept every such in that behalf, as her good and
obedient subjects, and shall acquit them of all manner penalties contained in
the said act, against such as shall peremptorily or obstinately refuse to take
the same oath. By which Iniunction, we may evidently perceive, that as the Lord
has restored unto her majesty the scepter of justice and judgment over all
persons, within her Dominions, and reunited the government over the
ecclesiastical state, to her highness crown and dignity: so her majesty
remembering the Lords goodness toward her, minds nothing less, the^ hereby
to confound the two principal offices in his church, viz. magistracy and
ministry, but leaves them still distinguished, as by his word he has
prescribed: challenging unto her self as chief magistrate, nothing else, but
power to command; both that the true ministry, be duly executed by men
lawfully called thereunto: and also that her lawful magistracy may be advanced
in all things according to his word. Wherein we see her majesty both in respect
of her sex, and in respect of her civil office, utterly to have refused, to
take this part of the ministry upon her, as well as she does abstain from
ministering the Sacraments, or dispensing the word by public preaching. She
contenteth her self with the authority limited unto her by the word of God
over the bodies, goods, lives and possessions of her subjects: she challenges
no power over their souls, as by excommunication to deliver them to satan. If
any person whatsoever shall offend against any law, statute, or custom of this
Realm, whereby he may incur any bodily punishment, she thinks it sufficient
for her by her process, to summon him before her tribunal seat, and upon his
trial, to have in her name judgment pronounced against him, for the breach of
her highness laws, whether the same consist, in loss of life, goods, lands,
promotions or whatsoever. And as touching ecclesiastical coertion, if any of
her people deserve to be punished by the ecclesiastical ministry, her highness
demands no other sovereignty, then to command the ministry to exercise the
discipline of the Church against the offenders, as by the laws of God they
are commanded: and in case they of the ministry, shall be herein remiss and
negligent, then to punish them with such pains, as either by her laws is
provided, or by her wisdom shall be thought expedient in that behalf, for the
contempt of her gracious commandment, and neglect of the Lords service. In
which diversity of punishments, the diversity of the offices, of magistracy
and ministry, does manifestly appear. Magistracy having evermore regard to
the body and outward man: but ministry always to the soul, and inner man.
The magistrate punishes with bodily chastiseme^t, the minister with spiritual
discipline, neither does the one hereby derogate from the other, or any whit
weaken the other, but rather each one strengthens and fortifieth the other. For
the mind brought in frame by discipline, frames the whole body to a more holy
obedience, so that the magistrate thereby has less trouble in his office, and
the common weal more florisheth in peace and prosperity. Which difference, were
it well weighed, and without cauilling thoroughly marked, would soon decide this
controversy. For hereby the former statute, touching the exercise of
ecclesiastical discipline by Doctors of the civil law (mere lay men) would
clearly appear to have been made in a time, wherein the truth was not so
manifested as now it is. For if every man ought to confess that it is unlawful
by the word of God, for a king and Potentate, no minister of the Gospel to
excommunicate, and so consequently, unlawful to execute the office of a
minister: every man ought much more to confess, that authority given by man
to a kings vassal no minister of the Gospel, to excommunicate, and so
consequently to execute the ministers office, is an authority given unto man
against the law of God, and therefore both the law speedely to be repealed,
and the abuse in the mean time to be reformed. And therefore I conclude
against that statute thus from the greater to the less. 1 Whatsoever is
unlawful for the king, a lay man to exercise in the Church of Christ, the same
is unlawful for every of his vassals a lay man to exercise. 2 But it is
unlawful for a king a lay man to exercise Ecclesiastical discipline in the
Church of Christ: 3 Therefore it is unlawful for a Doctor of the civil law, a
kings vassal and a lay man, to exercise the same.


BUT suppose this statute, might in some respect be some excuse to Doctors of
the Civil law, ignorant of the word of the Lord, yet thereby it follows
not, that the bishops may in like sort be excused, as well for that they can not
pretend any such ignorance, they knowing the same to be against the word, and
not therefore to be practiced: as also, for that they be not precisely
commanded by the said statute, to constitute and ordain Doctors of the
Civil law, no ministers of the Gospel, to be their Commissaries, or
officials, but they may them selves, if they will either reserve and keep unto
them selves, exercise jurisdiction, and minister justice by themselves: or else
depute such men unto those offices, as by law are capable of jurisdiction, and
may execute ecclesiastical discipline, according to the word of God, I mean
only ministers of the Gospel. But suppose again that by force of this
statute, bishops were absolutely commanded to ordain Doctors of the Civil
law, to be their only Commissaries, and officials: and that all sentences of
excommunication, and other ecclesiastical coertions, exercised by the said
Doctors, mere lay men, were good, and duly, and rightly ministered, by force
of this statute, and so the Bishops by that means exempted from all just
reprehension in this behalf: yet what can be answered concerning the
proceedings, judgments, executions and censures, pronounced by mere lay
men, no Doctors of the civil law? Bedell at Liechfield: Liche at Chester:
Chippindale at Leicester: Langeford at Bedford: Glasier at Oxenford: Green at
Gloucester, before they were Doctors of the civil Law, mere lay men.
Talentine at Northhampton a mere lay man, executed ecclesiastical coertion and
discipline a long time. Say at Winchester: Babyngton at Lichfield, Hudson and
Dethick in the County of York and bishoppricke of Durham, mere lay men, no
Doctors of the civil law, execute and exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
and all censures and coertions belonging to the same at this day. And though it
may be answered that some of these no Doctors, were, or be Deacons, and so
Clergy men, and therefore no lay men: I reply though they were, or be in
deed Deacons, and so one kind of Clergy men, that they can not therefore
excommunicate, etc. De regni iuris. li. 6. ea.
Ea quae fiunt a iudice, quae ad eius officium non spectant, viribus non
subsictunt. Whatsoever things be done of a Judge belonging not to his office,
the same things are of no force. For let us put the case, that some
Archdeacon, or Chauncelor, and yet no bishop, had ordained some man to be a
Deacon, pronouncing words apt to the giving of such an order, whether such a
one be a Deacon: I answer no, because power to make Clearkes, does not belong
to the order of priesthood, unless the ordayner be a Bishop. Or suppose that a
Bishop had granted one an hundred days of pardon, for some good work that he
had don: whether this grant by law be good? Truly no. Because it belongs to
a Bishop only to give forty days of pardon. and not an hundred. In like
manner I conclude, though some in authority exercising ecclesiastical censure
be Deacons, yet notwithstanding that their said censure, is in law no
censure, as a thing not belonging to the office of a Deacon, but only to the
office of a minister. There remains yet one other objection, namely that
excommunication is not used, as an Ecclesiastical but rather as a civil
punishment. Whereunto I answer, that such me^ speak altogether without book,
and that by law they shall never be able to justify their assertion. And
undoubtedly whosoever shall account excommunication, to be a civil punishment,
the same man is shrewdly to be suspected, to be a privy and subtle enemy unto
the Church, for thereby he excludes all kind of punishmente from the Church.
And I include under Excommunication, Suspension, Interdiction and admonition.
For if Excommunication be Civil, then are these also civil, and if these be
civil, then what is Ecclesiastical? But such men by undermining the Church,
to maintain their own corrupt abuses, require some sharper medicine of pure
ecclesiastical Discipline, to heal their uncivil behavior, and therefore
that excommunication cannot be a civil punishment, I prove this from the
description thereof. ij. q. 2. nihil.. euidenter. ij. q. 3. nemo.
Excommunicatio est extra co^munionem ecclesiae separatio: vel censura
ecclesiastica, excludens a communione fidelium: vel est aeternae mortis
damnatio. Excommunication, is the seperating a man from the communion of the
Church: or a censure ecclesiastical excluding from the fellowship of the
faithful: or it is a condemnation of eternal death. And this kind of
excommunication is called the greater excommunication. There is also another
excommunication, called the less excommunication, and the same only
seperateth a man from the receiving of the sacraments. Moreover
excommunication is said to be Paena animae, and mucro spiritualis, A
punishment of the soul, and a Spiritual sword. By which discriptions it is
apparaunt, that both the greater and the lesser, are belonging to the soul and
conscience only, and therefore spiritual, and therefore no civil punishment.
And therefore I conclude thus. 1 No spiritual punishment, is a civil
punishment: 2 But excommunication is a spiritual punishment: 3 Therefore it is
no civil punishment.


For every civil punishment, is either Poena pecuniaria, or corporalis: ff.
de. pub. iudic. l.
a punishment by money, or else a bodily punishment, and executed according to
the Proverb. Qui non habet in bursa, luat in corpore. He that has not to
pay in his Purse, let him redeem it in his body. Which kind of punishment
for the most part inflicted against excommunicated persons, upon their
absolution and restitution to the congregation, may seem to be of the same
force, to confirm the former assertion: namely, that excommunication is a
civil punishmente. For in this respect, that money is given, and received for
absolution, it may savor to unsavory senses, to be a civil punishment: but no
more can hereupon be concluded, that excommunication is a kind of civil
punishmente, because money is given for absolution, then that a punishment by
money is a bodilye punishmente, because money is given for the redemption of the
body. And again, if the Patrons of this civil excommunication, do not
vnciuily abuse absolution, neither the party excommunicated by giving, neither
the judge absoluing by receiving any monye, should have any color, to faigne
or forge any such distinction: for that no exchange by monye, ought to be
made, between excommunication and absolution. Absolution freely to be given.
The sentence of excommunication is simply to be denounsed for some heinous
offense: the sentence of absolution is freely to be given upon repentance,
the party is not to pay for excommunication the judge ought not to receive
for absolution one penny.

Extra de simo. c. ad ures.
CVM IGITVR INDIGNVM, etc. Seeing it is uncomely and contrary to the reason of
the church, says the cano^, that the benefit of absolution be redeemed: We
command that if the party have paid the 100 pounds, you cause him freely to be
al solued: neither should this punishment be imposed, for every trifle or
small faults. For as it is the greatest punishment by law, so ought not the
judge to give sentence thereof, rashly or unadvisedly, but as it were, with a
pair of Leaden heels. j. j q. 3. nullus
NVLLVS SACERDOTVM. etc. Let no Priest, for small and trifling causes, besides
the faults, for the which, the old Fathers have commanded offenders to be kept
from the Church, suspend any man of sound faith. The Emperor by his Imperial
laws, inhibiteth the same, Authen. desanctis episco. omnibus colla. no.
OMNIBVS AVTEM EPISCOPIS. etc. We forbid all Bishops and elders, to separate
any man from the holy communion before a cause be showed, for the which the
holy rules bid the same to be done: And if any neglecting these things shall
separate any from the holy communion, let him that is thus unjustly
excommunicated, as absolved from the excommunication, receive the holy
communion of an inferior Priest. By the ancient Laws of this Realm of
England, the like prohibitions and provisions have been established. Math.
Parisiensis. Hen. 2 fol. 135. Anno. 116. H. in a counsel holden at Claredon
SI AB ARCHIDIACANO. etc. If any shall be cited by the Archdeacon, or by the
bishop for any matter, to make answer before them, and will not satisfy upon
their citations, it is lawful enough to interdict him, but he ought not to
excommunicate him, before the Kings chief Justice of the same Village, have
been requested to compel him to come to satisfaction. And again, Math.
Parisi. ibidem.
Asserit rex iuxta, etc. The king according to the prerogative of his kingdom,
commands that none holding of the king in chief, or other minister be
excommunicated by any man without his knowledge, least if the king not knowing
thereof, by his ignorance, communicate with an excommunicat person, admitting
either to his kiss, or to his Council, an Earl or a Baron coming unto him.

And now, sithence by the ancient canons, decrees and constitutions,
confirming the good and ancient usage, of the Church and Fathers in old
time: It appears, that excommunication, and all other censures of the Church,
should not be exercised by the Bish. alone, but with the consent of the
Clergy and eldership: whereby many extorsions and briberies have been
repressed: Sithence, by a pretensed custom alone, begun in the popish
synagogue, the contrary hereof has been practiced: And sithence the same
pretensed custom: was first grounded upon a politic reason only, Vt facilius
expedirentur negotia, Which reason now cease: Sithence the same is also
unreasonable, and an enemy unto the Canons: sithence the same is violent and
not peaceable, but interrupted: sithence, it was never begun Bona fide: and
sithence also it is erroneous, as not begun with the knowledge and consent of
the lords people: Yea, since it was begun Mala fide, as being against the law
of God, and begun without the consent of the Bishop Christ, who only has
power to make a law in his Church: Sithence, it is against the power of
ecclesiastical discipline, and overthrows the liberty of the Church,
bringing the same into servitude and bondage: And sithence excommunication, is
no civil, but a mere spiritual punishment to be executed only against great
offenses: Let us conclude, that excommunication by one alone, is not lawful.

IT IS VNLAWFVLL for a Bishop, or any other Ecclesiastical person by common
right, to bear any civil office in the common weal.
Extra. ne. cleri vel mona. c. sed nec.
SED NEC PROCVRATIONES, etc. But let not any Clearke presume, to exercise any
government of Villages, or secular jurisdiction, under any Potentates or
seculer men, as to be made any their Iuctices. And if any person, shall
attempt to do against these things, in so much as contrary to the doctrine of
the Apostle, who wills none, going a warrefare to God, to entangle him self
with worldly affairs, he deals therein worldly, let him be separated from
the Ecclesiastical ministry, for that he, to please the Princes of the
world, drowneth him self with the waves of the world, neglecting the office
of a Clearke.

And again. Extr. ne cleri. vel mona. c clericus.
IVBEMVS ETIAM, etc. We command under the threatening of the great
excommunication, that no Priest have the office of any Vicount, or secular
governor: And if any shall presume to do the contrary, and being warned,
will not amend, let him be subject to excommunication. The reasons of these
Canons may be thus briefly gathered. 1 He that goes a warfare to God, ought
not to entangle him self with worldly business. 2 But every Bishop, and every
Clearke goes a warfare to God: 3 Therefore he ought not to entangle himself
with worldly affairs:
1 None being a Bishop ought to neglect the office of a bishop, or being a
Clearke, the office of a Clearke: 2 But whosoever being a bishop, or being a
Cleark, shall use civil jurisdiction, the same being a bishop, neglects the
office of a bishop, and being a Clearke neglects the office of a Cleark. 3
Therefore none being a bishop or a Clearke, ought to exercise civil
jurisdiction.
1 Every bishop and every Clearke, that drowneth him self with the waves of
the world, is to be removed from his Ecclesiastical ministry: 2 But every
bishop and every Clearke, that uses civil jurisdiction to please the
Potentates of the world, drowneth him self with the waves of the world: 3
Therefore every bishop and every Clearke, that uses civil jurisdiction, is to
be removed from his ministry.


IF such as seem by coullour of law, to justify the heaping of offices one
upon an others neck, had known these constitutions, no doubt though had they
covertly desired an outward pomp, yet never would they so openly have
maintained, a thing so manifestly forbidden, and so precisely disallowed by so
many laws. A minister may more lawfully exercise an occupation, then a civil
office.
For the words of the Apostle Nemo militans Deo, implicet se negotiis
secularibus, Are not only applied by the law to manual trades and
occupations, as to be a plough man, a merchant man, a Baker, or a Brwer: but
also to the cheifest offices under Kings and Emperors, as of Vicounts,
Stewards, Presidents, Justices of peace, and such like: for the law foreseeing
that a B. or clergy man, whose office ought to be applied wholely in heavenly
things, and thoroughly to be withdrawn from earthly things, might not only be
hindered from executing his duty, by being a Baker or Huckster, or other handy
craftesman, but also by taking of him the office of a Vicount, Steward, or
Justice of peace, (these offices being of them selves sufficient for a whole
man to be employed in) uses the reason of the Apostle, as well against the
one, as against the other. And in truth more properly, and directly, against
the one, then against the other: in so much as if we confer other places of
holy Scripture, with this of the holy Apostles, we shall find, that it is
tolerable, for a Minister: yea, he may exercise his hands in labor, and
toil of his body, to get some part of his living, in case he have not by the
congregation, allowaunce sufficient to mainetaine his estate: the same Apostle
leaving an example thereof, as appears to the Thessalonians. 4. 3. Neither
took we bread (says he) of any man for naught, but we wroughte with our
labor and travail Night and Day, because we would not be chargeable to
any of you: And again: Act. 20. 34. 35.
You know that these hands, have ministered to my necessityes, and to them
that were with me. If therefore every minister, so it be no hinderaunce to
his calling, and that he have no sufficient provision, may for the preservation
of him self and family, exercise some manual occupation and labor with his
body: and sithence we find not in the whole doctrine of the Gospel, that
any liberty is given to the minister to become a Magestrate, Romans 12. 7.
but that every one, that has an office, is precisely commanded to attend
upon his office; and every one that teaches, to attend upon his teaching:
and every one that exhorts to attend upon his exhortation: and that by
positive law, the self same is received and commanded to be practiced (as
before in the title of dispensations has been proved): I see not how he that
labors to couple the offices of magistracy, and ministerye unto one man,
and altogether to sever an handy craft, from a minister, can by pretense of
law or color of any reason, justify his assertion, the law grounding it
self upon the scripture, as well for seperating, and disioyning the former,
as for lincking and uniting together the latter. Yea, and the Bishops by their
aduertisementes, published in the seventh year of her Graces reign, and
subscribed with the hands of one Archbishop, and five Bishops, her highness
Ecclesiastical Commissioners, have ratified, and authorized what lay in them
the former laws, concerning the practice and use of the latter.
Aduertisementes the last article.
Their words are these. [I shall not openly intermeddle with any Artificers
occupations, as couetously to seek a gain thereby, having in Ecclesiastical
living to the some of twenty nobles or above by year.] Therefore I conclude,
that an Ecclesiastical person not having above twenty nobles by the year (a
small portion for a minister of the Gospel to live by,) may intermeddle with
an Artificers occupation. And if these great and learned Bishops, think it a
matter tending to covetousness, for a poor minister to use openly some handy
craft, in case he have twenty nobles or above to live by: I think for my part,
whosoever shall say, that for a rich Minister openly, to intermeddle with an
office of civil magistracy, to win him credit, and to procure him
estimation, is a matter tending to ambition and vain glory, that he does not
in so saying slander the truth. And I have for the defense of this my opinion
the laws and reasons following.

21. q. 3. Cyprianus.
IAM QVIDEM consilio Episcoporum est statutum, ne quis de clericis and Dei
ministris tutorem and curatorem testamento suo nominauerit, quandoquidem
singuli diuino sacerdotio honorati, and in clericorum ministerio constituti,
non nisi altari and sacrificiis deseruire, and precibus and orationibus vacare
debeant. Nemo enim, etc. It has been lately by the council of Bishops
ordained, that no man in his Tectament, should nominate any Clearke, or
minister of God, to be a Guardian, or ouerseer, for that every one, honored
with divine priesthood, and placed in the ministry of Clearkes, ought to
attend only at the Altar and Sacrifices, and ought to employ him self to
prayers and supplications. For no man warfaring to God, intangleth himself
with worldly affairs, that he may please him unto whom he approoueth him
self. Which thing the Bishops and our Predecessors, upon religious
consideration and wholesome provision, have thought good, that no man departing
out of this life, should nominate a Clearke to any wardship, or oversight of
any pupils. Here again we see the counsel, having respect unto the custom
of former ages, and times past, apply the very same place of scripture,
against the offices mentioned in this Chapter, and vouch it in plea, as a
bar against those offices in a minister, which notwithstanding in their own
natures are necessary and very holy, and whereunto many excellent privileges
and immunities be attributed: the cause of a Testament by law, being placed
in the raunge and number of holy and Godly causes. And we know by experience,
that the wyser a man is, and the more care he has of his posterities well
doing, the more provident and circumspect he is at the time of his decease, to
leave the tuitio^ of his infantes, and disposition of their goods, to men best
known to him, to be of greatest piety and sincerest religion, such as Bishops
have been accounted. Neither are these offices only thus forbidden by Canon
law, the Popes law, but also by Provincial constitutions of England made
heretofore, by the B. themselves in England, at the commandment of the
Kings of England.

Lyndw. ne clerici vel monac. c. vlt.
PRESENTI DECRETO etc. We ordeyne by this present decree, that Clearkes
beneficed, or placed in holy orders, be neither admitted gouerners of
Villadges, as to be Stewards or Bayliffes, of such administrations, by occasion
whereof they might be liable to make accounts unto lay men; neither yet that
they exercise any secular jurisdiction, specially those, whereunto judgment
of blood is annexed. And from these decrees I conclude thus. 1 Whosoever ought
to attend upon the alter, and to give him self to prayer and making of
supplication, ought not by any testament, to be made a Tutor or Guardian. 2
But every one honored with the holy priesthood, and placed in the ministry of
Clearkes, ought to attend upon the Alter, and apply him self to prayer and
making of supplication: 3 Therefore none honored, etc. and placed, etc. ought
by any testament to be made a Tutor or Guardian.
1 Whosoever is governor of any Village, Steward, or Bayliffe of any liberty
or bayliwicke, is by virtue of his office accountable to the laytie. 2 But no
Clearke beneficed, or otherwise placed in holy orders, by occasion of temporal
officers ought to be accountable to lay men: 3 Therefore noe Clearke
beneficed, or any other placed in holy orders, ought to be any Governor,
Steward or Bayliffe.


THE like constitution was made by Octobone, sometimes Legate from the Popes
side here in England, and specially publyshed against the excess of our
English Clergy in this behalf.

Constitu. October. ne clerici. iuris. secular: exerceant.
CVM HONESTATIS, etc. Insomuch as it is reputed a special decency of
ecclesiastical honesty, to be far estranged from carnal actions, we deem it
a very heinous and filthy thing, that hands deputed unto heavenly ministeries,
should be entangled with secular affairs. Or that certain Clearkes, seeking
after earthly gains, and temporal jurisdiction, through a foul and greedy
rauine, do receive from lay men seculer jurisdiction, and be called Iusticers,
and minister justice, which they cannot minister, without a dissipation and
injury, of ecclesiastical order. Therefore, we desirous, to extirpate this
horrible vice, straightly forbid all persons of churches, and Vicars, with
perpetuities: yea also, all other manner of persons whatsoever, placed in the
ministry, that they presume not to take any secular jurisdiction of any
secular person, or to exercise the same, according to the precepts of holy
Canons: by this present Constitution, we straightly inhibite, that none placed
in spiritual warfare, presume to exercise in the secular court, the office of
an advocate, either in the cause of blood, or in any cause whatsouer, save
only in such causes, as are permitted unto him by Law. And we likewise forbid,
that any clergy man should presume, to be either a judge, or an assessor.
Which constitution of Octobone, as it seems in some sense, and in some
respect, to exempt clergy men altogether from the power and sovereignty of
Kings and princes, denying them indeed, power over the Clergy, and so in this
sense be contrary and repugnant to her highness Crown, and prerogative
royal, and therefore not authorized by act of Parliament, (though in the end
the same Legate seem to allow the Kings privileges, adding these words,
Saluis domini Regis priuilegiis, Saving the privilege of my Lord the King: So
in another respect, and in another sense, if regard be had to the general
equitye of the inhibition, we shall find the same to agree altogether with the
reasons of the former provisions. For in this constitution the Legate allegeth
other reasons, then before were alleged: and forbids other offices, then by
the former were forbidden. The reasons may be gathered thus. 1 Whatsoever is
injurious unto the ministerye, or breeds a dissipation of the ministerye, the
same may not be lawfully laid upon the ministry: 2 But to be deputed a
minister of justice, to be made an advocate, a Judge, or an assessor, is
injurious to the ministerye, and breeds a dissipation thereof: 3 Therefore
these offices, may not be deputed unto them.
1 Whatsoever may be cause that the clergy by any foul fault should swerve
from the works of faith, the same may not lawfully be laid upon the clergy.
2 But to be made a Justice, an advocate, a judge, an assessor in seculer
Courts, may be cause that the Cleargye should swerve from the works of faith:
3 Therefore Cleargye men lawfully may not be made Justices, advocates, Judges
or assessors in seculer courts.


WHich two reasons of this provincial decree, may probably seem to have
been collected, out of some more ancient Canons long before that time
established, whereby the like offices were forbidden, and principally for these
causes following. 21. q 3. peruenit. Gloss. non exerceant. Extra. de vit. and
honest. cler. c. clerici consecratio distinc. 5. c.
First that for filthy lucres sake, they meddle not with taking to hire
possessions, and seculer causes: Secondly that thorough sloth and idleness,
they separate not themselves from the holy ministeries. Thirdly, that they
run not a gadding to the Courts of seculer princes: And lastly, because the
Psalter, should never be out of their hands. And not only upon these grounds
have these Laws at the first had their essence and establishment, but sundry
other considerations as forceable as these, are apparently known, to the
learned in the laws, for the overthrow of civil Jurisdiction in ecclesiastical
men. In the administration of civil Justice, every one in commission of peace,
without respect, either of the person, or of the cause, ought indifferenly and
impartially to execute his office. For be a man once sworn in commission of
peace, he may not afterward deal with hearing of what causes he list: he may
not take notice of halfepeny matters, and post over matters of blood, to his
fellow justice: he may not only set an end, between neighbor and
neighbor, for shrewde words passed, but he must prosecute the murderer to
death: he must take his examination, and he must send him with a Mittimus to
the Iaile. He must at the general Sessions of gayle delivery, certify the
murderers confession. Now because it is a matter very heinous by the
ecclesiastical law in force, that any ecclesiastical person, should be
present in any place, where any sentence is given for the sheading of blood,
much less to be a minister of Justice, in a cause of blood: Therefore civil
jurisdiction for this cause also is forbidden ecclesiastical men. And among
many constitutions, I have thought good to recite only these that follow.

Extra. ne cleric. vel mon. c. clericis.
CLERICIS IN SACRIS ORDINIBVS. etc. It is not lawful by the Council of
Toletane for Clearkes placed in holy orders to handle judgment of blood:
Wherefore we prohibit that they by them selves, neither chop of any members or
cause any to be chepped off. For if any shall do such a thing, let him be
deprived of his honor, and of his place. And again

Extra. ne cleric. vel monac. c. sententiam. A Bishop may not be a justice of
peace in cause of blood.
SENTENTIAM etc. Let no Clearke indite or pronounce a sentence of blood,
neither let him put in execution any sentence of Blood, or be present where
it is exercised. Neither let any clearke indite or write Letters, to be
destined for the auengement of blood. Therefore in the courts of princes, let
not this care be committed to Clearkes, but to lay men.

And again, Extra. de exces. prelat. c. extra.
EPISCOPVS, cuius authoritate etc. Abishop, by whose authority manslaughter is
committed, is deposed from the ministry of the Alter, and from his pontifical
office, and from the administration of his Bishopric: A Bishop either
directly or indirectly, giving cause that manslaughter be committed, the same
being committed, ought to be deprived from his Byshoply and Priestly office,
and to be removed from the administration of his Bishopric. And that this
Chapter may not seem (says the Gloss) to be understood of manslaughter or
murder unjustly committed, or perpetrated, these words are added in the Text,
Quia propter furtum, quidam fur suspensus erat: Because for theft a certain
thief was hanged. In the time of Henry the second, I find that the said
King, gave certain Privileges, and immunities unto the clergy, the Tenor of
which grant ensues. Math. Pari. H. 2. fol. 185.
ARCHIEPISCOPI, EPISCOPI, etc. The Archbishops, Bishops, and all persons of the
kingdom, which hold of the King in chief, let them have their possessions of
the King, as a barony and thereof let them answer to the Kings Iusticers and
Ministers, and let them follow, and do all the Kings customs, and as other
Baronnies, so shall they be present in judgments of the Kings Court, with the
Baronnes, until the matter come to the loss of member, or to death. By which
privilege granted unto the clergy (as I suppose) our Bishops at this day
have their seats in the Star Chamber, and are Lords of the Parliament
house. For before the grant made by this King, it does not appear they had
any such privileges; the words of the king not ratifiyng or confirming any
former grant made by his ancestors, and predecessors, Kings of England, as
in all gifts of confirmation usually is done, but gratifiyng his Clergy, and
other of his subjects, by giving them new liberties, and franchises, whereof
before his time they were not possessed: for in the grant there is no
repetition, or mention of an Inspeximus: we have seen, the charters of our
father, grandfather or great grandfather: but here is a mere and absolute
grant, derived principallye from the kings own person. H. 2.
Whereby I gather, that these offices in Clergy men, have not been of any long
continuance in England, and that by the ancient laws, and customs of England,
they do not properly belong unto them: only the King by his prerogative,
having power to make Barons, at his royal pleasure, and to appoint Judges in
his Courts at his gracious will, has by the same his Prerogative, granted
unto the Clergy, that which before time, by the common laws of his Empire, did
not appertayn unto them, and that therefore, as the common weal was governed,
justice ministered, and laws executed in the Kings Courts, by the Barons,
before the time of this grant, by H. 2. without the aid, and assistaunce of
Cleargye men, even so might the common weal at this day, be as well governed
by the like government, without any help from any of them; as in deed and
truth, the same in matters of pollicye and great state, these 24. years has
been wonderfully governed without them. For which of the Clergy men, since the
Lord sealed up the eyes of Queen Mary, has once set his foot within the
Council Chamber door, to consult with the Nobility of matters of state? Which
of them, has carried any sway, or borne any stroke in the Star Chamber,
otherwise then as the punie Baron there has done? And if Archbish. and Bysh.
may be spared in the Parliament house: yea, may not come into that assembly at
all, whenever any statute is to be made, touching felony, or treason, or the
loss of any member, or sheading of any bloud^ I see not but they may as well
be spared in matters of possessions, and inheritaunces, and in other matters of
state and policy whatsoever, and so much more rather in these then in the
former, by how much more the life of man, is more precious, then all other
earthly possessions or treasures: And by how much more, the taking away of the
life of an innocent, is more odible, and heynons before the Lord, in case it
be not done according to his word. In which matters, the divines are fittest
to be consulted with, and whose counsels, are not to be omitted, least life
be taken away, where it is forbidden, or death take no place, where it is
commanded. But be it so, that our B. may pretend their jurisdiction, in civil
causes to be more ancient, then from the time of K. H. the second: yea, be
it, that they may derive the same, from Edgar or Canutus, before the conquest:
yet, because Canutus ordained that the B. of the Diocese should be present at
the Courts of every shire, only to teach the people Gods Law, as Edgar
before him had appointed, the Shirife to be present, at the assemblies, and
Synodes holden by the Clergy, twice a year, only to teach the same clergy
man's Law, namely, the law of the Realm: They are not to boast of Antiquity
for their jurisdiction in causes civil. They have been appointed long
sithence to meet in deed in Civil Courts, but only to exercise the
spiritual sword. But were it so that by the Laws of Edgar, and Canutus, they
might seem to challendge, great regalities, dignities, and immunities: yet
they know, that by the Laws of the first King and last King, of the most
noble, most highest, and most holiest king, the king of al Kings, our Lord
Jesus Christ, whose vassalls in word they profess themselves to be; they
have no such enfranchiseme^ts granted unto them; yea, rather that they be
precisely willed being ministers of the gospel, not to be called Lords, or to
be deuiders of inheritaunces. But we will go forward. For not only the
decrees and ordinances before mentioned, against seculer jurisdiction, and
civil offices in Ecclesiastical men, have been made, and published by the B.
of Rome, and his Legates or Messengers, for the regiment of his Clergy, a
kind of people (as he says) only to be governed by such positive laws, as
proceed from his breast: Civil government, forbidden by the civil law to
ecclesiastical men.
But the Emperor also, by the Laws of his Empire, has directlye and
absolutely, commanded the same.

ALIVM AVTEM FIERI. etc. But we suffer not a Bishop or an elder in his own
name, or in the name of his Church, or ministry, to be made a receiver, or
gatherer of charges, belonging to the treasury, or to take to him either
public or other men's possessions, or to be a steward of an house, or proctor
in any cause of controversy, or yet to become a suerty in any such causes, that
by this occasion both no hurt be wrought against the churches, and that the
ministeries be not hindered.

By which Law, the Emperor we see, using the authority of an Emperor, and
exercising his imperial power over the Clergy, within his dominions; and
regarding the peace and quietness of the Church, and to keep the Clergy, as
well as the residue of his people, in due obedience of his Laws, and within
the compass of their calling: has established these his own laws, for them,
his own subjects, to be ruled, and governed by. Neither staieth he him self
in the prohibition of these offices alone, but proceeds further and further
with the like. De epis. and cler. Auth. presbiteros.
EPISCOPOS autem velmonachos tutelam alicuius personae subire non permittimus.
And as touching Bishops or Monckes, we suffer them not to take on them, the
oversight of any Orphane. And again, the Emperor Iustine, writing to Archelaus
the chief of the pretory commanded thus.

Cod. de epist. and cler. l. repentita.
REPETITA PROMVLGATIONE, non solum iudices quorum libet etc. We repeating our
Proclamations, think it good, not only that the judges of every tribunal or
judgment seat, but that the governors of the churches of this excellent City
amongst whom this most filthy kind of proouing dead men's wills have crept in,
before warned that they meddle not with a thing, which by the disposition of
our Laws, appertain not in any wise to any other, then only to the Master of
our revenues. For it is absurd: yea, rather an ignominy for Clergy men, to
show themselves cunning of common Pleadings: And the trangressors of this
ordinance, we deem shall be punished, with the loss of fifty pounds of
Gould. The reason of which constitution may be drawn from another Law of the
Emperor, wherein is prohibited the self same thing.

QVI SVB. etc. We think that the deceit of these men, ought to be met with:
who, under a pretense of being Deans or collegiat men, when they perform no
such duty, endeavor by reason of other chardges, to withdraw themselves, that
none under color of some one office, which he does not execute, might be
eased, of the weight and burden of an office, which by duty he should execute.
And again, the same Emperor says. Cod. de testa l. co^sulta diualia. Cod. de
dona. l. in hac. and l. secundu^ diui. ff. de decurio l. seuerus. ff. de iure
immunit l. semper.. sina.
ABSVRDVM EST. etc. It is against all rhyme or reason, that offices should be
mingled together without order or consideration, and that one man should catch
a thing, committed to the credit of another man. And therefore in another
Law, we find it written thus. Non est dubitandum, quin nauicularii non debent
decuriones creari: quia vtrumque officium gerere non possunt. It is out of all
doubt, that Shipmasters cannot be made Senators, or captains, because they
cannot exercise both offices. Again, the Emperor still respecting the equity
and reason of his former sentences and judgments, says thus. PLACET nostrae
clementiae vt nihil commune clerici, cum publicis actionibus vel ad curiam
pertinentibus, cuius corpori non sunt annexi, habeant. It is our gracious
pleasure, that clergy men have no communion, with public functions or
belonging to the court, unto whose body they are not incorporated. And by this
law says the Gloss, clergy men can not be judges, advocates, or proctors, in
secular causes.

And will you know then says the same gloss, by what means Clergy men, have
gotten into their hands, approbations of wills and Testamentes? Glos. ibidem
ver. co^petit.
Quia modicum lucrum pro hiis dabatur, clerici cupidi hoc sibi vsurpabant.
Because a little gain was given for them, covetous clergy men have usurped
them. l. hiis quidem. Cod. qui milit. non pos. lib. 12. l. 1. ff de colleg.
illicit.
Pride, ambition, covetousness, and usurpation, the beginning of civil
jurisdiction in Clergy men. By the order and discipline of war, it is
unlawful for one soldier to take the pay and wages, allowed for two
soldiers. In societies of Cities and Towns corporate, and other houses of
companies and fellowships, it is not lawful for one to be governor over two
companies of diverse crafts and mysteries.

And again. Cod. de prox. sacro. scrut. lib. 12. l. hac part in fi. Cod. de
assesso. l. fi.
NVLLO MODO, etc. Let them not in any wise take unto them double offices, or be
written or enrolled in two regesters, heaping by that means upon one man,
many commodities, and leaving nothing for the residue. Because Qui ad vtrumque
festinat, neutrum been perag^t. He that hasteneth unto two things at once, can
perform neither of them rightly, according to these prouerbiall verses. Qui
binos lepores, vna sectabitur hora;
Vno quandoque, quandoque carebit vtroque
He that in one instant
a brace of hares will trayle:
Shall loose the one sometimes:
sometimes them both shall fail.


The reason why Bishops and Archdeacons, exempt and disburthen them selves from
general hearing and determining causes of instance, and judgment of law,
committing the same unto their Commissaries, and officials, Doctors of the
civil law: I suppose to be, either for that them selves being ignorant of
the law, are desirous to have justice, ministered by men skillful of the law, or
else, that they having dispatched them selves of all outward care, touching the
outward man, might be wholly dedicated to the trymming and decking of the
inner man, not only touching them selves but others also committed to their
charge. And if they for these respects, and to avoid ignominy and reproach
shun the execution of law, properly (as they say) and altogether belonging
unto them: what reason can they pretend, to take upon them the execution of
the laws of this Realm, no whit pertinent to their callinges, and whereof by
all reason they are like to be more unskillful, then of their own Canons and
constitutions? By which Canons they are not only forbidden as before, to
exercise any Civil jurisdiction for other men, but also though the same
concern their own servants.

Extr. ne cler. vel monac. c. fi. lib. 6.
QVOD SI EPISCOPVS, etc. If any Bishop have any temporal jurisdiction, he
ought to commit the same to some lay man, that he may take punishment of all
malefactors. Now if a bishop may not exercise his own temporal jurisdiction,
descending unto him by lawful inheritance, or otherwise belonging unto him
over his own Tenants, within his own franchisementes and liberties, in his
own person, but ought to depute the same to an other; how much less may he
lawfully exercise the Civil jurisdiction of an other man.

Again. 88. distinc: c. epis. and conc. glos. lib. 6. de regu. iur. c. potest
quis.
EPISCOPVS TVITIONEM, etc. A bishop ought not to take upon him self, the
defense, government, and charge of Widows and Orphans, and strangers, but he
ought to dispatch these businesses, by some other chief Elder, or chief
Deacon. But contrary to these Canons, laws, and principles, our Prelates not
having so ruly, and stayed a will as were requisite, make a hotche potche, of
the Clergy and layetie, a gally maufrey of magistracy and Ministry, and a
mingle mangle of Pastors, and people: They turn cat in the pan (as we say)
and maintain the tumbling of the office of a Minister, upon one of the
people, and the office of one of the people upon the minister, so that by this
their iumbling of offices together, there can be nothing but confusion and
disorder, as well in their government, as in their judgment. Bishops
government in ecclesiastical causes being ^uill, that argues the same in civil
causes not to be good.
For my part, if I as well knew their government in civil causes, where they
may be in commission, might hereafter be good, as I am sure their judgment in
Ecclesiastical policy: has hitherto been naught: I would wish them,
rather to be Magistrates in the common weal, then superintendentes in the
Church. But because it may easily be coniectured, by the fact of the one, what
the effect of the other would be; it is to be wished, that they still were
barred from the first, having so shamefully abused the latter. For besides the
manifest contempt and abuse of all laws positive, in force committed to their
fidelities, whereof in the former treatizes, mention has been made; if a man
shall peruse their aduertisementes, and their Canons set forth for due order
in the public administration of Common prayer, and concerning certain
offices of the Church, and certain duties belonging to those officers: he
shall find, they have bestowed but little labor in making them, and less
fidelity in executing them. For the aduertisementes, besides the preface, the
whole Treatise is not five leaves and a half of Paper with the subscription of
their names and all. In which five leaves, their is not any one thing
mentioned and commanded to be done, but the same was either commanded by her
majesty's Injunctions in the first year of her highness reign, and therefore
needless to be repeated again: Or else is translated out of some latin Canon,
and so made an english article, (half an hours study for a bishops
Chappleine): Title. Articles for administratio^s of prayer and sacraments.
Or else is directly against her majesty's Injunctions, and therefore sauoreth
of supremacy: Or else is superstitious, and therefore smells of Popery: And
so contrary to the commandment of the Lord. Her majesty by her injunctions
commands every Deane, Archdeacon, Parson and Vicar, to preach in every of
his cures by him self every month. 43. Iniunction.
And because none should be excused, as unable in this behalf, she has
commanded the bishops, that none utterly unlearned be admitted to any cure or
spiritual charge: and she by her singular and excellent wisdom, accounts
him utterly unlearned, that could only read to say mattens or Mass: but by
the aduertisements and Canons, the bishops pronounce it sufficient, that a
Parson or Vicar preach once a quarter, and that not by him self, but by an
other, and that one utterly unlearned (even as by her wisdom an unlearned man
has been adjudged) be admitted to the ministry, and afterward sent to the
Archdeacon, or his official to school, and to conne his taskes of scripture,
and to learn his Catechism.

Again. Her majesty has commanded every one to preach within his own cure
without a license: they command that none preach within his own cure except
he have a license under the bishops seal. The article, that the minister shall
wear a cope with Gospeller and pisteler agreeably, smells rank of
superstition, and as far as I can find both against her highness Injunctions,
and besides the book of Common prayer. The book of the bishops Canons is of
somewhat a larger volume, it contains 14. leaves, you must consider, the
whole convocation had an oar in that Boat, it entreats of Bishops, of
Deanes, of churches: of Archdeacons: of Chauncellors, Commissaries and
Officials, of church wardens: of Preachers: of residence: of Pluralities, of
schoolemaisters, and of Patrons of benefices. In the description of which
offices, as it is manifest, they had but little regard to the word of God, so
is it apparaunt also to every one learned in the Canon law, that for the most
part they are translated thence, here a piece and there a piece, and all not
worth their labor, because, if it be not against the laws of the Realm, or
prejudicial to her highness prerogative, then is the same already confirmed by
act of Parliament 25. Henry the 8. 25. Henry 8. c. 19.
and if there be any thing in their said Canons, which is not thus translated
out of the Canon law, whatsoever the same is, if it be good, then was the very
same established before by her highness Injunctions. For, as touching the
erectio^ of new offices belonging to an Archdeacon, and the Bishops
Commissaries and officials, in teaching the ministers their Catechism, and
hearing them say their lessons without book, and to take an account how they
have profited in Scripture, I think if the prerogative of the convocation
house were well searched and made known, it might not erect any new office, or
promulgate any new Canon, without her majesty's special consent first had and
obtained thereunto. And I am sure, that neither by law, neither by custom,
this office did ever belong to an Archdeacon, or his official, before the
book of these Canons was published. Book of Canons and title of bishops.
Touching the not making handy crafts men, and such as have no title to live
by, to be ministers, and the not making any minister at any other time, but
when it shall chance that some place of ministration is void, and that none
be suffered to be occupied in the administration of the Church, that is called
by the idle name of a Reader: Title residence.
Or that is made a minister, under the age of four and twenty years, or
understands not the Latin tongue, having no gifts of teaching, or the
absence of the sheephearde from the Lords flock and diverse other things,
specified in the Bishops Canons. If the translator had not been more faithful
in his translation, then the Bish. in the execution, a mere English man,
should never have known any such thing to have been written in the Latin
Law: And therefore because NEMO negligens in re sua, presumitur diligens in re
aliena. No man negligent in his own cause, can be presumed to become diligent
in an other man's: I can gather no otherwise, then that there has but little
good, grown to the Common weal hitherto, by the bishops and Clergy men, in
the Administration of Civil justice. And that therefore such as have written,
or spoken, or preached against Civil jurisdiction, in the Eclesiasticall
state, have done it for two urgent and weighty considerations: Friends of
reformation friends of the queens majesty's prerogative.
First not to encounter her majesty's prerogative, (as it is falsely supposed)
but to teach their Lord and masters truth. They have not done it in
disobedience to her crown, but in obedience to their God: They know it is
better to obey God then men, and therefore they have labored faithfully by the
word of God, to persuade her majesty, and the estates of the Realm, that
these offices ought not by the Law of God to be resiaunt in one person, and
therefore has exhorted her majesty and them, in the name and fear of God, to
use her prerogative, and their authorities to the seuering of them. Secondly
they have preferred the general welfare and commodity of the common weal,
before the unlawful honors and promotions of private men. They know by
learning and have proved by experience what detriment may ensue to the Common
weal, when offices are committed to men ignorant of such duties as belong
unto their charge. A man that has spent all the days of his life, in the
study of Grammar or Oratorie, and has always taught the same, were a very
unfit man at the age of threeschore years, to be made a public Keader in
Physic or Law, and yet notwithstanding to remain a Schoolemaister still.
Expedit reipublicae vt quisque officio suo fungatur. It is expedient for the
Common weal, that every one execute his own office. And I am of opinion that
the friends of reformation, are greater friends and mayntainers, to and of
her highness prerogative then the others be. For they ascribe unto her
majesty, indeed, truth, and verity, that which the others do but in word,
show, and semblaunce only: They earnestly desire and crave, that as her
highness has been anointed and Crowned, by the Lord him self, Queen and
gouernesse over them: and as she is their natural and only lawful Lady and
Mistress: and as she has the name title and style of supreme and chief
ruler over all persons, and in all causes: So likewise the causes now accounted
Ecclesiastical, being mere Civil, she might in deed, truth, and verity,
have all and all manner of jurisdiction executed in her majesty's own name, as
well in Courts and judgments now reputed Ecclesiastical, as in other her
majesty's Courts temporal, whereby her Civil government might be more
enlarged. Which thing the abettours of reformation perceive now to be
otherwise. Forall summons, acts, proceedinges, sentences, decrees, and
judgments in all causes and controversies determinable, before Archbishops,
Bishops, and Archdeacons, are begun, continued and ended, in the Archbishops,
bishops, Archdeacons, their Commissaries or Officials, names, styles and
dignities, without any relation or mention of authority given unto them, as
proceeding from her majesty, then the which there can not seem any thing
more prejudicial, to her state, Crown and dignity. For be it that they be
created Archbishops and Bishops, by her highness, and invested into their seas
at her Graces commandment: yet this argues no greater prerogative belonging
unto her majesty over them, then such as she has over her other subjects,
whom she creates Barons, or dubbeth knights. But as concerning common and
ordinary jurisdiction, in causes reputed Ecclesiastical, they have no letters
patentes from her majesty, conuaying unto themas from her royal person, any
power over her subjects, to hear and determine their causes in her highness
name, and under her government: Only they execute such jurisdiction, as by
popish constitutions, or popish customs, has been heretofore annexed to
their Archbishopprickes, bishopprickes, and Archdeaconries, and that by an
utter enemy to her royal person, state and government. B. L. to his colleague
Comissioners.
In so much that some of them by Letters has signified unto their Colleague
Commissioners, that common and ordinary authority in causes ecclesiastical
chiefly, and almost only belong to them selves, and their officers: And that
commissions from her majesty for reformation in matters ecclesiastical,
grant only an extraordinary authority. And that therefore the said
Commissioners have not to hear matters of instance, and such as require
judgment of law, for that such causes belong only to them selves and their
officers, whereby they have insinuated her majesty, to have no common or
ordinary authority in causes ecclesiastical, as they them selves have.
Whereas all other courts within her highness Empire, as leetes, courts Baron,
courts of regard, courts of Forrestes. (I leave to speak of her highness
own Courts at Westminster) all liberties and franchises, all parkes and free
warrens, belonging to any of the Nobility, Gentry, or any City or borow of
this Realm, have ever had their beginninges and establishmentes, by the
gracious favor of the Kings of this Realm, as from whose prerogative, such
dignities and immunities ought franckly to proceed, and by whom only they have
been granted: Only our Church governors challenge not their authority, as
from her sacred seat of justice and princely throone, but they challenge their
authority as a power belonging to their own seats, derived from an usurped
and foreign power. 17. page ^. 28. Henry c. 16.
The statute made, that every Archbishop and bishop of this realm, and of
other the kings dominions may minister, use, and exercise all and every thing,
and things, pertaining to the office or order of an Archbishop and bishop,
with all tokens, ensigns, and ceremonies thereunto belonging, and that all
Archdeacons, and Deanes, and other having offices, cures, and dignities
spiritual, may by authority of this act, and not by virtue of any foreign
power, or authority, administer, use, and exercise, all things appertaining to
their dignities, offices, orders, cures, religions, felowships, and may
lawfully hereafter use, all tokens, ensigns and ceremonies, which they have
been accustomed to use in times past, so it be not expressly, against the laws
of God, and this Realm: This statute I say, having been the rule of our
Archbishops and bishops consciences, for their gracinges, there Lordinges,
there vsheringes, their kneelinges, there tastinges, their cupbearinges, and
such like, improoueth no whit any part of the force of the former assertions:
but rather confirms, and fortifieth the same. First the statute having
relation only to tokens, ensigns, and ceremonies accustomably administered,
used, and exercised before the making of the statute; all which being
Antichristian, and therefore expreslye against the laws of God, are plainly
by this statute abrogated, and therefore ought no more to be administered, used
or exercised. For though the King, the peers, and commons at that time, not
instructed in the unlawfulness of them, did not hold and repute them to be
against the laws of God, and therefore did not specially abridge any
particular rites, ensigns, and ceremonies, etc. yet now for as much as we are
certaynely infourmed, that they be altogether Antichristian, and therefore
expressly against the word of God, we may and ought to urge the general
intendement of the statute, generally to take them away. Secondly, were not
the foresaid popish rites, ensigns, and ceremonies, Antichristian, and
expressly against the laws of GOD, and therefore by this branch of the
statute might be ministered, used and exercised; yet notwithstanding, it is
manifest that the said rites, ensigns, and ceremonies, have not been
appointed by the prerogative of any of the Kings of this Realm, but have
been transferred from Italye unto England, by a foreign and usurped power, and
therefore by the second branch of the statute, as things authorized
contrary to the Laws of the Realm, are not any more to be used, or
exercised. In the time of King Henry the second, we have seen before, that
this privilege was granted to Archbishops and Bishops, that they should
hold their possessions of the King, as a Baronie, and should be present in
the Kings courts, as other of his Barons. If in these days they did sit
them selves in their own Consistories, and exercise government by the like
authority, their Courts happily would not be so contemptible as they be,
nor their judgment seats, so abused as they are. The people would be better
quyeted in those places: and offer less injury to the magistrate, then now
they do. And therefore I conclude, that though her highness and the laws
indirectly, and as it were alatere, tolerate these men to rule and govern,
according to those foreign laws, whereof they have the execution: yet the
more faithful and loyal every subject is, the more he should and does
contend, to have the whole and entyre government of the Church and Common
weal, directly, immediately, and absolutely to spring from her highness, as
from the head and fountain under Christ, of all government to be executed
amongst her subjects. In doing whereof, they shall dutifully and Christianly
more and more mayntaine her prerogative. The Emperor forbidding
Ecclesiastical men, to usurp Civil offices, lost no whit of his imperial
prerogative over the subjects, yea rather, hereby he openly declared the
magnificence of his Empire, and the absolute authority he had over them: and
that as well by forbidding things not to be done, as by commanding things to
be done. Enemies of reformation enemies unto her majesty's prerogative.
For though he spoiled them of unlawful preeminences, yet he enriched them
with lawful liberties, I know not the inward intent and meaning of such as
mislike to have civil government translated from Archbish. Bish. and
Archdeacons unto the civil magistrate. But if I may speak that which may
shrewdly be suspected, they may seem to be greater enemies to her highness
prerogative then others be. For though outwardly in words they seem to grant
unto her all liberty in the disposition of civil offices (whereunto the others
do likewise agree and condiscende): yet they seem in deed to be loath she
should draw the sword of her prerogative, and cut a sunder the coards of
their co^sistories. They grant her authority to make them selves justices of
peace, and ecclesiastical commissioners, and so wage law for her prerogative.
An easy matter for them to stand in, and plausible to flesh and blood: their
outward man delights with outward pomp and credit. But suppose the case
stood between the Archb. Bish. and Archd. and her majesty for her prerogative
in abolishing their jurisdiction, and tra^slating the same to others; and that
the matter were to be decided by the gretest part of their own voices, and that
their voices were to be given in scrutiny, and not any ways to be known who
had given his voice, with or against her prerogative in this case (I fear me)
rather then their Lordeshippes should take the foil, they would lay her
prerogative in the dust: self love would have a struck, and flesh and blood
would be loath to loose any liberty. The history of Henry the fifth, and the
Oration of Henry Chychuby, Archbishop of Caunterbury, made in the Parliament
house, to alienate the Kings mind, and to dissuade his Nobles, from the
enterprise whereof he and they had consulted, touching the overthrow of
irreligious houses, and to draw their endeavors to make war, and to leauie an
army against the French king, might be a forcible argument to any, to
persuade him self the same thing in this case, though he had no other reason
to induce him thereunto. But the uncivil entreaty of her highness own
scholars elected by her gracious commaundemement from Westminster to her own
Colleges in Cambridge and Oxenforde, even by such as would seem in words to
set up mighty propes under her prerogative, argues manifestlye the same
thing. For otherwise her majesty's scholars in all respects as well qualified
as their own, and always elected half a year before their own, might once
in the space of twenty four years, though not for their own sakes, yet for
their honorable Lady and mistress sake, have received some more favorable
intertainment and preferment in those houses then hitherto they have done. The
masters of those houses would not have placed them next unto the screene, and
set them next unto the Porters lodge as by elections unto fellowships in the
one, and schoolerships in the other, they a long time have done. Whereas on
the contrary side it is apparently known, that sometimes the Dean of Christ
church in Oxenford, a great friend to reformation, and a man for his excellent
knowledge and wisdom in government, singularly commended even by his enemies,
in these small matters gave an apparent and rare example of his humble duty
and loyalty unto her highness. For the reverent estimation he had, and carried
of and unto her highness ordinance and institution, he placed a scholar sent
thither by her majesty's appointment, first and senior unto all those that
were elected into the house at that time: he him self brought the same her
scholar to his chamber, and placed him in a Chamber and study commonly
appointed for the ancients of the house: all his own scholars were inferior
unto hirs, and placed beneath hirs. Since the departure of which man, if the
Audite or butterie books of that house were sought, you shall find her
scholars names, written always in the latter end of the book, the last of
forty, and placed after his scholar, whom her highness but the day before,
had preferred to be a Deane or prebendary in that house. The Deanes scholars
they go and sit, and are placed foremost: the prebendaries in the midst, and
hirs hindermost: and if they were to go a procession, as in the time of popery,
hirs must go foremost, as unworthiest to go next to the cross. And because her
majesty sometimes by her letters heretofore requested the Deane and chapter,
to receive into her College such as she thought meet to be placed: Now
forsooth, to prevent her bountifulnes, and to take away all occasion from
others to seek preferment in that house at her majesty's hands, they of late
have invented a new device, and practiced a new trick, where they were by the
order, and foundation of the house, bound yearly to make elections of such
scholars as might presently at the time of the election be placed in the
vacant rooms, they now either at one time choose a greater number of scholars
for them selves, then are places vacant and so make but one election in two
years, or else so soon as any place by the departure of any schooler is void,
they forthwith in the name of the Deane or some Prebendarie chop an other in
his room: by means whereof either her majesty's letters are delayed unto the
end of two years, or else remain altogether frustrated, so kind hearted
these no Precisians, and these no Puritanes have been, and so thankful they
have showed them selves for their maisterships, Deanries and Prebendaries
received at her majesty's hands, by her gracious bounty and liberallitie. And
therefore since they strive so egerly for such tryfles, and use such foul
shifts, to shut her out of doors, and make her scholars packehorses, and set
them at the Carts tail, in her own Colleges: I think a man may guess
twice, and yet not guess so nigh, as to guess that Clergy men, enemies to
reformation, rather then they would loose their dignities, would, if it lay
in their power, give her Highness prerogative the Canuysadoe. They allow her
majesty a royal power to shred green Olyue branches, but to root up old
rotten dotterelles, they deny her any such authority: they can be contented
her majesty should strippe poor men clothed with sackecloath; but mighty
men decked in scarelet she may not touch, or once look awrye upon. No cause
of the name of ecclesiastical court.
Concerning the Courts and judgment seats of Archbishops, bishops, and
Archdeacons hitherto reputed and called Ecclesiastical Courts, I can see no
reason in the world, why they should be any more so esteemed, taken or
reputed, or why any matter, or cause, or suite, or controversy commenced in
those places, should or ought to be called or counted Ecclesiastical. For
though in times past, I mean in time of popery, they might probably and
coullorably be so called, either for that Clergy men alone were Judges, and
exercised judgment in them: either for that such parties as between whom
suites did depend, were for the most part mere church men: either for that all
peticions, and actions made, and begun in those Courts, were for such
matters and causes, as whereof church men, only by usurpation, challenged unto
them selves the decision, and determination: yet now so it is, that all these
reasons fail and are of no force. For with us at this day, though Archbishops,
bishops, and Archdeacons, be Clergy men, and chief amongst the
ecclesiastical seat: yet notwithstanding Doctors of the Civil law, mere
lay men (as they call them) and no whit beneficed, by privilege of Clergy,
exercise all jurisdiction reputed Ecclesiastical in their consistories, and by
the ordinances of the Realm, are made competent and lawful Judges in these
Courts. 25 Henrici. octui.
Where one suite now depends, or these many years has depended in the same
Courts between Clergy men alone, one hundredth almost are and has been
depending between lay men alone: the causes them selves are all for the most
part mere Civil, and belong only to the Civil court. Approbations and
insinuations of Wills and Testamentes by express words, (as you have heard
out of the Civil law), are absolutely prohibited unto Bishops, and all other
Clergy men: And so consequently (for that, Appendices sequuntur principalis
subiecti naturam) Accessories follow the nature of the principal subject. All
causes of Legacies, Bequestes, Accountes, Inuentaries, Commissions of Orphans
gooddes, and whatsoever else may be incident to any of those causes, are
utterly forbidden. Causes of wrongful and injurious slanders, infamous
Libels, and contumelious crimes, causes of contractes and marriages, causes of
dowry and divorce, causes of filiation and legitimation of children, matters
of Usury, and whatsoever appertains to the decision of these causes, are
causes mere civil, and pertain to the civil magistrate: and therefore
sithence Archbish. Bish. and Archdea. to disburthen them selves, may lawfullye
commit the hearing of these causes from them selves, yea and very seldom or
not at all, execute their jurisdictions by them selves, but continually and
effectually do surrogate and depute Doctors, or Bachelors of the Civil law.
What injury to their persons, or alteration of the state and government can it
be, in case her majesty by her prerotiue, did commit the same causes unto the
same men, and make the bishops men, her men, and their commissaries, her
presidentes? Touching matters of tith it is lawful for the chief Justice of
the kings bench, where any usage or custom by any party is pretended, to pay
less then the whole tith, as suppose the twenteth or forteth part of his
tithes: Yea in some cases, where no tith at all is paid (as upon the statute
of tith wood being timber trees above twenty years grows) to prohibit in
her majesty's name, every judge ecclesiastical, that he proceed not to the
determination of any such cause, and so to take unto him self the hearing and
determination of the same according to the common laws of her highness
realm. There is small diversity of reason, why the same, or some other Civil
magistrate, may not as well hear and determyne all and singular causes of
tithes, after what manner or form soever they be paid, as whereby long
continuance of time, they have been customablye paid after such and such
sort, or where no payement at all has been made. In the second or third
instaunce, when appeal is made from an Archbishop, Bishop, or Archdeacon into
her highness high Court of Chauncerie or Delegates in any case whatsoever, her
majesty by the prerogative of her Crown and dignity, has absolute power to
appoint such men, to set a final end, and ordinate direction therein, as by
their wisdoms shall be thought consonant to equity, right and good
conscience. There is no disparity of reason, why in the first instaunce, she
may not as well have like authority, or why like authority, from her, or by
her Majesty, may not lawfullye be committed to any of her subjects, though no
ecclesiastical persons, but only seculer and lay men. Neither by this means
should the course of Law touching appeals be taken away, but the same might
be still practiced, as now it is. In the provinces belonging to the Roman
Empire, though presidents and Proconsulles, had their Commissions from the
Emperor, yet appeals were notwithstanding made from those Governors unto the
Consistories and tribunal Seats, of the Emperoures imperial City of
resyaunce and chief aboade. And therefore though the Gouernmentes (now
reputed Ecclesiastical, but in truth Civil) were absolutely translated from
Ecclesiastical men, and put into the hands of lay men; (as in truth it is
already executed by lay men) yet the Courts of Arches and Audience, and the
Court of Delegates might remain and continue still: and as they ought indeed,
so they might in word, as well and better to, be called, the Queens Courts
of Arches and Audience, as the Archbysh. of Canterburies Courts of Arches and
Audience. As convenient for the Doctors to attend upon the Queen as upon the
Archbysh.
And as good a sight it were, and as dutiful a part, for my masters and
Doctoures of the Civil Law, in their Scarlet robes to attend upon her
Maiestyes royal person, in case she passed thorough Paul's, as to attend upon
their Lords grace his person. And as touching every other Consistory, now
called the Bpshoppes or Archdeacons Consistory, for avoiding of confusion and
many judgment seats, if they were united and reduced in every Shiere, or
every Diocese to one consistorye, it might likewise have the name of the
Queens Consistorye, and the Courts be called, the Queens civil Courts:
as, wherein according to the natures and qualities of the causes before
specified, Civil Justice might be ministered, and the Popish ecclesiastical
Law abandoned, and as a froth or filth, be spewed out of the Common Weal.
Her highness can not more gratify the Pope, then by executing his law.
For assuredlye by no means can her Majesty so much gratifye her capital
enemy, as by authorizing and practicing his Laws: nor by no means can she
more honor the Lord, then utterly to abandon all semblaunce of any
government, proceeding from an enemy and Traitor to his Majesty. Neither
were it a Dodkin matter, (so little is his Law worth) in her state and
government, to have all Books of her enemies Laws, laid on a heap in
Smithfielde, and sacrificed in Fire unto the Lord: her own common and statute
Laws, the Civil Law for the exellencye thereof, received among all Nations,
and certain provincial Constitutions made heretofore, at her Ancestors
commandment, have for the most part already, and where need is, speedilye
may have sufficient matter in them for the gonernment of the Church and Common
weal, without any help from the Laws of the enemy of the church and Common
weal. Instit. de iur. natu. genti and ciui sed and quod.
The Law of a King is, as it were the mouth of a King, for that he always
speaks by his Law. And if we suffer the Pope to speak amongst us as a
King, do we not honor him as a King? If we embrace his power, do we
banish his person? If you say that they be not executed as his Laws, but as
ours. I ask you again? why should they at all be executed as ours? For in
truth they do less good unto us, then an Herb-Iohn does (as is said) in the
Potage: for that Herb does neither good nor harm. But these Laws do annoye
us vvonderfullye, and they do us no manner of good at all. They are altogether
needelesse, they are altogether Bootelesse, I would to GOD they were
altogether footelesse too. For touching the government of the Church, we have
first the perfect and altogether righteous Law of God to rule the same by:
Secondlye, we have her Majesty's Injunctions, the common and Statute Laws of
the Realm, and the provincial constitutions containing in effect, whatsoever
ought in any case by any subject, to be practiced within this Realm.
Touching the administration of Justice in any civil cause before mentioned,
and whereof practice is made in the ecclesiastical Court, there is nothing good
in the whole body of the Canon Law, concerning the same, but the same has
been culled out of the Civil Law, it is but an Epitomy of the Civil Law.

The rules of the Cannon Law, are for the most part, rules taken out of the
Civil Law: only there is this difference, that by the Cannon Law, a man in
some case, shall not in his whole life time get an end of his suyte (as these
parties that had a cause depending in the Popes Court twentye four years, and
yet in all that space, Lis non erat contestata, an issue could not be joined)
whereas by Civil Law, a cause in the first instaunce ought to be finished
within three years at the vtmoste, or else the Agent becomes non suite.

And if upon cause the matter be appealed after definitive sencence, the same
cause of appeal, ought ordinarily to be ended within one year, or upon some
just cause extraordinarilye happening within two years. Otherwise the appeal
is frustrate, so that in both instaunces five years only must be spent in
suit of law.

And now what reason is there, that the Canon Law should be still canonized
amongst us? when it was ordained, that none should proceed in any university
doctor of the Canon law. I think the meaning of the ordinance chiefly was,
that leaving no hope of preferment to the professors thereof (the thing being
of it self so vile) they should loose no labor in the study thereof.

But I will conclude, that in as much, as by the Canons, Constitutions,
ordinances and synodalles provincial, made before the 25. year of Henrye the
eight, Byshpos and all other Clergy men are forbidden, to be Vicountes,
Presydentes, Justices, Stewardes, Bayliefes, gouernoures of Villadges, Judges,
Advocates, Assessors, Tutors, Gardians, Overseers, runnagates to seculer
Courts, farmers of temporal possessions, receyuers of revenues, present in
any place, where mention of any process or judgment is to be awarded
against any man, to the sheading of blood: And in as much as they are
commanded to apply themselves wholly to Prayer and supplication, and not to
neglect their office, and to entangle them selves with worldly business: And
for as much also, as the Emperor has upon substantial reasons and
principles, inhibited the Clergy under his Dominions the like offices, to the
end there might be no confusion of government, nor mingling of offices, nor
Justice vnministred, nor one to defraude another: and for as much also that
such Canons, Constitutions, ordinances, and synodalles provincial before
specified, be not contrariant nor repugnaunt, to the Laws, Statutes, and
Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Queens Prerogative
royal, but rather for the establishment of the same, the same Canons, being
both founded upon the Law of God, whereby her prerogative stands, and is
vpholden: and confirmed by the Laws of reason and nature, and also ratified by
the consent of Emperoures and nations, that therefore these Canons,
constitutions, ordinances, and synodals provincial ought to be used and
executed as they were before the making of the Act 25. Henry the eight, and
that therefore it is unlawful for Archbishops, bishops, or any Clergy men
to bear any civil office in the common wealth. If any except, that before 25.
of Henry the 8. bishops and Clergy men did use and execute those offices, and
that therefore these Canons were not then in use and executed, and therefore
not in use now, or to be executed now. I reply, that what bishop or Clergy
man soever, did before the 25. H. 8. use or execute any such office forbidden,
as whereof mention has been made before: the same Bysh. or Clergy man had some
special dispensation, faculty, or license from the Pope so to do, and that
therefore the conclusion remains still firm. For the statute has not
relation to the particular exemptions and immunities of certain privileged
persons in this case, more then it has to the residue of the whole body of the
canon law, wherein is nothing generally forbidden, but dispensations were
grante^ from Rome at that time to the contrary, and so if the exception were
good, we should have no ecclesiastical law at all in force, because from the
observation of every general law, some at that time were exemted by
dispensatio^. If it be answered again, that as the pope did gratify his
clergy, so her Majesty does gratify her clergy by dispensation: herein he
most strongly confirms mine assertion, that bishops and clergy men, by
common right, may use no civil Iuridiction. For whatsoever is lawful by
privilege or dispensation only, the same is unlawful by common right.

Unlawful to ordain a Minister without a Title.
Extra. de prebend. c. non licet.
NON LICET VLLI EPISCOPO. etc. It is not lawful for any By. to ordain
clearkes, and not to give them whereon they may live: but let him choose one of
these twain, either let him make no Clearkes at all, or, if he make any, let
him give them whereon they may live. Again.

Extra. de prebend. c. episcop.
EPISCOPVS SI ALIQVEM. etc. If a Bishop shall ordain any, either Deacon or
Minister, not having a certain title, whereby he may receive things necessary
for this life, unless the party so ordained, have some inheritance of his
own, for the maintainaunce of this life: Let the Bishop so long minister unto
him things necessary, until he may assign unto him in some Church, a
convenient stipend, for his Clearkly warfare. And it is intended here says
the gloss, that one may then be ordained without any title, when as he has
whereby to live. Again.

Extra. de prebend. c. tuis.
Unto thy demaundes we answer thus, that thou may promote unto higher
orders, Clearkes placed in inferior orders, in case they have of their own
patrimony, whereby they may be commodiously relieved, although they have not
obtained any Ecclesiastical benefice at all. But if the Patrimony should
decay by sudden misaduenture, or ouerflowing of Waters, it seems sufficient,
that the Bysh. should provide for them in some Ecclesiastical benefice,
because since they may not return again into the world, their poverty might
redound unto the discredit of the clergy. Again.

Extra de aeta. and qual. c. accepimus.
ACCEPIMVS TE. etc. We understand by thy report, that certain Clearkes
promoted unto holy orders without a Title molest thee, about the obtaining of
certain benefices. Although therefore in the ordination of Clearkes, thou and
thy predecessors ought to have had that diligence, that by you, unmeet men
should not have been ordained, and therefore after their ordination, thou can
not pretend any exception against them, unless after their promotion they have
made themselves unworthy: yet notwithstanding, when it behoou^h us to write for
such, we, for a cautle cause, to be put in our letters, decree, that if the
ordained for whom we write be reputed fit, and not unworthy an Ecclesiastical
benefice: that a competent Benefice be given unto him, either by the ordeynor,
or his successor. Whereas, if we would deal strayghtly by Law with thee,
we could worthily compel thee to the provision of those, whom it is
manifest to have been ordained by thee or thy predecessors: Especially, in as
much as thou oughteste to repute those meet to receive an Ecclesiastical
benefice, whom thou haste admitted unto orders. Again.

Extra. de prebend c. cum secundum.
CVM SECVNDVM APOSTOLVM. etc. Sithence according unto the Apostle he that
serves the Altar ought to live of the Altar, and that he, that is elected unto
a burden ought not to be rejected from the reward: it is evident by the like,
as reason it self persuades us, that Cleaerkes ought to live of the patrimony
of Jesus Christ, unto whose service they are deputed. For, in as much as
Clearkes are called (...), which is Sors, a Lot or Inheritance of the Lord or
in as much as they attain an inheritance in him, that they may truly sing with
the Prophet. The Lord is the part of of mine inheritance; it is meet that
they be relieved with the stipends of the Church, in the which and by the
which, they are appointed unto holy services. And although our predecessors to
the shame of the ordeinors, would the ordinations of such as were promoted
without any certain Title, to be frustrate and void: yet we, desirous to deal
more favorably, will the ordained so long to be provided for, by the
ordeynours or their successors, until by their means they shall obtain some
Ecclesiastical Benefices. And therefore inasmuch as I the bearer hereof, was
by the presentment of none, promoted by thy predecessor unto subdeaconship: we
command that if they, unto whom we have committed his examination shall find
him fit, thou being lawfully cited to propose either by thy self, or by thy
lawful proctor, whatsoever thou think reasonably to be proposed, touching
as well the aptness of his person, as the quantity or qualitye of a Benefice,
thou so long minister unto him things necessary for the maintenance of his
life, until he shall obtain by thee in the Church of Zamoran, or soms other
Church, an Ecclesiastical benefice. Again.

Lib. 6. de. prebend. c. epis.
If the Bishop unto whom without express mention of any person, thou haste
generally committed in thy steed, to give orders in such a diocese, shall
promote any not having a title unto holy orders, he him self (seeing he was in
fault by ordeining such a one) shall be bound to minister unto him al things
necessary for this life, until by him or some other he be provided for, in
some competent benefice. But unto whom license is given by the diocesans to be
promoted unto holy orders, of whatsoever Bishop they will: in this case not the
ordeinors, but they who give license, (because they ought not to give license
to one not having a Title) if they have no Title, are bound unto the premises.

If any advocate for any Bishop shall auerre the Bishops, generally to have
regard unto these and such like Canons, in as much as they admit none unto holy
orders, unless he be presented by some lay men, and have some special deed or
grant in writing for some annual rent or pencion, payable unto him, in case
afterward, he languishing with some incurable disease, or otherwise visited,
shall not be able to execute his ministerye duly: I answer, that that is not
sufficient, because any such pencion is not payable, unless the party
presented be made unfit to serve in the ministry. And that therefore as this
ought to be done, so the other ought not to be left undone: For the Law in two
respects, and for two considerations, requires both the one and the other to
be done. First the Law wills every one admitted unto orders, to have for his
present mayntainance and relief in the ministry, some true, lawful, and
certain title, in and unto some ecclesiastical benefice. As both the law it
self in these words; (some Church stipends of clearkly warfare: an
ecclesiastical benefice: in an ecclesiastical benefice: ecclesiastical
benefices: a competent benefice) Glos. dict. c. epis. verse.. titulo.
and also the gloss and other expositors, do manifest and define a title, to
mean some ecclesiastical benefice. Secondly, the law requires, that every one
admitted unto orders, having for his present relief, some ecclesiastical
benefice, should also have some other title unto some annual rent or pention,
whereby he might be relieved, in case he were not able, thorough infirmity,
sickness, or other lawful impediment, to execute his ecclesiastical office and
function. The reason whereof is this, Extra. de. renuncia. c. ad supplicationem.
Adeuitandum vituperium ministerii: To avoid the obloquy of the ministry. Both
which kind of titles, the bishops, them selves by there canons of discipline,
published. 1571. have what in them lay, against themselves, ratified and
confirmed. Touching the first: the bishop (say they) shall lay his hands on
none at any other time, but when it shall chance that some place of
ministration is void in the same Diocese. And if some place of ministration
(as they say) must be void before a Bishop may lay his hands upon any, then
must the party (say I) to be ordained, have some place of administration
committed unto him, and so then some present provision made for him in the
ministry: namely, some ecclesiastical benefice, whereby (I say) an uncertain,
unlawful, and feyned title, unto some stipendary curatship only, is not meant:
but such a certain, lawful and true title in deed, as whereby he might be
able continually, conveniently, and decently without gadding to and fro, or
without any obloquy or reproach unto the ministerye, provide things necessary
for the mayntainance of him self, and his family. And as it is flat against
the Law of the Lord, that any should be admitted unto the ministry, not
able to do the message of the Lord: so is it also expressly against the laws
of our government, that any should be made a minister, to serve only as a
stipendarye Curate. Neither did the synagogue of Rome ever admit any such
office by their canons, only by popish customs, thorough negligence of popish
Prelates, such disorders and abuses have crept into the same. Touching the
second kind of Title before mentioned, the Bishop (says our ecclesiastical
synod) 1571.
shall lay his hands on none henceforward, but on such as have some title (as
they call it) whereby he may live if by God his sufferaunce he become blind,
or fall into grievous sickness of the body, or into a continual languishing
disease. And therefore out of these decrees and the former act of Parliament. I
conclude thus. 1 All decrees, canons, constitutions, and synodalles
provincial, not contrariant or repugnaunt to the laws of the realm, nor
derogatory to her highness prerogative, that were in force. 25. of Henry 8.
are by the statute of Primo Eliza. now in force. 2 But all the decrees, canons,
constitutions and sydalles provincial, before specified (excepting the Canons
made 1571. were in force, 25. of H. 8. and are not contrariaunte or repugnaunt
to the Laws of the Realm, nor derogatory to her highness prerogative. 3
Therefore these former decrees are now in force. And if so, then our Bishops by
the same Canons compellable to provide a present, a certain, and a competent
stipend for every such Minister and Deacon, as whom, not having any
conueniente ecclesiastical Benefice or place of Administration, either they or
their predecessors have, contrary to the old and their own new Canons, made
and ordained, or hereafter shall make and ordayn a Minister or Deacon.


FOr were it so, that the Predecessors of our Bysh. deceased, were only
culpable herein: yet notwithstanding our Bysh. now living are in this case
aunswerable for their successors default. Extra. de prebend. cu^ secundu^.
Panor. in. c. vlt. de aetat. and qualit. nu. 1. Glos. lib. 6. de preb. c. si
episc. verse. ad premissa. Extra. de for. comp. c. penult. ff. de transac. l.
cum Hii.
Huius prouisionis obligatio transit ad successorem. The band of this provision
passes unto the successor, and is liable against him. Ordinatus ad sacros
sine titulo acquirit sola ordinatione contra ordinatorem, obligationem, vt eum
compellat ad prouidendum de beneficio. And this rule is so certain and
infallible, as in case a Clearke ordained unto holy orders without a Title,
promise the By. that he will not molest him touching the same, that yet the
same Clearke notwithstanding any such disclayme, may bring his action against
the Bysh. and recover either an Ecclesiastical benefice, or sufficient
mayntainaunce out of his revenues. For this right, is Ius publicum, and may
not be remitted. It is also a right, whereby relief is provided for
maintaynance of life: but Alimenta, pacto alimentarii non tolluntur:
Nonrishments are not taken away by a covenant of him that is to be nourished,
to the end the common Treasury, or common weal be not consumed or burdened,
with extraordinary and unlawful impositins. And again. Eztra. de simo. c.
penult.
If any shall ordain or present one unto orders, taking of him an oath, that he
will not disquiet him about his provision, let the ordaynor and presentor know,
that the ordaynor from conferring again, the presentor from the execution of
his orders, is suspended for the space of three years. And besides, let the
ordained understand him self to be suspended from his office so received,
until he shall deserve to be restored by the Apostolic sea. The reason
whereof is this, namely, because every such oath is luramentum turpe, a filthy
oath, and therefore not obligatorie, and being the accessorie, no more
auaylable then the principal. Neither may it serve for any excuse unto a
bishop, that the party ordained, affirm him self to be contented with some
small title or portion bestowed upon him, in case the said title be not in
deed sufficient for the maintenance of his necessity. Extra. de simo. c.
penult.
Quia precauendum est indecentiae clericali, item huiusmodi renunciatio
expressam simoniam induceret, Because the indecency of Clearkes is to be
foreseen, also such a disclayme should induce manifest simonie. Moreover if a
bishop ordain a Cleark, and bestow upon him a competent benefice, which
afterward is euicted from him, in this case also the bishop after the said
euiction, is bound to relieve the said Clearke, until he have provided him
such a benefice as is not recouerable from him, both to the end no collusion
between the bishop and the Clearke should be used, and also because the bishop
should warely and wisely have fore seen the first title to have been sure and
good.

The manner of Archbishops, bishops, and Archdeacons visitations, and what
procurations are due for the same.
FIrst, visitations (says the Canon law) Extra. de cens. c. cum venerabili.
were instituted Causa correctionis; for cause of reformation; and therefore it
is certain (says the Gloss) Glos ibid. ver. bis in anno.
in the same chapter, if the visitor be certain that the Church need no
visitation, he ought not to visit the same: because the cause ceasing, the
effect should cease. Secondly, because visitations were ordained to the intent
a Church destitute of spiritual things, might have spiritual things
ministered unto her; 10. q. 2. precarie.
and for that by common intent of law. Eztr. de prescrip. c. cum ex.
Nemo tenetur beneficium facere de preprio, vel propriis stiperdiis militare.
No man is bound to do a benefit upon his own charge, or to go a warfare
upon his own costs; Therefore in these respects, and upon these causes
procurations were annexed to visitations, as certain proper and peculier
stipendes due unto visitors, touching their necessary charges and expenses, to
be spent in and about the same. Glos. lib. 6. de censib. c. faelicis ver.
manebit.
And to the intent no poor Church, by over great costs to be expended for the
procuration of a visitor, should be damnified, therefore a sober and moderate
procuration was at the first generally commanded, and is now specially rated
to a certain small value. And again, least the Bishop might
inconsideratelye, and for lucre sake, visit a whole City or Diocese in one
day, and so not only without reason receive so many procurations, as there
were Churches, but also inuert the natural order of the policy of the Church,
making the accessory, (namely the procuration) greater then the principal,
(namely the visitation) a due and equal order was taken, that the visitor
should satisfy him self with one procuration for one day: and that the number
of procurations should not exceed the number of days spent in visitation. In
which visitation the Ordinary is precisely willed to go present in proper
person unto the Church to be visited; and may not by common right commit his
office unto any other, unless he be diseased, or having many places about one
time to visit, could not, either in time of winter, by reason of snowes or
inundations of waters, or in time of war, by reason of perrill and danger of
the enemy, commodiously resort unto every Church. Which natural intent, and
true meaning of the law, is evidently by these words so often repeated. viz.
Personally exercise: personally visited: personally searching by him self with
effect: personal visitation: If he can not commodiously, or without
difficulty come unto every one; Upon which word Accedere, says the gloss,
Patet ergo quod ire tenetur, nec sufficit ad suam ecclesiam vocare. It
appears therefore, that he is bound to go, neither is it sufficient for him
to call to his own church. Neither does the alteration of procurations from
money unto victuals, or from victuals unto money, alter the nature of the first
institution of procurations. For as at the first it was ordained, that the
visitor and his retinue, for the day where in he visited, should have a
moderate diet in victuals, provided at the charge of the church to be visited:
So was it never intended by any alteration, that he should receive twenty or
forty days diet in money, for visiting twenty or forty churches, at one place
in one day. Lib. 6. de cens. c 1 procurationes. and lib. 6. cod. c. exigit.
But as a visitor, by the first institution of procurations, was to have had
his diet in victuals, only for one day: so was he by later decrees to receive
so much monye, as was sufficient for one days diet only. Lib. 6. de cens c
faelicis.
Which is apparent by the decree of John Stratford, Archbysh. of Canterbury,
particularly and of purpose ordained against the Bishop and Archdeacon of his
province. For (says he) though the Bishop visit many Churches in one day, yet
he shall have but one procuration; whether the same be in money or victual,
whereunto all the Churches so visited, shall proportionally contribute.
Extrauag. commu. de censib. c. 1.
Which procuration for a Bishops substitute is limited by a decree of Bennet
the 12. not to exceed the value of fourscore Turons of silver, every 12.
Turons making one floren of pure Gold, of an acune florentine, according to
our english estimate, not amounting in coin above the sum of five shillings
at the utmost. So that the whole procuration for one day, to be received by a
Bishops substitute, of all Churches called together, ought to be at the
vtmoste, but thirty five shillings: the whole procuration of an Archdeacons
substitute, for one days diet, ought not to exceed the some of 12. Shillings
6. pence, though either of them should call 50. or an 100 Churches together
into one place in one day. In like manner, if the Bishop personally, visit
by himself, then is he to have for his own and his retinues diet, about five
marks only: and in case the Archdeacon visit personnally, then is he to
receive about twenty shillings only. Which procuration limited unto the
Archdeacon by the decree of Bennet, seems to be mitigated by a prouincial
constitution in Lindewood, whereby an Archdeacon is allowed toward one days
diet for himself and his seruitors, but 40. pence. Which sum (says the
gloss) Sufficere videtur pro quatuor personis, and totidem equis cum vno
summario, seems to suffice, for four persons, and so many horses with one
sumner. Which diet is to be understood for one day natural, containing 24.
hours. Wherefore I conclude, that neither a Bysh. nor a Bishops Commissary:
that neither an Archdeacon, nor Archdeacons official may at any time visit
for lucre or gain: that he may only visit then and there, when and where he
knows just cause of reformation; that he may not take an excessive but a
moderate procuration: that neither he, nor any of his retinue may take a
reward: that he may not reap earthly things, unless he sow spiritual things:
that he may not (except upon urgent necessity) visit more churches then one, in
one day: that he may take but one provision for one day: that he may not take
any procuration at al, unless he diligently perform the office of a visitor:
And lastly, that Archb. B. and Archd, ought personally to visit, unless by
Privilege they be specially exempted. By which exemption, they have only
this liberty, that the Archb. By, and Archd. substitute, may take so much
allowances of the churches visited, as they may reasonnably spend in one day,
and that their substitutes may not purse up, or carry any treasure away, as by
the decree of Bennet before alleged is evident. For the same decree allows
no more to the Archb. B. and Archd. nor their substitutes, then so much as they
may well spend in one day for there diet, and other necessary chardges.
Concerning which privilege, granted by the Canon of Bennet the 12. exempting
Archbysh. and Bysh. from necessity of personal visitation, and licensing them
to visit by others, in as much as the said Canon, being contrariant or
repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of the Realm, or derogatory to
her highness prerogative royal, is not therefore authorized, but rather
abrogated by act of Parliament: I answer, that the said privilege, is now a
void privilege, having no law, cannon, constitution or sinodall provincial
to justify the same. For, whether a bull, brief or any faculty granted unto
any subject of this realm from the sea of Rome, in the time of Queen Mary or
else, when for the enjoying many benefices, or being nonsident, and such like,
be pleydable in any her highness courts, or allowable within any her
dominions, the case argued not long since, at the bar of common pleas between
M. Sergeant Fleetewood, and M. Sergeant Wameslowe, and passed by the judgment
of the whole Court against Wameslow, arguing for the validity of a Bull from
Rome, does prove the contrary. Wherefore unless our Prelates will rashly
incur, the penalty of her highness Laws inacted against abetters of
foreign jurisdiction, they are well and warely to be advised, not to stick
unto any privilege heretofore granted by any Cannon, from any Pope for the
exaction of procurations, due unto their substitutes, the same Cannon as
prejudicial to the Queens prerogative royal, being abrogated: yea, they are
soberly and in good discretion, to use the benefit of common right alone, and
only to practice such canons, as are in force, by the former act of
Parliament: namely, personally to visit in manner and form before described.
For if they shall hereafter upon the knowledge of these things, unadvisedly
attempt any thing unto the contrary, her majesty may be rightly moved to
exasperate the matter, and to have her sword whetted against such contempts.
For though by such kind of visitation, as is prescribed by common right, some
pore Archd. perhaps having their subsidies, and tenthes, valued according to
the rate of their procurations, might not be able, to satisfy her majesty's
said tenths and subsidies: yet, not only the revenues of fat Archb. B. and
Archdeconries could be no impediment hereunto (For that they have either lands
personages, and prebendes, to supply all such wants) but also, her majesty by
seasing some yearly portion of the said procurations into her own hands,
might, for the maintainaunce of her royal state, both have the revenues of her
treasury greatly increased and also the whole ministry, from unlawful
exactions, lawfully released. Every minister would more freely no doubt, in
confideration of the singular peace he enjoys under her Majesty, yield unto
her majesty, a voluntary contribution of the one half of such procurations as
now are yearly payable unto a Bishop or Archdeacon, rather then to pay the
whole procurations unto the said B. or Archdeacon, under whom, and by whom,
and with whom, he is at continual War. And so where her majesty receives
now yearly, for an Archdeaconrye, valued at 40. pounds, but 4. pound by year
for tenths, her majesty may well receive 20. pound eue^ four times so much as at
this present, is due: yea, and where her majesty receives the first fruits of
an Archdeaco^ry, but once in the time of a man's life, the ministry no doubt to
be disburdened of Bysh. and Archdeacons intolerable visitations, will in steed
thereof cheerfully at the end of every ten years, yield unto her Majesty in
steed of the said first fruits, the whole procurations now due unto the said
Bysh. and Archdeacons, the one may hereafter lawfully be yielded: the other
has been heretofore unlawfully exacted, as appears by the Conons following.

Extra. de. censib. c cu^ venerabili. Li^. 6. de censib. c. 1.. procurationes.
Lib 6. de censib. c. exigit.
We decree that the Bishop, when he shall come to any church for cause of
reformation, take of the same Church a moderate procuration. And let him
receive such a provision, as is appointed in the Canons. But neither he him
self, nor any of his family, by means of any office or custom, or by any
other means whatsoever, may receive any money, in the name of any procuration
and provision: only let them receive moderate expenses in victualles. etc.
that he may not seem to seek his own, but those things which are Jesus
Christ's. And if any thing repugnant unto this decree shall be attempted; let
him that receives it, be holden accursed: from the which, let him not at any
time be absolved, unless he restore the double.

Lib. 6. censi. c. faelicis.
But because experience teaches us, that by this means many inconvenience
happen, as well unto the persons visiting, as unto the places and Churches
visited, we grant that patriarks Archb. B. and other unto whom the office to
visit belongs, may of such gouernoures or persons of places visited, as are
willing to disburce money, lawfully receive the same for their moderate charges
of victual to be spent in those days, wherein they shall personally visit.
Adding moreover that the visitor whether he shall visit one place alone, or
many places, shall not lawfully receive any more then one procuration for one
day, although every place visited by him were able to pay one whole procuration;
in as much as it ought to suffice him, to receive temporal things of the
places personally visited, for those days wherein he ministers unto them
spiriiual things. For many procurations may not (says Pope Clement) Clement de
censib c. ad nostrum.
be received for one day, the office of visiting not performed. Lib 6. de
offic ord. c. si. episcopus.
Neither may or ought a Bishop that does not personally visit, exact by his
substitute or deputy any thing at all of those whom he by his substitute or
deputy shall so visit.

Lib. 6. decens. c. 1.. 1. and. deinde.
If commodiously or without difficulty, he cannot come unto every church, let
him call the clergy and layty from many places, unto one convenient place: and
then let him freely visiting the clergy and people, only receive procuration
of the places visited.

Lind. de. ce^sib. c. 1. in fin.
Moreover, we straightly inhibite the Archd. that they receive by no means,
procurations without a reasonable cause, and only for that day, wherein they
personally visit a Church, able to provide for them: neither let them presume
to extort any thing for the redemption of their visitation: for every ordinarye
(says the gloss upon the word (Personaliter) that by office may visit, is
bound personally to visit. And we also ordain (says Otho) Otho. de procu and
visit. Archid. c. vnic.
concerning Archd. that they profitably, personally and faithfully, visit
there churches, and let them not charge the churches with superfluous expenses,
but only receive moderate expenses, whilste they visit.

Octobone de procu. quae and. rati etc. unit.
The very orderly disposition of nature gives seed unto the sower, and
multiplieth unto the labourer the fruit of his labor. And again, no man
doubts, but that it is both absurd ad unlawful for any man to reap where he
sows not, or to gather where he straweth not: From out of the equity of these
principles, holy Canons have provided, that, that Church that admits a
visitation concerning the wholesome disposition of the temporal and spiritual
goods thereof, ought also to exhibit a procuration ordained for the visitor.
But whereas by means of a visitation any procuration is due, if the same
means ceasing, any thing be exacted or received, the same undergoes the name
of a thing euilly received, and not due. Since therefore we understood that
many Prelates do exact procurations of their subjects, though they do not
visit: we more advisedly, providing, as well for the in demnity of Churches,
as the welfare of Prelates, straightly prohibit, that none among them, receive
any procuration due by means of visitation from any Church, unless they
personally visit the same Church. And if any shall receive any thing
otherwise, let him know that he is suspended from coming unto the Church,
until he have restored the same, least in their visitations they should seem
rather to gape after gain, then either to preserve the state of the Churches,
or to seek the salvation of the souls of the people. Moreover we decree
sentences of excommunication, suspencion, and interdiction, pronounced by
occasion hereof, by mere law it self, to be no sentences at all. Lind. de
censib. c. quamuis.
Lastly, John Stratford, Archbishop of Caunterbury, by authority of this
present counsel inhihited, that no man presume to receive of any Church, any
procuration to be paid by means of visitation, unless he diligently perform
the office of visiting, with effect searching and trying personally by him
self those things that are to be found out and tried. And if any would visit
many Churches in one day, let him be content with one days procuration in
victuals or money: unto which procuration, let him cause all and singular
Churches so visited in one day, proportionably contribute as the Canons
ordain.

FEES FOR Letters of orders unlawful.
Extra. de simo. c. in tantum.
CVM VERO EXPRESIVS, etc. But sithence he does most evidently express a kind
of sale, who first receaueth a price, and then bestows a precious thing; And
sithe^ce also grace ought freely to be granted, we command that you correct
such excesses, restrayning your suffraganes and their Officials from so
unlawful an exaction, that the fault of others proceeding from your
negligence, be not imputed unto you for a punishment. Moreover, study and take
heed, thou abolishe out of thy province that evil custom, whereby
Archdeacons require a mark of silver: and other inferior officers, either a
white Cow, or some certain piece of money to be paid unto them.

Extra. de simo. c. cum in ecclesiae.
HORRIBILE NIMIS. etc. It is too too horrible, that venality is said to have
place in certain churches, so that for placing of Bishops or Abbots, or any
other Ecclesiastical persons in their seats; or for inducting ministers into
the church, and also for burialls and funeralles of the dead etc. somewhat be
required. But many suppose this to be lawful because they think custom to
have a long time prevailed, not considering that by so much more heinous are
the offenses, by how much longer, they have their unhappy souls, infected.
Therefore we straightlye forbid, that these things be not done hereafter:
or that any thing be exacted for placing men in their seats, or instituting
priests etc. And if any man shall presume, to do contrary hereunto, let him
know him self to have a portion with Gehesi. Extra. de simo. c. j.
Sicut non debet Episcopus, etc. As the Bishop in the ordination of a Clearke,
oughe not to sell his hand which he imposes: so ought not the notary or other
Minister sell his voice or quill in the same. We forbid therefore him that is
ordained, to give any thing at all, either for his ordination, or for the use
of his pall, or for paper, and pastell.

1. q. 3. si. quis prebendas.
And neither for past, neither under pretense of any custom, either before or
after, let there be any thing exacted, or let him presume to give, because it
is Simoniacall: But let him freely without any diminishing, enjoy the dignity
and benefice conferred upon him.

Prouinc. will. lind. de institu. c. 1.
We ordain, that no Prelate when he shall confer any church, or prebend,
presume or dare any manner of ways, either to usurp unto him self, the
fruits of the same Church or Prebend, not yet gathered, or to exact, or to
suffer to be exacted, by his officialls or Archdeacons any thing for the
institution, or possession giving, or for any writing to be made touching the
same.

Prouinc. lin. de instit. c. fi.
By the approbation of the holy Counsel we ordain, that they which are bound
at the commandment of their superiors, to iuduct those that are admitted unto
ecclesiastical benefices, be contented with moderate chardges for such
induction to be made: Namely, if the Archdeacon him self, or his official
do induct, let the Archdeccon be thoroughly contented with three shillinges
four pence, and his Official with two shillinges for all charges, both of him
self and his retinue concerning their diet. And let him that is inducted as
before said, choose whether he will provide for the retinue of him and his, that
gives the possession in such quantity of money, or in other necessaries: And
if any thing over and above this, by occasion of the premises be received by
such as induct: or if they receive any more for the induction to be made by
them; or if it shall happen that they make not letters certificatorie of their
induction, and deliver them unto the inducted, or with feigned pretense
unlawfully differ them; we will such as are culpaple herein, so long to incur
suspencion from their office, and enteraunce from the Church, until the
things contrarily received, be restored; and and that they satisfy in the
premises, him who by their default is hindered. But what if he be inducted
(says the Gloss) Glos. ibidem verb. and facil. ad hoc c. statutum. insuper
Extra. de rescript.
by an other then by the Archdeacon him self or his Official, and yet at the
commandment of the said Archdeacon: Whether may the Archdeacon receive any
thing for such an induction? Answer no. But he that ineucteth him after this
sort, shall have of him that is inducted, necessary expenses, and such as are
agreeable to his estate and calling, under the moderation limited unto the
Archdeacon him self or his official, if either of them had personally made
any such induction.

Prouin. lind. de censib. c. item licet.
ILLVM ARCHIDIACONORVM, etc. We detesting that abuse of the Archdeacons and
their Officials and other Ordinaries, whereby they exact of the Priests
appointed to celebrate in their jurisdictions, before they do celebrate, a
certain and excessive sum of money, unlawfully converting the liberality
wherewith such Priests were wont to content them selves, receiving but one
penny of Clearkes, registring their names in their records unto a confiscal
exaction of six pence, or there aboutes; We ordain, that from henceforth of
the said Archdeacons and other Ordinaries, or any of their ministers, under
pain of suspencion from the celebration of divine things, by any means
presume not to receive of the said Priests, above one penny. For the which
there names must be registered in their first admissions.

Lind. de censib. c. saeua.
A cruel and miserable greediness has invented that unmeasurable exactions,
for letters of institutions of Clearkes admtited unto ecclesiastical
benefices; and for letters of orders, for labor of writings and for seals,
are oftentimes made, the Canon disalowing the same; saying, as it becomes not
a bishop to sell the imposition of hands, so it is not decent for his minister
to sell his quill. Moreover, the Clearkes of Archdeacons and their Officials,
and other ordinances, refuse to deliver the certificates of inquisitions made
upon vacant benefices, unless they first have an excessive some of money for
writing. We therefore willing to abolish this abase, have determined by the advice of this present counsel to ordain, that for the writing of the letters
of inquisitions, institutions, or collations and commissions to induct; or for
the certificates of the same into their benefices, the said Clearkes receive
not either by them selves or by others above 12. pence. And for the letters of
every holy order, the said Clearkes, neither by them selves nor by any other
shall receive above six pence. In other things let the Ordinaries themselves,
be bound to allot stipendes for their ministers and officers, whereby they may
justly be satisfied: But for sealing of such letters, or to the Marshals for
entering into the house, or to the Portors, or door keepers, or Barbers, we
will that nothing at all be exacted or paid by any coulorable intent, least
the payment for seals os letters or enteraunces aforesaid be turned unto a
damnable gain. Bishops and bishops men not a few are suspended by this Canon.
And this we ordain upon pain of double to be restored within one moves.
Otherwise the Clearkes that refuse to restore double, let them know them selves
to stand suspended from their office and from their benefice.

And now generally to conclude: It were not amiss in my simple understanding,
that the whole Church made humble supplication, unto her excellent Majesty, and
her honorable Counsaylers, that the Judges of the Land, might be consulted,
upon the validity of the former act of Parliament, and that it might be
known, whether the foresaid Cannons established thereby, or any of them, be
in force: and if so, that then her Majesty would vouchsafe, graciously to take
the Church affairs into her own hands, and by her commisson Ecclesiastical,
appoint such honorable and faithful men as are not in the ministry, to
examine the bishops proceedinges.

Viz. Whether they have made any criminous and unlearned ministers?

Whether they have suffered any such men to remain in the ministry all the
time of her majesty's reign?

Whether the Archbish. have dispensed in any matter or cause, contrary to the
word of God?

Whether the pastor of every congregation be suffered to execute the discipline
of Christ, authorized by Act of Parliament?

Whether the Archbish. and bish. have sat in matters of blood?

Whether they have made a minister without a title, allowing him whereon he
might live?

Whether he have made any in his own Diocese, without license from his fellow
bishops?

Whether he have received any money for letters of orders, institutions, or
suffered his Archdeacons to do the like for inductions?

Whether he have received money for excommunication and absolution?

Whether he have set out his bishopprick or any part of his jurisdiction for an
annual rent?

Whether he have not suffered his chief houses of resiaunce to fall into
dilapidations?

Whether he have not admitted unto any benefice the son of him, whose father
was placed in the same benefice before?

Whether he suffer none to be non resident, but where the evident necessity
and utility of the Church requires?

Whether he have promulged and executed any Canon or iniunction without her
majesty's writ and royal assent?

Whether he have personally visited the Churches of his Diocese, only upon
just cause and not for gain?

whether a minister have not by common right and Act of Parliament, a lawful
calling in the ministry, and such a calling, as from the which the bishop may
not remove him without some special cause?

Whether an Archbishop, or bishop, by virtue of his Archiepiscopall or
Episcopal authority, may promulge or execute, any Canon or Iniunction,
unless it be made in convocation, summoned by her majesty's wryt, and
authorized by her royal assent?

Whether a murderer, or theife, be usually compellable upon his oath, to detect
his murder or felony?

Whether an Archbishop or bish. may lawfully bring upon her highness leage
people an inquisition, sifting them with oaths, what faith, devotion, or manners
they profess? Especially the said people living in outward obedience of her
highness positive laws? And if not: then whether an Archbishop or bishop, may
lawfully urge the like, touching matters only of discipline and ceremonies,
and command her said people by virtue of their oaths to declare, what, when,
where, or how, they have spoken or preached out of the word of God the truth of
God touching the same?

Whether a preacher, only upon occasion of his text, teaching the people, that
weomen by the law of God may not baptize: or that by the same law a Deacons
office is not to preach: may be justly condemned, to have preached maliciously
against the book of common prayer, the said preacher not once mencioning in
all his sermon one word of the said book?

Whether a preacher of the Gospel, borne within her majesty's Dominions, have
not freedom of an English Citizen to challenge the benefit of her highness
laws for the defense of his person, fame, goods, lands and liuinges?

Whether a preacher of the Gospel, fearing some unjust vexation of his
Diocesan, may not complain into her highness court of Chauncery, and have her
majesty's writ Quia timet, against the said Diocesan?

Whether a preacher of the Gospel, may not lawfully have his bill of
complaint, admitted by the honorable Counselors, Pears, and Lords of the
Star chamber, against his Diocesans injurious entreaties, and contemptes of
her highness laws?

Whether some kind of writ, out of her highness other temporal Courts, may
not lie as well against a Diocesan for proceeding against a preacher of the
gospel, contrary to common or statute law, or contrary to her highness
prerogative royal: as some kind of writ does lie against an Archbishop, for
proceeding against some other of her highness liege people, contrary to the
intent of the statutes provided against usury, perjury, payment of tithes, and
such like?

Whether an Archbishop may sing a note above Aela: and lawfully exercise an
absolute power within her majesty's Dominions?

Whether a minister admitted by the order of the book of king Edward the
sixth, be not presently a lawful minister, and may preach in his own cure
with out any license in writing from the Bishop?

Whether licenses granted by her majesty, or her majesty's ecclesiastical
Commissioners: or any of the Universities, be at any time reuocable by an
Archbishop alone?

Whether any license for marriage, without banes asking, be lawful or no, and
whether banes asking be of necessity required by the book of Common prayer?

Whether any commutation of penance be lawful?

Whether a mere lay man, no doctor of the civil law, may be a chauncelor, and
so excommunicate?

Whether a mere lay man, no Doctor of the Civil law, may be a bishops
register, contrary to an Act of Parliament?

Whether it be lawful for a symoniacall, excommun^cat and irreguler person, to
be a ludge or no? And (...) an Archbishop be such a person, whether he may
resort to the Pope to be absolved or no, or where, or how he may be absolved?

Faults escaped.
Page 12. li 29. for leave these, read, leave the seat page 12. li. 33. for he
shall be in, read, be in. page 13. l. 24. for by the popes act of parliament,
read, made by the pope, and co^med by act of parliament. page 14. l. 12. for he
is deposed, read, he deposes page 14 l 35. put a before certain page 14. l 13
for functions read, f^ns. page 18 l. 28. for corrects or improoueth, rea. to
correct and improoue page 20. l. 35. read, and that it did not concern the honor
of the Son of the most page 22 l. 7 for. 4 read 1^. articles. page 23. for
corruptions read, occupations page 33. l. 3 for the minister charge, read the
minister at the B^. instance charge. pa. 56 l. 11. for that they, read that
the ^ pa 75 for collation read, collusion, pa. 71. l. 35. for curall, rea
^urall. p 79 l 15 for dicit. rea dicere p. 79. l. 27. for, o^ yet a consent,
rea nor yet consent. pa 82 l. 18. for part^, rea. pacta. pa. 161. l. 9 for
reputari idoneas, rea reputare idone^ pa 101. l 27. for this plurality man, rea
a plurality man. page 103. l. 8. for harly rea. Carlisle. page 103. l. 35. for
canon, rea. common. page 151. for petion, rea. petition. p 157. l. 5. for
passion, rea. possession. page 173. l. 27. for runs thee, rea. runs
against thee page 175. l. 25. for of sufficient, rea. of no sufficient pa 222.
for servants rea tenaunts page 141. l 25. for Abbot, rea Abbi^. pa. 169. for of
excommunication rea of sole excommunication. p. 122. l. 10. for Moses, rea.
Io^hua. and page 122. l. 12. for Joshua read Ioshuas (...).


