A short Recapitulacion or abrigement of Erasmus Euchiridion, brefely
comprehendinge the sum and contents thereof. Uery Profitable and necessary to
be read of all true Christen men,

Drawn out by M. Couerdale Anno. 1545

Timo. ii. Suffer afflitions, as good and feathfull sowdyars of Jesus
Christ.ij.

Job.vii. Syeng the lyffe of man, is but Abattell or werfare upon the erathe.

Ephesians. vi. BE strong in the lord, and in the power of his might. And put on
the armoure of God, that yemaye stand steadfast, against the crafty assautes
of the devil. For ye must not wrestelle against flesh and blood: But
against rule, against power, and worldly rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spretual wickedness, for heavenly things.
ij. Cor. x Let not your weapens pertaining to this battaylle, be carnal
things, but mychty in God, able to cast down strong holds, and aver throw
the ymaginacion of man, and every hieth yng that exalts yt self against the
knowledge of God, And bring in to captivity, al understanding to the obedience
of Christo owre lord and God.
The sum of the prologe.
The preface, prologhe or long epistle, written to the right virtuous and sage
father Paulus Uolzius (whom almighty god even now this last year has
delivered out of this wretched world) declares evidently, that though some me^
have even married them selves to the vayn pastymes and pleasures of the world.
Yet god through aduersite (as his accustomate manner is) nurtureth god throw
aduersite calls his own children to re pentaunce.
and teaches his own, chasteneth the^, and calls them to a Christian life:
To the furthuraunce whereof like as eueryone of us is bound to bestow all his
labor and study. So is not he to be cast away, that being weak and frail,
not only desires to be virtuous, but also is fervent in lerning the way of
godliness: Whereof they are the best teachers, that auoydinge the tediousness of
huge and great volumes, do instruct men rather to live godly, then to waist
their brains in long and vain disputacions. For how few so ever they be that
give them selves to ^^ole doctrine, yet the fear of god (the fruit whereof is
eternal salvation) apperteyneth unto all me^. Nether does any man atteyne so
nyghe unto wisdom, as he that is in love withal, and appears not so much
learned himself, as he is Who is wysest and best learned.
studious to allure all other (yea as well friend as so, as well turk as
Christen) to godliness, and is not himself overcome with euel, but rather
ouercometh euel with good. For as it is a Christen ma^s part to save and not
to destroy, so has the same right true and effectuous diuynite subdued more
people in times past to the kingdom of Christ, then any other artilery, weapen
or ordinance of war. Yea like as our most cruel enemies may be mollified
and won with benefits and kyndnesse, when we se^e nothing so much as the it
health. Even so in seeking their destruction, we may sooner turn in to turks
our selves, then that we shall cause them to become Christen men.

Now to considre the corruption of The corruptnesse of the world,
this world, and how far it is out of frame, the darcknesse, the trublous
rufflinge, the great tirannye, avarice and iniquite thereof unpunished: how
cold me are in charity, and how greatly given to ambicion and lucre: Who
lamentinge the same, does not se thousands of occasions for us all to take
better hold of Christ's doctrine, and to have recourse there unto? Specially
considering that the cruel Philistynes prevail so greatly, and cease not
(even now in our time) to stop it up, wringing and wresting it to their
filthy purposes: our philistynes
yea brablinge and cryeng so sore against it, that for fear me^ darre not
drink the lyuinge water thereof, but must be feign to take such corrupt
lycoure, as come out often heir all to trode^ cisternes: even earthly things for
heavenly, pelfare of men's inuencious insteade of gods holy commaundme^tes.
Which trifles yet shall easily of themselves vanishe away, if the light of
faith be so kyndlind in our minds, that we lose not the rule and patron of
Christ's love and charity. And doutles it shall further the gospel most notably
prestes.
if they that teach it, do excel in the knowledge and life there of: and if
Princes establishinghe no laws for their pryuers
own pleasure, delight more to refourme their people with mercy, the^ with
cruelty, rather to defend them, then to pyll or pol them. As for Princes,
they should without doubt use less oppressinge of their people, less warrynge
one against another, and less sheddyng of blonde, if bisshoppes and prestes
that be about them, were not readyer to flatre them, then they are since rely
to instruct them in Christ's doctrine. Which as it manifestly rebukes
covetous pharisees, ypocrites and proud rich folks: So does it openly teach
us to do good, and to be meke and gentle of mind, eue^ to our enemies.

Now though Princes make many laws whereof Christ is not the authoure, yet as
they are to be obeyed when they command that which isiust and right, so is it
best to suffer them even when they be evil. As touching the The comen people,
come^ people, though their estate be low, their under stonding ssrosse and
weak, and they of dewile bound to obey, yet for as much as they perteyne to
the mistical body of Christ, they must be nourished, for borne and cherished
after a fatherly manner, until they were more strong in Christ. For every one is
not like perfect in te kingdom of god. Therefore he that is called to more
excellentie of gifts, ought (after the manner of the highest elements) to
draw other unto him, and to help that his inferiors may be tra^sfourmed in
to his nature: and not under the pretense and cloak of virtue to disagree from
the learning of Christ, who is the only mark which every man ought to shote
at, and in no wise to change it, but to enforce himself to come as nigh it as
he can. Which as it is the higheest perfection allowed of god, so consists it
not in the manner or kind of lyuinge, not in garments, meats or drynkes, but
in the affecte and mind.

And like as there is no estate of lyuinge but there be some dangers where into
it may fall, so ought no man to be displeased, but rather to take it in right
good worth, when he is warned thereof. Nether is he a condemner of other men,
that faithfully shows Noting is fre from the cauillation of lewd persons
them their dewtie. And yet can there nothing be fre from the cauillacion of
lewd persons: but what so ener is spoken, yea even to the praise of virtue
against vice, that same is taken to the worst, and judged of them to be of a
wrong and synistrall opynion. Yea of so corrupt and perverse judgments are
some, that they count it (even in prestes) to be but a small vyre, which is
most abominable: and also esteem it to be an hye virtue, which has but only
the visure and appearaunce of godlynes thinkinge the^ selves better for the
ceremonies, rules and trifles of men's inuencion, and yet having no conscience
at all to slaundre other men. Nether need men to fear, that the reproving of
such abuses does either subuerte religion or hyndre true obedience. For who^
soever the holy ghost enspyreth, is of his own acorde without any manner The
holy ghost is the anthour of obedience
of compulcio^ ready to obey, yea even those rulers that be sharp and
roughe. Who yet nevertheless should no more abuse the obedience of their
inferiors, then any man should make his liberty a cloak or cover to his
carnal living. Which though some do, yet ought not other men therefore to be
locked as Jews in the bondage of ceremonies. For the more a man is religigious
and given unto true godliness, the less he yeldeth to the ceremonies, of men's
inuencion. Wherein if no man were snared till he were of parfite experience,
then like as the fewer should be disceaued. Even so doutlesse (acording to the
desire of all them that be good) the religion of the gospel should be so
pleasant unto every man, that they should be heartily well content there with
without any other.

And reason it is, that all things give place to the glory of Christ, where
with Moses rejoiced, that his own honor was defaced and mynished: like as
also the religions of men should be, if they that profess the gospel did live
thereafter. For as they whom we now call religious, are nothinhe like them of
the oldtyme, but drouwned in ypocrisie and worldly business, yea nothing
better then other temporal men, save only in appearaunce. Even so shall the
vows of chastity, pouerte, and obedience be better hepte of him that observes
the profession of holy baptyme, then they be of them.

The rest is then, that seeing the confidence in our selves is most dangerous,
we nether disdain them that be feeble, ner foolishly sto^de in our own
conceate for no dyuersite of lyuinge from other me^: But rather folowinge the
counsel of Christ, let us even fro^oure hertes confess when we have done
our best, that we are but unprofitable servants. And to the intent that we
may be obedient unto Christ himself, let us be ready not only to hear them
that call us unto him, but also to tolerate and suffer the evil: Nevertheless
in such forte, that if they command things wicked and contrary to the
doctrine of Christ, we rather obey god, then men.

The first Chapter.
How we must watch and look about us allwaye, while we be in this life.
WHo so will escape the danger of syme, and prosperously go forward in the
way of godlynes, must allway The life of man is but a war fair.
considre, that this life of man is a perpetual warsart, and must be
circumspecte, that the world with his delycious and flatring pleasures iugle
not his mind from watchinge, or make him to careless, as though he had
already conquered his enemies: Who, consideringe they be so many, as namely the
wicked and crafty deuels above us, the world before and behind us, yea on the
right hand and on the left, as well Enemies at hand
shaking the wall of our saules with the gonnes of aduersite, as prouokyng us
unto evil with his vainepromisis: Not only while the slipper and crafty
serpent lays awaythe, eue^ by our own affections and sensualite to entyce
and draw our minds unto mortal and deedly pleasures, But also while we our
selves bear a boute with us the old earthy Ada^, our own most perilous
enemy: Considering Isaye, we have so many deedly enemies, ought we not
therefore still to be weaponed and allwaye to watch: Why sleep we then so fast,
geuynge our selves to ydilnesse, to pleasure, to revelling, as though we
should rather live in banckettyng, then in warfare against such enemies: Why
will we rather make truce with vice and sin, the^ with god, whit whom the
wicked can have no peace: namely they that not only take part with sin, but
unkindly also and wickedly break their appointment made with him: Have we not
in we have promised in baptyme, to fight always under the sta^dart of christ
holy baptyme professed and bound our selves to fight faitfully ever under
the standart of Christ our captain, to whom we owe more then we have to pay:
Do not the badges and signs of baptyme in us testify, that we are sworn unto
him, never to forsake him, whereof the name of Christ also ought to put us in
remembrance. Why are we then such rennagates, that we not only take part
against him which bestowed his own life for us, but do it also in a filthy
quarrel, to opteyne noue other reward then the very death of our souls? If in
these mad wars of men, the miserable souldyours do ioperde their lives are
pricked and stered up unto courage, through the greatness of the pray, through
the comfort of the captain, through the cruelnesse of the enemies, through
shame of cowardnesse, or desire of praise. How much more then should the hope
of reward kyndle us to have lusty stomachs: when he that shall quyte our
pain if we win the field, beholdinge us, does not only comfort us in our
labors and trauayles, while we are yet fightinge, but also gives us such
reward as excels all the senses and wits of man, even blessed immortalite
and heaven it self: The hope of which reward should by reason inflame the
quycke courages of gentle stomachs, seeing he that has promised, can nether
dye ner disceaue.

And consideringe he beholds us that seyth al things, like as very shame of
cowardnesse at the leest way should move us to be lusty in this battayll:
Eue^ so for as much as to be praised of him is very felicite, why ioperde we not
our lives to have this praise: Seeing now we are so circumspecte in avoiding,
the dangers and death of the body, why perceive we not the death of the soul
which is much more cruel: Now even as the body is out of te^pre wha^ it will
keep no meat, so wha^ the word of god seems bitter unto Tokens that the
soul is sick.
^s, if our mind rise against it, if our memory keep it not, if we think
not upon it, net work thereafter: If our soul grudge, or be weak and faint
to work the deeds of mercy, to suffer trouble or loss: If the eyes of our
mind be waxen so dymme, that they se not the clear light of the treuth: If
our inward ears hear not the voice of god: Summa, if we lack al our
inward feling and perceauyng of the knowledge of god. It is an evident toke^
not only that our soul is acrased, but also deed, because god which is the
life thereof, is away For felyng is a token of life: and like as the body is
not alive if he feel not the prickinge of a pynne.

Even so when we are wounded in our soul and have committed evil, if it
grieve us not, then is not our soul alive, but deed: For the which cause also
Christ called the Pharisees painted sepulcres, namely because they bare deed
souls about with them Wherefore considering that the bodies of good men are
the temple of the holy ghost, and for as much as (acording to the gospel) the
mouth speaks out of the abundaunce of the heart, No doubt we would speak the
lively words of god and work his deeds, if he our life were present within
our hertes.

Thus though we fight in strange and wonderful ioperdies, with many violent
and subtle adversaries, yet have we causes sufficient to be of good comfort
For though our enemies be grievous: Causes of consolation.
yet have we present help at hand. Though they be many against us, what
matter is it when god is on our side: If he stay us, who ca^ cast us down:
As for our enemy, he is no new soldyour, but one that was overcome many
years agoo, and over thrown by the might of Jesus christ: as he shall non also
be subdued in us by the same power, if we as lively members remain in Christ
our head. For tough we be not strong in our own strength, yet in him we
shall be able to do all things. If the end and victory of our war depended
of fortune, the^ might we donte thereof: but it is certain and sure, namely in
the hands of our protectoure, whose benignite never fails man. Wherefore if
when being thanckfull unto him that for our how we may win the field
salvation first oppressed the tyranny of sin: If we be not careless ner
negligent, but with all diligence do our part again, and be of good
comfort: If we I say, fightinge on this manner do follow his ensample, nether
bearinge us to bold upon the grace of god, as they do that be careless:
nether casting away the confidence of mind, as do they that mistrust his
mercy: Then through his strength we shall be sure in conclusion to win the
field.

The.ij. Chapter,
What weapens are to be used in the war of a Christen man.
Like as nothing perteyneth more to the war of a Christian man, then to know
with what weapens he must fight, and to have the same always ready at hand:
Even so (consideringe the adversary is never idle) we ought not to cease from
war, but if we will fight against the multitude of vices, we ought always to
watch, to have our mind armed, and to take the weape^s of defense, but
specially to provide us of two, namely prayer two weapens
and knowledge, which be the chief armoure of a Christen man. Perfect prayer
lifts up te mind unto god: knowledge armeth the mind with halsome precepts
and honest opynions. These two cleue so together, that the one can not lack
the other: For as the one makes intercession, so the other teaches how we
ought to pray, namely in the name of Jesus, and what we ought to desire, even
that which is wholesome for our souls health. Now though prayer be more
excellent, because she thalketh familiarly with almighty god, yet is knowledge
no less necessary: Which as it ought not to be vnparfite, so ought not prayer
to be faint, slack, or without quycknesse. Nether ca^ we well perform the
great journey that we have to go, without the aid and help of these to
weape^s. The use of prayer is, not to mo^ble and babble much, as they do The use
of prayer
that are not ripe in gods sprete. For fyve words spoken in knowledge, are
better, then ten thousand babled with the mouth. Nether is it the noise of our,
lips, but the fervent desire of the mind that god aloweth. Which fervent
prayer with like study or meditacio^ of the holy scripture, is able as, well to
put abacke the great violence of our enemies, as to make easy any grievous
aduersite. If we with this heavenly Mannaa^d food of god be refreshed in the
furtheraunce, of our journey, it shall make us bold and strong, to buckle
with our enemies. For the doctrine of god as it only is pure and undefiled
(contrary to the nature of men's doctrynes) Even so, to them that spiritually
vndersto^ding it, may abide the hearing thereof, there is nothing sweterner more
pleesaunt, and therefore the more the doctrine of God.
worthy to be searched and well po^dred. This is the river of comfort, the
fountain of ease, the well that refreshed the weerye, the water of Siloe, where
the blind recover their sight. To the study whereof if we apply our selves
wholly: that is, if we exercise our minds continualli in the law of god, we
shall be so armed, that we need not to fear any assault of our enemies.

Touching the heithan Poets and Philosophers, if we taist of them measurably,
so that we wax not old ner ^ye in them, they are not utterly to be disalowed.
Yea what soever they teach well, ought no more to be despised, Liberal
sciences are not to be dispysed.
then was the counsel of Iethro whom Moses followed. As for such as write
uncleanly, we ought either not to touch the^, or else not to look to far in
the^. To be short, al manner of lerninge should be taisted in due season and
measure, with good judgment and discretion, under the correction of christ's
doctrine: so that the wisdom of god be above al other, our best beloved, our
dove, our sweet heart: Which may not be touched, but with clean and washe^
hands, namely with high pureness of mind and due reverence: for so coming
with reverence ought (...)
unto it, we shall se the pleasures, delicates and deynies of our blessed
spouse, the precious Jewels of rich salomo^, even the secret treasure of
eternal wisdom, Wherefore co^sideringe the verite of god nether disceaueth ner
is disceaued, we ought to give more crede^ce there unto, the^ to any thing that
we do bodily either se or hear.

As consernyng the interpretours of the holy scripture, we ought not to chose
Expositours of scripture
them that teach to brawle and conte^de, but such as go far thest from the
lettre: whose godliness and holy life is known, whose learning is more
plenteous, and whose exposicio^ is most agreeable unto gods word. Now as we
ought to grow unto parfitnesse and strenght in the knowledge thereof, and not
still to be children. Even so if we will have it to be sauery unto us, and to
nourishe us, we must not reed without vnderstunding (as clostres do) but break
the codde, and failt of the swetnesse within: specially co^sideringe that as it
is the sprete and not the flesh that quyckeneth, so will the father of heaven be
whorshipped in the sprete, and not in the barcke of the lettre. Wherefore tough
we should not despise the weak, yet ought we to make speed unto more secret
mysteries, and to stere up our selves there unto by offten prayer, till it
please god through his son Jesus Christ to open it, that yet is shutt, unto us.

Now tho our purpose, if we wandryng through out al doctrynes, pyke and chose
out the best, and by the example of the be, refuse the poison, and suck out
only the wholesome and sweet Iuce, it shall arm our minds the better to a
virtuous conversation. But that deuyne harness which with no weapen can be
persed, is fetched only out of the armory of holy scripture, where with our
David Christ Jesus brake the forehead of our adversary. Wherefore if we list to
go unto the store house of gods scripture, we shall there In the armoury of gods
word are the best we apens
find the true armoure of this war, valeaunt in god not only to destroy
fortresses and counsails and every high thing that exalts it self against
the doctrine of god, but also to resist in the day of aduersite, and to
quench all the whote and fyrie weape^s of our cruel enemy. Such weapens or
armoure of light (though we be the refuse and aut caltes of the world) has
almighty god given us, to make us stowte and lusty in his wars. For in his
armory find we the harness of Justice and verite, the buckler of says, the
helmet of health, and the sword of of the sprete which is the word of god:
Wherewith if we be diligently covered and fenced, there shall no tribulation,
straitness, hunger, nakedness peril persecution, etc. Separate us from the
love of god. Such armoure, Isaye, shall holy scripture mynistre abundauntly
unto us, if we occupieng our time the rin, do use the same wisely.

The.iij. Chapter,
How that the first point of wisdom is, a man to know him self. Of two manner
of wisdoms, the true, and the apparent.
IF we thus war now, intendinge to opteyue the peace which Christ only
gives, we must strongly fight against our own vices, with whom, god our
only peace and felicite, is at variaunce: Of the which felicite they are
utterly void, yea very wretches, filthy and unhappy, that lyenge still in
the night of ignorance and foolishness, are destitute of his wisdom: if we
be wise, we shall be conquerours of the enemy. Wherefore like as worldly wisdom
is foolishnes worldly wisdom.
before god, even so if we be wise in him, it ought not to discorage us, when
the world judges us to be fools, to be disceaued, to dote, and to be mad
bedlems, because we intend to depart toward Christ. Is not this a miserable
blindness, sore to be mourned, when in trifles and things of no value, yea
unto filthynesse and in euel only, me^ are clear witted: and in things
concerning salvation and in goodness not to have much more understanding the^
brute beestes? O how good a thing is it to have knowledge, to be willinge to
learn, and to be abedient unto the truth? Contrary wise a very euel thing is
it to lack knowledge: yea as he is good for nothing which has no wisdom. So
is it a worse thing to disdain to learn: But to withstand and repugne the
truth is worst of al, and farthest To withstand the truth is worst of al.
from grace: Namely, wha^ me^ despise the wisdom of god, and think scorn to
be taught of it: For the which cause he himself shall utterly forsake the^, and
rejoice in their destruction. For to count it madness when one lives godly,
is a very beestli and deuelishe wisdom, after the which follows presumption,
blindness of mind, rage and tyra^nye of affectious, and finally the whole
heap of all vices and liberty to do what one lysteth, yea custom of sin,
dasyng of the wits, bodily death, and afterward death everlasting. Thus we
se that the mother of extreme mischefe is worldy wisdom.

But contrary wise of the wisdom of god come all good things, specially so
bernesse, the fruits of gods wisdom.
meaknesse, the secret joy of a clear conscience, which vanishes not away,
but grows to eternal gladness and mirth. This wisdom must we require only
of god with fervent prayer out of the veins of holy scripture. The chief part
of it is to know our selves, which we shall do the better, if we well
consider, what we be inward and within our skynnes.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Of the outward and inward man.
Almighty god made man at the first of diverse parts, coupled with blessed
co^corde: But the serpent the enemy of peace, put them asunder again with
unhappy discord, so wynge the poison of discension between them that were
honestly agreed. Insomuch that now nether the mind ca^ rule the body without
business, nether will the body obey without grundginge, For where as in man
there should be such an order, that like as in a prosperous comynaltye, for
auoydinge of debate and strife, the wysest bear most rule, and the subjects
obey their officers: This origenal decree of nature and first example of
honesty notwithsto^ding, the order in man is so troubled, that the subjects
will not obey the Sensualite will not obey reason
prince: Yea the corrupt affections and appetites of the flesche strive to be
more master the^ reason it self. Which unquiet affections who so ouercometh,
the same lives ablessed life, mounting up to celestial things: and as a king
endowed with wisdom, willing and purposinge to do nothing amysse, nothing
against the judgment of reason, nothing in ordinatly, nothing frowardly,
nothing corruptly.

The.v. Chapter.
Of the diversity of affections.
THe eternal law which god has created in in the right reason of man,
teaches him to abhor al corrupt affections, and not to live after them,
which thing even the heithe^ philosophers do also confess. Now as we are bound
sureli to know what motions we be most inclined unto, so ought we to
understo^d, that thorou right reason (which is the power of gods holy sprete)
the most violent of the^ may either be refrayned, or else turned in to virtue
Truth it is, that as some man is more prone unto virtue the^ some, either by
reason Some man is more prone to virtue then some
of the influe^ce of the celestial bodies, or else of our progenitors, or else
of the bringinge up in youth, ar of the complexio^ of the body: Even so some
vices follow the countrees, some the co^plexio^ of the body, some the age of
man, some be appropiated unto kind. And some time an euel disease of the man
is reco^pe^ced with another certain contrary good gift or property. As for
the vices that are nighest unto virtues, we must amend the^, and turn the^ in
to that virtue which they most nighe rese^ble. For let a man that is soon
provoked unto anger, refrain his mind, and he shall be nothing faint herted,
but bold yea and fre of speech without dissimulacio^, The nygarde, by the
exercise of reason, shall be thrifftie and a good husband: The flatrer, shall
through moderacion, be curteys and pleasant: The obstinate may be constant:
Solemness may be turned to grauite: One full of foolish joys may be come a
good co^panyon. But in any wise must we beware, that we put not the name of
virtue to any manner of vice, as to call cruelty, justice: envy, zeal. The
way The way to felicite.
the^ to felicite is first to know our selves: Secondly, to do al things
after the judgment of reason, whose mouth must not be out of taist, but without
corrupcion. Now as there is no greather reward the^ fe^licite: even so that
which unto our only strength is hardest of al to do, is most easy if we look
unto god our helper. Wherefore if we grounding our selves upon a sure purpose
of a perfect life, do ferue^tli set upon it and go lustely unto it, no doubt we
shall be able to bring it to pas: for to be willinge to be a christian man is a
great part of Christendom. A good will does much
And though the beginning of a thing be never so hard, yet the way of virtue
in process does wax easy: shall beestes be more ready to be tamed, the^ we in
our minds? Sal we for the healt of our bodies be ruled by the counsel of a
phisician being a man, and not master our own affections at the commandment
of god him self, to have a quyete conscience al our whole life? Shall we do
more so save our bodies from liknesse, then to deliver both body and soul
from eternal death?

The.vi. Chapter.
Of the two parts of man, proved by holy scripture.
AShame it is, that in this war men be so rude and vnexercysed, that they
know not the dyuersite between reason and affections. For that the philosophers
call reason, the same does S. Paul sometime call the sprete, sometime what reason
is.
the inward man, sometime the law of the mind. That they call affection,
calls he sometime the flesh, sometime the body, sometime the outward man, the
law of the members, and the body of death. And thus our war is peace, life
and liberty of the soul: but death and bondage of the flesh, with all his
lusts. Now where as Plato put two souls in one man, S. Paul in one man makes
two men; so coupled togheter, that nether without other ca^ be either inheaue^
or hell. And again so separated, that the death of the one must be the life of
the other. This is the old debate between the two twynnes Jacob and Esau
Jacob and Esau, which or ever they come to light, wrestle together within
their moters womb. Between these two brethren is never joined parfite
concord. For Esau hates Jacob, who having Esau ever suspected, darre not come
within his danger. With thing avoid the ioun sail of the flesh
should teach us to suspecte our own sensual flesh, and always to eschew the
counsel thereof. Yea mete is it and convenient, that the woman be obedient to
the husband, that Isaac be more set by then Ismael, that grace increace, and
tirannye of the flesh mynishe. For when carnal affections ware old, then
springs up to blessed tranquilite of an innocent mind, and sure quietness
of the sprete. Let not Ismael therefore the child of the flesh disceaue us with
his pastyme and pleasures, but let our Isaac always suspecte him, and flee the
occasions Flee the accasio^s of sin
of sin. For full wild is the flesh, so that the trouble thereof is expedient,
to the exercise of virtue, to the custody of humilite, to nurtoure us, and to
teach us wha^ we are tempted, first to desire help of god: secondly, that if
we be his, no tentacion can be dangerous unto us: And finally against al vain
glory, against so wild and manyfolde affections, to be ever still, wrastleng.
For by such victory we shall be sure of the blessinge of god: and opteyne grace
to be at another time much (...) armed against our enemy: (...) halt not on
both sides, but leene more to the sprete of god, then to our awue carnal
affections: Which if we ma^fully subdue unto the end, we shall be sure after
these trublous storms to have true quietness, even to se the lord, to taist
and feel how sweet and pleasant he is, and to opteyne eternal consolacion in
him.

The.vij. Chapter.
Of the three parts of man.
MAn, after the mind of Origin is made of three parts. The first part is the
flesh, wherein The flesh,
the malicious serpent thorou origenal frespace, has written the law of
sin, whereby we be provoked unto fylthynesse, and coupled unto the deuell, if
we be overcome. The second part is the sprete, where in we represente the
symilitude of the nature of god, The sprete.
who after the eternal law of his own mind, has graven therein the law of
honesty, wherbye we be knett unto god, and made one with him. The third part
is the soul, partaker of The soul
the sensible wits and natural mocions, woe if she forsakyng the flesh (...)
unto the sprete, becomes (...). But if she foolowe the corrupt affections of
the flesh, then joins she herself unto an harlot, and is made, one body with
her, that being an euel, strange, flatryng, foolish and babbling woman,
breaks her promise, and forsakes the husband of her iouth. Wherefore if we
enclyne unto the sprete, it makes us not only blessed, religious, obedient,
kind and merciful. But also teaches us to desire celestial and necessary,
pure, parfite and godly things, to obey God more then men: and though some
affections be disguised with visers of virtue, yet not to be disceaued with
them. If we enclyne to the flesh, it makes us beestes, despysers of God,
disobedient, unkind and cruel, yea and causes us to desire delicate,
pleasant and filthy things. The rule of true The rule of true godliness
godliness therefore is to leene so nighe unto the sprete, that for any good
inclinacion or virtue we ascrybe nothing to our selves: that we do nothing
for our own pleasure or advauntage: that for obseruyng of outward things we
judge not our selves better the^ other men: that we regard more our neghbours
nacessite, and be readier to help them, then to keep mes tradicions: that our
love be chaist and spiritual, and that nothing be so dear unto us as Christ
himself.

The.viii. Chapter.
Certain general rules of Christen lyuinge.
Now to guide and conueye us out of the blind errors of this world, unto the
pure and clear light of spiritual living, we must of virtue and godliness
make even a crafft and occupation: the rules whereof if we do follow, and
manfully exercise our selnes therein, the holy ghost shall bring our purpose
for ward. These precepts shall do us much good against blindness, against the
flesch, and against our own weakness, namely three euel, that proceading of
origenal sin, remain still in us, to nurtoure us, and for the increace of
virtue. For where as blindness cancred with corrupt and evil bringing up,
lewd company, froward affectious, darkness of vices and with custom of
sin, dymmeth the judgment of reason: so that in the election of things we be
disceaued, and in stead of the best, follow the worst. The first point is
therefore, that we have Three necessari points
knowledge to discern what is to be refused or clean obbolissed, and what is to
be accept. Secondly, where as the flesh draws us to in ordinate affection we
must hate that which we knou to be euel, and love that which is honest,
wholesome and good. Thirdly where as infirmite ouercometh us is either with
tediousness or with tentacion, we must be of good courage: and so continue in
the things which we have well begone ne, that we faint not: and that after we
have set our hand to the ploughe, we look not bacward, til we have opteyned
the crowue promised.

The.ix. Chapter.
Against the euel of ignoruance.
The first rule.
THe first rule must be, that we so judge both of Christ and of his We must
judge well of scripture, not douting in the promises of god.
holy scripture, that we be sure, how that it greatly perteyneth to our
health, and that though all the world be against it, yet nothing that we
perceive with our natural senses, is or can be so true, as it that is red in
the scripture, enspyred of god himself, brought forth by so many prophets,
approved with the blood of so many martirs, with the consent of all good men
so many hundredth years, with the doctrine and life of Christ himself, with so
many miracles, etc. Which scripture is so agreeable to the equite of nature, and
every where so like it self, so rauiseth, moves, and altered the minds of
them that take heed thereunto, yea and tells of so many, great, wonderful and
true things, that if we often considre the same, it shall stere us up unto more
feruentnesse both of faith, prayer and virtue, being sure, that as the reward
of vice and of these momentany pleasures, is both vexacio^ of mind and
eternal punishment. So unto good men shall be given and hundred fold joy of a
pure conscience, and finally ouerlasting life.

^he.x. hapter.
The second rule.
AS the first rule is tha^, not to doubt in the promises of god. So is With a
good courage must we enter in to the way of salvation
the second rule, that we enter in tho the way of salvation gladly, boldly,
and with a good courage: that we be always ready for Christ's sake to lose both
life and goods: that we be not negligent, but feauent: that we suffer not the
affections of our lovers, the pleasures of this world, the care of our
household, the chain of wordly business, to hold us back from the kingdom of
heaven. For we must for sake Egypt, that we turn not again to the flesh
ports thereof: So haist out of Sodom, that we look not back: So fiee out of
Babylon and from the vices thereof, that we do it spedely without prolonginge of
the time: that we trust no longer to our selves, but commit us wholli unto
the lord, that we serve him altogether, and no other master: that we halth not
on both legs. For the lord is so gelous over our souls, that he will have
all that he has redeemed with his blood, and can not suffer the feel shipe of
the deuell, who^ he ones overcame by his death. So be there but two ways
only, the one of Two ways only
salvation, the other of perdicion. The strayte way is it that we must walk,
wherein to, though few do enter, yet must we considre that we are as much bound
as other men, to lead a Christen life, to take Christ's cross upon us, and to
follow him. For if it belong unto us to live with Christ, and to rise again to
eternal life, then belongs it also unto us to dye with him, and to be
crucified with him as touching the world, sin and carnal desures. Which as
it is an hard thing and known wnto few, so is it the comen and general
profession of al Christen men, sworn and promised in baptyme the most holy and
religious vow of all. And though there be never so few that perfitly follow
the head, yet must we al enforce our selves to come thereto. For of al Christen
men they are the best, that with steadfast heart and purpose are still minded so
to be.

The.xi. Chapter.
The third rule.
THe third rule is, that we utterly despise and count for a thing we must
despise what so ever leads from the way of Christ.
of naught, watsoeuer would feaer us from the way of virtue and of Christ,
Which as it is of al other life's the most commodious. So even at the first
cease it to be sharp, and in process is made easier, pleasant, and
delectable, whereby we go with sure hope, and that without labor, to eternal
felicite: where as these mad men of the world, with their own extreme labor,
purchase eternal death: non though the way of godliness were much more
laborious the^ the way of the world yet the hope of reward and the comfort
of god swageth the tedioussnesse thereof, and of bitter makes it sweet. But in
the way of the world, one care and sorou springs of an other without any
quietness. For notging is filthier or more laborious, the^, the bondage of
nothing worse, the^ to be servant unto sin
Egypt nothing more grievous then the captivity of Babylon, nothing more
intolerable the^ the yoke of Pharao and Nabugodonosor. But Christ's ioke is
pleasant, his burden is light. Summa there lacks no pleasure, where a
quyete conscience is: No misery, where an unquiet conscience crucifieth te
mind They that out of the vices of Babylon are converted unto the lord, have,
experience hereof, and can tell us, that nothing is more grievous, the^ vice:
nothing more easy, more chereful, or more comfortable the^ is virtue.
Nevertheless though both the reward and labors of virtue and vice where like,
yet were is better to be vexed with Christ, then to swymme, in pleasure with
the deuell: which is so filthy, cruel and discentful a master, that every man
should flee out of his service, wherein is nothing but grievous labor in
purchacyng, sorou and tho^ght in lesyng, yea many thousand ioperdies, miserable
care, perpetual tourme^t, mischaunce labor spent in vain, much grefe of heart
and mind. But What they op^^yne that convert unto god.
who so endeavors himself with sure purpose to come from the vicious world
to a good co^uersacio^ in Christ, opteyneth that he seeks, changes trifles
with things of more value, yea filuer for gold, flynt for precious sto^e,
finds better fre^des: for outward pleasures and riches of the body, euioyeth
such as be (...) better purer and more certain: So that his loss shall be
turned to advauntage, aduersite to solace, rebuke to praise, vexacion to
comfort, bitter things to sweet, euel to good.

The.xij. Chapter
The fourth rule.
THe fourth rule is, that we have none other mark and ensample Christ only
must be the mark and ensample of our living
of living, save only Christ who is nothing else save charity, simplicite,
innoce^cie, patience, cle^uesse, and what soever he himself taught: To who^ we
direct our journey, if we be so given oneli unto virtue, that we love and
desire nothing but either Christ, or else for Christ: hating, abhorringe, flyeng
and anoydinge nothing but only sin, or else for sins sake. And thus if our
eye be pure, al our bodi shall be bright so that what soever honest or
indifferent thing we take in hand, it shall turn to our wealth. As for filthy
things, nether advauntagener punishment should make us to commit them. Mean
things verily and indifferent ought no farther to be desired, then they are
profitable to a christian living. As for an ensample. Conning or lerning must be
loved for christ's sake: so that wha^ we know him and the secrets of his
scripture, we love him in such sort, that openyng him unto other, we both take
fruit of him our selves, and if we have knowledge of other sciences, we use them
all to his honor. For better it is to have Love is more excellent then
knowledge
less knowledge and more love, then much to know and not to love. This every
thing, so far forth as it helps most unto virtue, ought chefely to be
applied. But rather ought we to lack them then that they should hold us back
from Christ: Unto whom we ought to haist so ferueutly, that we should have no
leisure to care for other things, whether they be given us or taken away from
us: but even to use the world as if we used it not. After this rule if we
examen al our studies and acts, than like as having a craft or occupacion we
will not labor to defraude our neghbours, but to find our housholdes and to win the^ unto Christ. Even so when we fast, pray or use any such like, we
shall not do it for any carnal purpose, but proceade on still til we come unto
Christ, nether going out of the way, ver doing or suffering any thing, that
shall not mynistre unto us some occasion of godliness

The.xiij. Chapter.
The fifth rule.
THe fifth rule is, that we count it parfite godliness, always to We must
ascend from things visible, to things invisible
apply our selves to asce^de from things visible to things invisible. Which
if we do not: then are we no true honourers of god, but plain supersticious.
And yet being strangers in this visible world, what soever offreth it self to
our sensible powers, we considering it, ought to apply the same either to the
world angelical, or else to manners, even unto god, and to the invisible porcio^
of our selves. And thus the thing that we perceive by our sensible wites,
shall be unto us an occasion of godliness: Yea by the light of this visible
Son we shall learn, that great is the pleasure of the inhabitauntes of heaven,
upon whom the eternal light of god is ever shyninge. And like wise by the
darck night, we shall think how horrible it is, a soul to be destitute of the
lihht of god: and that if the beauty of the body be pleasant, the beauty of
the soul is much more honest. For the less felyng we have in things
transitory and of the body, and the less we are moved thee with, the more the
less delight we have in erthy things, the more pleasure have we inheauenly.
swetnesse we find in things perteyning to the sprete, and the better are we
aquainted with things eternal: to the love whereof we ought to arrise from
things temporal, and in co^pariso^ of the other even to despise them, and more
to fear the disease, poison and death of the soul, the^ of the body: Ye the
wrath of god, more then any thonder or lichtenyng, The mystery therefore in all
things ought to looked upon, as well wha^ we considre the outward creatures and
works of god, as in the study of his holy scripture: the sprete whereof and
not the baren lettre must specially be searched out, and the allegories
handled, not dreamyngly allegories.
or vnfrutefully, nether with subtyl disputacions) after the manner of our
diuynes, that are to much addicte to Aristotel) but well fauouredly, after the
eusa^ple of the old doctors: for in as much as it is the sprete that gives
life and liberty: therefore in all manner lettres and in all our acts we must
have respect to the sprete and fruits thereof and not to the flesh and his
fruits: wishing rather to be privily allowed in the sight of god, the^ openly in
the sight of man: rather to In sprete and verite will god be worshipped.
whorsipe god in sprete and verite, then other wise, rather to eat Christ's
flesh and drink his blood spiritualli, the^ oneli with the mouth: rather to
be quickened and to have life in the sprete, the^ hangings. Ihons gospel or an
Agnus dei about our necks, to rejoice in any carn all thing, where the
sprese is not present: rather to be one sprete with the sprete of christ, to be
one bodi with his, to be a quick member of his church the^ without fruit to
say or hear many masses: rather to have a clean and saueri mind, and to
study to walk with christ in new life, the^ to have the bodi washed, touched
with salt, anointed, or spre^cled with holy water: rather to roprese^t and
folou the virtuous and blessed doctrine of saints, We must follow christ in his
saints.
yea to counterfaite christ in the^, the^ to rejoice in touching their relikes,
to honor their bones, or to be buried in a gray freres cote rather to
express the lively and very image of Christ set forth in his own ductryne,
and living, the^ to crepe to te crusse, or ta have at home a piece of the wod
that it was made of: rather to asce^de to more parfitnesse of the sprete, to
grou in parfite love and charity, and to offer a contrite and humble heart unto
god, then to have confidence in carnal things, or supersticyous ceremonies,
tradicions and inventions of men: rather to do the thing that the eyes of god
require, the^ to please the eyes of men: rather to procure the quietness, and
innocence of the mind, and to seek the nourishment the rof by the true
hearing, seeing and feling of the word of god in the soul, the^ by the outward
senses of the body: rather with inward medicynes to heal the hurtes of the
foul, and by the wings of love to fly up to the sprere, then crepyng on the
ground with unclean beestes, to be still unlearned in the mysteries of Christ,
or to be destitute of the sweet lycoure that comes of him.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
The.vi. rule.
THe sixte rule is, that varieng as much as is possible both from We must vary
from the comen people,
the deeds and opynions of the comen sort of men, we fette the ensample of
godliness at none, save only at Christ himself, the only true patron and
form of lyuinge, the only true pathe and right hie way. For look as are the
opinions where with our minds be instructed, such are also our manners and
conversation. And therefore Christen men in bringing up their children, should
chefely care, that even from the cradle they be Christenly persuaded, and not
learn to sing filthy or wa^ton songs, to wayle or wrynge their hands for
the loss of worldly goods, to recompense euel for evil. For towe is not
readier to catch fire, then man is disposed unto vice: which chefely
proceadeth of euel opinious, when in stead of a sweet thing, we embrace it
that is sower, and when for it that might do us good, we follow our oune damage
and loss. Wherefore considering that the comen sort of people and their manners
now adays be most corrupt, and seeing there is no worse author of lyuinge the^
they be: for as much Isaie, as the flock of good men is but small, peavice more
regarded then virtue. No estate, nothing should make us to go from the truth,
no opynion, no name or parsone of man should move us to tread one ynthe from
Christ's truth, or from the life of virtue: Whereof non adays me^ are more
ashamed, then were the Neithen in times past: Yea to be a right Christian man,
is accounted every where a very vile thing: so vain is the world and in so
great reputacion have they it to be borne of noble blood, to be rich, to have
their pleasures, to be strong and valeaunt, to be praised of the world, to be
accounted worldly wise: wha^ in veridede the chefest nobilite of al is to be
the child of god, the chefest riches is to true nobilite true riches. true
pleasure true strength
possess him in who^ are al things: the chefest pleasure of al is so to
delight in Christ, that we be moved with the love of none other lust: the
chefest strength is, wha^ a man has so overcome himself, that he ca^ find in
his heart to deipise al injuries, to reco^pe^ce good for euel, to pray for the^
that curse him. The chefest praise of al is, for godlynes sake to be true praise
mocked and laughed at of euel men, and to be approved of Christ: the chefest
wisdom of al is, to be circumspecte in prouidyng true wisdom
for the life to come. Summa, we must not conform our selves to this world,
but so alter our minds, that we harken and approve, not what is the will of
me^, but what is the good, well pleasinge, and parfite will of god. For if we
move not the eyes of our heart from Christ, but follow his verite, we shall not
go out of the way. If we walk after his light, so that it shine unto us, we
shall nether stumble in darkness, ner fall in to the blind errors, opinions or
sects of the world.

The.xv. Chapter.
Opynions mete for a Christian man. we are not borne for our selves

THis excellent lernyng then of Christ must be stablished in us, that we think
us not to be borne unto our selves, but to the honor of god and wealth of al
men. So that loving him again which bestowed himself on us all toghether for
our redemption, we also for his sake love other men, and abhor their vices:
having not only respect to their need, and what we are able to do for the^,
but also reme^bringe the manifold causes that by reason should move us to love
them, to tender them, to be at one with the^, and not to account them as
strangers, or to hate the^ for any alteracio^ of vesture or of any such trifle
yea in no wise to despise them, but estemyng their hurt our awue, to considre,
that what soever we have received it is given us to bestow upon the^, and to
increace in edifieng of them in charity. This lerninge will induce men to desire
no vengeance, but to be the sons of their father in heaven, to overcome
evil with good, to suffer hurt rather then to do it: to forgive other men's
offenses: to be gentle in manners: If they be conning, to for hear and amend
the ignorance of the unlearned: If they be rich, to be circumspecte in
distributinge the goods that god has given the^; In pouer te to be as well
content as other men: In office to be more careful and diligent in consydering
their charge: In notyng the manners of euel persons, yet not to despise the
profession of virtue: In laboring for a comen office or in executing of the
same, to do it always for the profit of the comen and not for their own
singular wealth: being ready, even with the loss of their own life and
go^odes, to defend that which is right: being loathe to have preeminence,
Offices of Christian men.
which if it chance unto the^ yet to think that they also have a lord and
master in heaven, even Jesus Christ, and that no man is bound to follow his
doctrine more strately the^ they that he will of no man ask more strait
accomptes then of them, that they leine not to their own wills, that they
flater not themselves in evil: that their manners besuch as deserve riches,
honor, reverence, dignite, favor, and auctorite: that they them selves be
not guilty in the offenses which they do punish in other: that they despise no
man in comparison of the^ selves: that in bearinge rule, they mind not so much
to excelle as to profit all men: that they turn not to their own profit the
things which are comen, but bestow that they have yea and themselves also
upon the commonwealth: that in their titles of honor they refarre all such
things unto god: that in mynistring their office, they fetch not ensample of
their predecessors, or of flaterers, but only of Christ: that they be ready
rather to lose their domynio^s then Christ, who has a far better thing to
give them. For nothing is so comely, so excellent, so glorious, to kings,
princes and rulers, as in symilitude to drauwe nyghe unto the highest, greatest
and best king, even Jesus: Namely, in stead of violence to xeercyse charity,
and to be myuistre unto all me^. Inconclusion, we must so cleue unto the
lerning of Christ, and be so circumspecte there in, that we cloak not our We
may not cloak our own vices with other men's falls.
own vices with other men's fails. For though holy men have sometime done any
thing not to be followed (as David, wha^ he commutted aduoutrie and murder:
Solomon, when he had so many queen's and concubynes. Not, when he was droncken:
Loath, wan he lay with his own daughters: Mary Magdalene, when she syune so
sore: Peter, when he denied the lord: Paul, when he persecuted the church of
god.) Yet ought we to do nothing that varieth from Christ: but as we have been
like other men in sin, so should we be companyons and parteners also with
them that repent and turn unto god. And as for other men's deeds, we ought not
churhshly so much to barch against them, nether with cruelnesse to fear them,
as with softness and ^ayre means to amend them and allure them unto Christ.

The.xvi. Chapter.
The.vij. rule.
THe seventh rule is, that studie^g We (...) still be clymmynge up unto
godliness.
diligently to draw on still as nighe as we can to the beholding of heavenly
things, we turn our minds so fervently there unto, that the very love of
Christ cause us to hate all transitorp and filthy things: which shall wax the
more vile unto us, the more we set by things invisible. Therefore ought we so
to prece unto the best, that though we be not so parfite in all things as we
should, our mind yet be not defiled with grievous offenses, but more receive
able of the benefits of god. And though we can not do so well as holy and
blessed men have done before us, yet let us commit no worse things then the
heithen: Who though they had no parfite knowledge of god, yet was honesty
dearer unto them, then either fame, goods, life, or any thing else in the
world. And doutlesse it shall notably withdraw us from sin, if we pondre well
in our minds we must pondre the commodities of sin.
the incommodities there of, as infamye, poverty, loss of goods, waysting of
time, the hate of good men, grefe of mind, miserable unquietness of
conscience, with thousands mo such like inconveniences. Wherefore better it is
that our youth believe this to be the property of sin, the^ with woeful
experience to learn it in them selves. And though we can not atteyne to the
most excellent virtue, yet shall it profit much, if we being but in cyuile or
moral virtues, run not headlonge in to all kind of vices. Notwithstonding
for as much as that is not the resting place and quiet haven of felicite, but a
shorter journey there unto, we must pray still unto god, that he will vouchsafe
to pluck us up to better things.

The.xviij. Chapter.
The.viij. rule.
THe eight rule, that when the storm of tentacion ryseth against We may not
despayr in god.
us, we be not disco^tent with our selves, as though god cared not for us or
favored us not: but rather give him thanks, because he instructs us as his
own heirs, chasteneth Tentacion is a sign that god loves
us as his own most singularly beloved children, and proves us as his own
assured friends: which is a token that he loves us, as he did the Apostle
Paul, blessed Job, and other holy saints: Who being both great and many have
suffered troubles as well as we: why should we then be discoraged or fall in
despair, and not rather do our best to overcome as they did: considering we
have a faitful god, that will not forsake us, nor suffer us to be tempted above
our strength, but make us able to endure.

The.xviij. Chapter
The.ix. rule
THe nyye^th rule is, that our mind We must ever keep watch.
be always watching and circumspecte against the soden assault of our enemy:
that his tentacio^, suggestion and first mocion unto sin, may be holden
down at the beginning, while it is fresh, and he put back to his co^fusio^.
For more easeli or more surely is he never overcome, then by that means.

The.xix. Chapter
The.x. rule.
THe teuth rule is, that what so ever remedies against te^tacion
the enemy te^pteth us, we straight way either hate, abhor, and defye him,
or else pray ferue^tly, or get us to some holy occupacio^, settinge our whole
minds there upon: or else to answer the tempter with words of holy scripture:
Whereof to have some certain sentences ready against those inconveniences that
we are most enclyned unto, is very profitable in all tentacions.

The.xx. Chapter.
The.xi. rule.
The.xi. rule is, that in tentacion we nether give op our hold, we must
nether be faint hearted nerts presumptuous.
nether when we are conforted, wax wanton, or stond in our oune co^eeates:
but wha^ our enemy stereth us unto filthy things, to behold, not our own
feblenesse, but to remember that we may do al things in christ, woe bids us
be of good chere, for he has overcome the world. Again, wha^ we have
overcome our enemy, or done so me good work, we must beware that we ascribe
nothing thereof to our own merits, but thank only the fre benevolence of
god, of whom we receive all things. Thus against this double mischefe we shall
find double remedis if we not only in tentacio^ dispeiring in our oune
strenght and trusting in the benevolence of christ, do flee for socoure unto
him: but also in our spiritual co^ solacon humbli confessing our own un
worthynesse, immediately give him thanks for his benefits.

The.xxi. Chapter.
The.xij. rule.
THe twelfte rule is, that wha^ we of te^tacion must we al way take occasion
of virtue.
have avoided the stroke of our enemy, we take his weapon from him, and smite
him with his own sword: so that when we are provoked unto euel, we do not
oneli absteyne from sin, but thereof also take an accasion of virtue, grow
sto^ger in courage, know our own weakness the better, increace the more in
good deeds, and humble our selves the more in all things. And thus shall
tentacions be ever the renewinge of our holy purpose, and increace of
godliness and virtuous lyuinge, thus shall we not only vanquisse our enemy,
but if he begin with us again afresh, he himself shall ministre unto us a^
occasion of godliness

The.xxij. Chaptrr.
The.xiij. rule.
THe thirtenth rule is, that in the conflicte and battayl we be bold, and
behave our selves so ma^fully, We must be bold, and after one te^tacion ever
look for another
as though we should never fight more. Never theles when we have overcome, we
must always after one te^tacion look for another, never departing from our
harnes, but always watch and keep our standing, aslong as we are in this body.

The.xxiij. Chapter.
The.xiiij. rule.
THe fourtenth rule is, that we favor not our selves in any In to smallest
faults of al must we not favor our selves.
one vice, be it never so small. For if we with Christian hatred abhor one, we
must needs abhor al. Yea if true charity have ones possessed our hertes, we
shall indifferently hate the whole host of euel things, and not flater our
selves so much as in the leest. For though we ca^ not as yet pluck up the
whole generation of vices, never theles we must always day by day withdraw
somewhat of our evil conditions and ever be addyng somwath to good manners.

The.xxiiij. Chapter.
The xv. rule.
THe fiftenth rule is, that in the conflicte of tentacion we compare not The
bitterness of the fight must we compare to the pain that folowetthe sin.
only the bitterness of the fight with the pain which followed the sin, but
also the present swetnesse of the sin that entyceth us, with the pleasure of
the victory herafter, and with the tranquylite of mind that follows the same.
For as if we be overcome, there follows us a more paynful and longer grefe,
then we should have had in time of fight, if we had won the victory: Even so
if we be co^querours there follows us a more great and longer pleasure, then
was it that carried us in to sin which was overcome. Which thing he shall
lightly judge, that has had experience of both. Wherefore Let us prove what it
is, to overcome
if we prove sometime, what it is to overcome, the oftener we do it, the more
pleasant shall the victory be unto us

The.xxv. Chapter
The.xvi. rule.
THe sixtenth rule is, to have our minds so armed before hand, we may not
despair though we lie under.
that though we be fallen in to sin, and overcome, we yet despair not, but
thake thereby occasion of greater courage, to wrestle more strongly, to come
again quickly to our selves, ^o take a good heart unto us, to repair again
the rebuke and shame of the fall, with new courage and lustiness of virtue,
after the ensample of David, Solomon, Peeter, Paul, etc. whom god, no doubt,
suffered to fall, leest we after we are fallen, should despair. Wherefore if we
rise up quicly with a lusty courage, and go to it afreshe both fearser and more
circumspecte, our deedly offenses shall grow in us to an heap of godliness,
while we love more fervently, that erred before most shamefully.

The.xxvi. Chapter
The.xxvij. rule.
THe seuententh rule is, that against al manner weapons and We must exercise our
selves in the cross of Christ.
darts of our most wicked enemy, we cast the cross of Christ, and exercise
our selves diligentli therein: not after the comen manner slenderly repeting the
story of his passion, or honoring the image of the cross, or with a thousand
signs of it armynge al our body round on every side, or layeng up at home
some piece of that holy ^^^ or wepinge for sorou that christ suffered so great
wrong: but as lively me^bres of our head, to mortify our own affections,
and so recording the mystery of the cross, that if we be ticled with ambition,
ashamed to be set at naught in this world, tempted with envy, with glotony,
with filthy pleasure, with covetousness, we considre to what vileness Christ
our head humbled himself how kind, lonyng and good he is eue^ to the worst:
how he drancke eysel and gal: how full of vexacion and grefe all his whole life
was: how poor he became for our sakes. Thus in all tentacions shall it not be
grauous, but pleasant and delectable unto us, to have oppressed our own
affetions.

The.xxvij. Chapter
The.xxviij. rule
THe eightenth rule is, that wha^ any affection moves us to iniquite, We must
considre the filthiness of sin and the dignite of man.
we considre the filthiness of sin, and the great dignite of man. For seeing
that in other trifles we take advisement with our selves, reason it were, that
or ever we consent unto the feynde, we pondred well this most weighty matter,
who made us, in how excllent a state we are set, with how exceading great price
we are bought, to how great felicite we are called, how that for man's sake
only, god has forged the maruaylous buyldinge of this world, brought us in
to the company of angeles, made us his own children, heirs of immortalite,
members of Christ and of his church, our bodies the temple of the holy ghost,
our minds the images and habitacio^ of god: On the other side to considre,
that sin is the most filthy pestilence and consumpcion both of the mind and
body: eue^ that deedly poison of the most filthy serpent, and the pressed wages
of the deuels most miserable service. Thus if we take good adviseme^t, we shall
se, yt were not wisely done, for a momentany and poisoned little short pleasure
of synue, to fall from so great dignite in to so vile estate.

The.xxviii. Chapter.
The.xix. rule.
THe nyententh rulle is, that we we must still have in mind the godnesse of
god, and the malice of the deuell.
still have in mind the eternal benificence of god, and the wicked
noysomnesse of the deuell: namely, with what goodness almighty god has made
us, with what mercy redeemed us, with what liberte endewed us, with what
te^dernesse he daily suffers and susteyneth us wretched sinners, patiently
lokyng for our amendment: with what joy he receaueth us when we turn again:
Co^trarely with how natural hate and envy the deuell father of all mischefe,
did long agoo lay wait to our health, in to what grievous tentacion he has
cast us, ymageninge daily to draw us in to eternal mischefe. Thus being
myndfull of all mighty god and his manifold benefits, we shall not unkindly
depart from so noble, so loving, and so beneficial a father, to make our
selves wilfully bond unto the deuell, that most filthy and cruel master.

The.xxix. Chapter.
The.xx. rule.
THe twentiet rule is, that we forget not but allwaye remember The dyuersite of
rewards
what great difference is between the reward of virtue, and the rewaerde of
sin. Yea even in this world are the fruits of the^ unlike. For like as the
end of faith is eternal salvation in heaven and the reward of sin ever
lasting death in hell. Even so here in this life, godliness, brings
tranquilite and quietness of mind, eue^ a blessed joy of pure and clean
conscience, athing more precious and pleasant then all the world: And contrary
wise a perpetual grefe, unquietness and gn a winge of the mind (with a
thousand other euels) accompanies sin and wickedness, even in this life.

The.xxx. Chapter.
The.xxi. rule.
THe one and twentieth rule is We must be hold the misery of this present life
that we consider, how full of gre, fe and misery, how short, and transitory
this present life is: how on every side death lies in wayt against us, and
suddenly catches us: how vnsuer we are of one moment of life: how great peril
it is to contynuethat kind of life, where in if soden death should take us (as
it often fortuneth) we were but lost for over.

The.xxxi. Chapter.
The.xxij. rule.
THe two and twentieth rule is March what extreme mischefe follows, when men
will not repent.
that we fearing the extreme mischefe of impeuitencie, pondre well, how few of
them which have prolonged their lives in iniquite, be truly converted unto
sin, and with due repentance reconcyled unto god again. Therefore is it
mete, that we being monished, do remember, how easy it is to fail in to
sin, but hard to turn back again.

The.xxxij. Chapter.
Remedies against certain vices, and first against bodily lust.
TO resist the lust of the bodi, if we will be well weapened, we the
inco^modities, of bobeli lust
must considre the inco^modities thereof: namely* how filthy and beestly it
makes us, how moment any and bitter it is, hou it pulls us from our good
name and fame, consumes our goods, kylleth the strength and beauty of the
body, decays and hurts health, causes innumerable and filthy diseases,
disfigureth youth, hastes age, dulleth the wit and sight of the mind,
withdra et us from al honest studies, takes away the use of reason. Likewise
by the hurt that we have seen other have through their voluptuous pleasures,
should we learn to avoid the fame. And as well by the ensamples of them that are
virtuous, as by the great commodities of chastity, to be pure and clean bo^th
in body and mind: Considering to how mani vain of fices they be subject,
that put their heads under the girdle of filthy lust: hou it is always
coupled with those sins that be greatest and most in nombre, hou this life
vanishes away faster the^ smoke, hou many that follow such things are, taken
away by soden death, how sharp the extreme judgment of god is, how the joy
of a pure mind is much sweter then the pleasure of sin, how great benefits
the lord has heaped upon us, and al to make us refrain from deedlie and
mortal pleasures, how he always beholds us what soever we do or think, how
greatli, abstinacy and frowardness of mind springs of bodily lust, what
great sorrow follows thereafter: how that the more we are consecrated unto god,
yea the more learned we be, and the more we have received of his ghiftes. The
more unmeet, and the more shame is it for us so to abuse our selves, what
estate or kind soever we be of.

The.xxxiiij. Chapter
A short recapitulacion of remedies against the flame of lust
JN co^clusio^, if we bilde sure from We must avoid o^sious.
the enticynges of the flesh, we must be circumspecte, avoiding al occasions,
moderate in eating drive king and slepinge, absteyne from pleasures, regard
once owre death, behold the death of christ, live with such as be
uncorrupted, eschew the communicacion of wanton persons, flee idle
solytarynesse and sluggishe idleness, exercise our selves in the meditacion
of celestial things, and honest studies specially of holy scripture, gevyng
our selves often and purely unto prayer, most of al when we be tempted.

The.xxxiiij. Chapter
TO resist the vice of covetousness, we must call to remebrauce the dignite of
the estate of man, to the use whereof almighty god has created al things. And
though we possess riches, yet must we despise them: Yea so far must we be
from alcarefulnesse of our living, that we cloak not our conuetousnesse which
the name of necessite: but first seek the kingdom of heaven, and be sure, that
he which makes provision for the lilies of the field and birds of the air,
will not suffer us to lack: and as we must abhor wilful begging, eue^ so
possessing money, we must set no store therbye, ner love it, but be faithful
dispensers of it, and of all that god has committed unto us: yea though we lose
them, yet not to be sorye therefore. For they are but aburthen: and though they
be accounted among good profitable things, yet are they of the lowest sort,
and help not unto virtue, whereof the reward is true honor and not riches:
were with if any fre^dshippe, honor or pleasure be gotten, it is but false and
feigned. Somewhat therefore shall it move us the less to desire the^ the
inco^modities of riches,
if we consider the great inco^modities of the^: namely, with hou sore labor
and ioperdie they are gotten, with hou great thought and care they are kept,
with hou great sorrow there are lost, hou they are even but sharp thorns, hou
hard it is for the rich to enter in to heaven, hou that riches be come^li
either unjustly gotten or else unjustly kept, and how that avarice is plain
ydolatrie before god, whom no man can please, that sets his heart upon Mammon.

The.xxxv. Chapter.
A short recapitulation of remedies against the vice of auaryce.
JN conclusion, if we will resist the vice of avarice, then as we must discern
true things from apparaunt, true commodities from false, so must we with our
inward eyes behold almighty god, who only satisfies the mind of man. We
must remember, not only that we came naked out naked we came and nakd shall we
go
of our mothers wo^ve, and shall naked got hither again, but also that this
present life with all his riches is uncertain: and therefore should we turn our
minds from the corrupt manners of the come^ sort, and rather content our
selves with poverty: considering the fearful woo that christ threatheneth the
rich men of this world.

The.xxxvi. Chapter
Against ambicion, or desire of honor
honor springhet of virtue only.
IF ambicion vex our minds, we must be surely persuaded, that only to be
honor, which springs of virtue, yea that to be the chief and oneli honor,
which is praised of god: and again, that to be no honor but rebuke, which is
given of an ungodly person for an ungodly person for an nothing better, then
a quyete mean life
dishonest thing. For the more honor we discerue, the less we desire it,
being content with the conscience of well doing. As for the honors that the
comen people desire so greatly, they be but vain, because that as they given
of them that put no difference between honesty and dishonestie, so are they
given often for mean and filthy things, and that to the vnworty. Now if any
honor be given unto us, we ought to refer it al unto god. Therefore like as
nothing is more full of pricks, cares, perils and sorrows then the life of
great men, so is nothing better then a quyete mean life. For seeing al honor
is coupled with great charge, beter it is for us humbling our selves, to be
partakers of mercy, then by ambicion to be excluded from the secoure of grace.
Wherefore if the ensample of Christ stick fast in our minds, we shall learn
the better to despise al worldly honor, and to rejoice only in the cross of
christ. For if we be despised of god, and abhorred of his angels, what good
shall wordly honors do unto us?

The.xxxvij. Chaptrr.
Against pride, or swelling of the mind.
UUe shall not swell in our minds, if we know ourselves, and we must know our
selves.
account what good thing so ever we have, to be the gift of god and not of
us, ascrybing all euel only unto our selves. We must remember, how filthy we
were conceived and borne, how naked, nedy, wretched and misirable we crepte in
to this light: how many diseases, chances, combraunce, grefes and troubles
this wretched body is in danger unto. For a surer proof of incurable
foolishness and lack of understanding is not, then if we stand greatly in our
own conceate. Wherefore if for honor, beauty, co^nyng or any such thing, we be
moved unto pride, the best is to humble our selves before god, and to considre
our own deformities, In conclusion it shall chefely refrain us from pride, if
we pondre well, not we must considre our own deformities,
only what we are in our selves, how filthy in our birth, and as a buble of
water in all our life, yea even worms mart wha^ we dye, but also what Christ
became for us.

The.xxxviii. Chapter.
Against wrath and desire of rengeaunce.
UUhan grefe of the mind mouet Wrath is a childish thing.
us to be avenged, we must remember, that wrath is no manlynesse, but a very
childishe, feeble and vile thing is it to desire vengeaunre. As for another man's
folly, we must little regard it, yea and beware, lest in auenginge his
lewdness, we become lewder ourselves: for by reuenginge is no iniurye eased,
but augmented: And the longer it endures, the more incurable it is: But
softness heals it, and of an enemy makes a friend. For no man can be hurt
of us, except we will, or except we follow the grefe of our own minds: Yea
we will not stick to forgive him, if we think not scorn to considre the
infirmities that moved him to offend us, or if we will do any thing for love
and aucturite of the person, or compare that his offense with As we forgive so
shall we be forgiven
his former benefits, or considre how sore and often we our selves trespa^e
against god, who shall even as much for give us, as we remytie unto our
brethren: Which thing if we do, it is a readyer way to opt^y^^ remission of
our sins, then for obsolucion to re^ne to Rome, to sail ^o. S, James, or to
bye most large pardons. Wherefore by the ensample of Christ that suffered so much
for us being his menies, we should swage our own minds, and pardon other
men, yea eue^ the unworthy. And though we be angry and grieved with another
man's vice, yet should we love the parson, and not harden our minds against
him, but against wrath: being so temperate in our selves that we suffer not
our own affections to rule us, but overcome evil with goodness, malice with
kyndnesse: which is even to follow the parsite love of Christ Jesus. For as it
is the property of a wise man to suppress all displeasure, even so to follow
the appetite of wrath, is not the point of a man, but playnlie of beestes, and
that of wild beestes: which thing we shall, evidently perceive, if we behold
our own countenance in a glass, when we be angry.

In conclsion, to what evil so ever we perceive our selves to be speically
^uclyued or stered, whether it bethrugh vice of nature, custom, ^rtuell
bringinge up: Against the assault of such enemies, as against the vice of
bachyting filthy speaking, envy, glotony, and other like, there must be
certain rules written in the table of our mind, which for forgettinge must
now and then be renewed. And we as Christ's souloyours must have our mind
armed Our minds must be armed with prayer with holy scripture, and with
examples of holy men.
long before hand with prayer, with noble sayenges of wise men, with the
doctrine of holy scripture, with ensample of devout and holy men, and
specially of Christ. And in what persons so ever we find or perceive the
image of Christ, with them to couple oureselues, withdrawing us from the
company of other, and making our special and familiar aquayntaunce with holy
S. Paul and his doctrine.

Imprinted at Ausborch by Adam Anonimus

In the month of May. Anno. 1545.


