A VEry pleasant and fruitful Diologe called the Epicure, made by that famous
clerk Erasmus of Roterodame, newly translated.

1545.

S. Paul to the Ephesians.
You that have professed Christ, suffer not your selves to be deceived with
false doctrine, nor vain and noughtie talkyng, but harken unto all Godly
things, and especially too the doctrine of the Gospel. THE HABOVNdaunt mercy
and grace of our heavenly father Jesus Christ, may always strengthen and
defend out noble and virtuous Prince Edward too the maintenance of the
lively word of God.
WHERE as many histories of old and ancient antiquity, and also al godly
and Christia^writers most plainly consent together, and agree in this, that
dignity, riches, kindred, wordly pomp, and renoume, do neither make men
better, ne yet happiat, contrary too the blind and fond judgment of the
most part of men: but by the power and strength of the mind, that is,
learning, wisdom, and virtue, all men are hyghly enriched, ornated, and
most purely beutified, for these be things both notable, eternal, and very
familiar between the heavenly father and us. It is therefore euidente (most
excellent Prince) that the fittest orname^tes for your graces tender age, be,
eruditio^ and virtue. Whereunto you are both so ernestly addicte and therein so
wonderfully do prevail, that I need not too exhort and exstimulate your
grace unto the study thereof. For that God him self has wrought, and fourmed
your mind so apt and desirous too attain and diligently too seek for all
godly doctrine, that eue^ now you do show in all your sayings and dooinges
such a wonderful pleasau^res much like unto a certain sweet music or
harmony, that any honest heart exceadinglye would rejoice in the sight thereof.
Verily, your grace thinks plainly all time lost, that is not bestowed upon
learning, which is a very rare thing in any child, and rarest of all in a
Prince. Thus your noblenes, rather desires virtue and learning the most
surest and excellent treasures, which far surmounte all worldly riches, then
any vanities or trifles. Now your grace prepares for the wholesome and
pleasant food of the mind. Now you seek for that which you shall find most
surest helper and faythfulst counselor in all your affairs. Now your
magnifice^t mind studieth that, which all English men with meke and humile
hearts should desire GOD to endue your grace with all. Now with diligent labor
you search for a thing, as one most myndeful of this saying: Happy is that
realm thathath a learned Prince. Now you travail for that, which conquereth,
and keeps down all grievous tourmentes and outrageous affections of the mind,
too the furderaunce of good living, and maintenau^ce of virtue, I mean wholesome
erudition and learning. Many Heathen Princes forsooth, are highly magnified with
most ample praises, which gave them selves too the study of Philosophy, or
knowledge of tongues, for their own commodity, and especially for the weal
of their subjects. Who is now more celebrated and worthelier extoiled then
Mithridares? that noble king of Pont and Bithinia, which, (as Aulus Bellius
writes) understood so perfitly the languages of. xxii. sondrye countries that
were under his dominion, that he never used any interpretour too answer his
subjects, but spoke their la^guages so finelye, as though he had been of the
same country. Ageyn, that honorable manne Quintus Ennius said: that he had.
iii. hearts, because he could speak Greek, Italian, and Latin. Yea, and
breuely, the most famaus writers, as well the Heathen, as the Christien, with
an universal consent, plainly affirm: When they had weied the nature and
condition of the purest things under heaven, they saw nothing fair, or of
any price, or that ought too be accounted ours, but only virtue and learning.
Even now too acknowledge that same, it is yeoue^ you from above, for your grace
delecteth in nothing more then too be occupied in the holy Bible: wherein, you
begin too sauer and smelle forth the treasure of wisdom, knowledge and
fulness of the deuyne power, that is a study most convenient for every
Christien Prince, that kind of study cannot have sufficient laud and
commendation. Whose Princely heart forsooth, is raueshed on such a godly and
vertuousstudie, it can never have condign and worthy praises, but deserves
always too be had in great price, estimation, and honor. Who does not
know? that Prince which is yeouen unto the scriptures of God and with a stout
stomach and valiant heart, both searches forth and also defends ye true
doctrine of the Gospel, too be enrolled in the assemble of Christ. Who does
not see? that Prince too be most surely armed, which carries in his heart
the swerd of ye spirit, which is the blessed word of God. Who is ignorant?
that everlasting life consists in the knoweledge of God. What Prince would
not study to maintain that, which is written for the health, and salvation of
all men werynge with himself that a Prince can not deserve, neither by
conquest, ciuel policy, nor yet by any other mean under heaven, this name
high or honorable, sowourthely as by the setting forward of Gods word. What
young Prince humily desendyng down intoo him self and calling to memory his
bounden duty would not with a glad heart and a cheerful mind, gredelye
desire too know, enlarge, and amplify the glory and majesty of his derely
beloved father? Your grace (forsooth) has professed God too be your father:
Blessed are you then if you obey unto his word, and walk in his ways. Blessed
are you, if you supporte such as preach the Gospel. Blessed are you, if your
mind be full furnished with the testament of Christ, and show your self too
be the most cruel foo and enemy against ypocrisie, supersticion, and all
papistical fantasies, where with the true religion of God has been dusked and
defaced these many years Blessed are you, if you read it day and night, that
your grace may know what GOD does forbid you, and ever submit your self
thereunto with serviceable lowlines chiefly desiring to florysh and deck your
mind with godly knowledge. And most blessed are you, if you apply your self
unto al good works, and plant surely in your heart the scriptures of Christ,
If you thus do, nether the power of any papistical realm, nor yet of hell can
prevail at any time against your grace. Now therefore, with humile heart,
faithfully receive the sweet promises of the Gospel. If you keep the words of
the Lord and cleave fast unto them: there is promised you the kingdom of
heaven: You are promised a weal public most rich and welthy You are promised
too be delivered from the deceiptes of all your privy enemies. You are
promised also, too conquer great and mighty nations. Again, let your grace
be most fully persuaded in this, that there was never King nor Prince, that
prospered which took part against Gods word, and that the greatest
abomination that can be, either for King, Prince, or any other manne, is too
for sake the true word of God. O with how rebukefull words and grievous
judgment they be condemned, which dispice and set little by the holy Bible and
most bessed Testament of God, wherein there is contained all the will and
pleasure of our heavenly father toward us most miserable and ignorant wretches
Who would not quake, too behold the terrible fears and threatenynges of God
against al such? Who would not lament and gladly helppe their obstinate
blyndenes? Who would not weep? to hear and read in how many places, they be
openly accursed by the scriptures of Christ. God him self plainly affirms,
that he will suddenly consume them with the breath of his anger. Yea, besides
that whosoever ever declyneth from the word of God is accursed in all his doings,
whether he be King, or Prince, rich, or poor, or of what estate soever he
be. This fearful saying (most excellent Prince) should move all men to take heed unto their duties and to pray that goods word may take place emo^gist
us. O that al men would fantasy the scriptures of God, and say with the
virtuous man Job. We will not be against the words of the holy one. Truth
it is, God takes diligent care too have us al know his word. Would God
therefore, that all we were now willing to have the sincere word of God and
all holsom doctrine too go forward. O that all we would consent together in the
Gospel, brotherly admonishyng, and secretelye prouokyng one an other too true
religion and virtue. O that no man would sow emongist the people pernicious
doctrine, but with all lowly diligence and Godly monition ever provoke, tempt,
and stere them, till their hearts were removed from their old dautyng dreams
and supersticio^, which have been long grafted in them through popyshe doctrine.
By this mean we should ever have concord emongist us, which in all things
is necessary, but most needful and expedient in Gods holy word. Now truly
the godlyest thing that can be devised, for any christian realm, is to have
emongist them one manner and form of doctrine, and too trace trueli the
steps of God and never to seek any other by ways. Who has not read in ye
scriptures? but that realm is endued with godly ornaments and riches, where
all men prospere, go for ward and florishe in gods word, delectyng day and
night in the sweet co^solations of the holy testament. By this way we should
especially setforth the glory of God, and of our savior Jesus Christ, if we
would reverently show one an other that which God has taught us. Yea and in
this doing all men should well perceive that we were the true disciples of
Christ, being knitte and coupled fast together in mind and judgment,
preaching God with one mouth and also with one assent ever promotyng his
glorious testament. O the good hap and grace of that king or prince emongist
whose subjects there is such an hole consent and judgment in the word of
God, for yt most assuredly byndeth and adiuigneth ye hearts of al subjects too
their king. The strength of the Gospel is even such in this puincte, that
there was never man, which did humily receive it, that would murmour against
his Prince. It teaches how wyllyngly all men should obey their king. It
shows very lively and most apertly unto every man his full duty. It ever
provoke us from all wicked, cursed, and most obstinate disobedience. It ever
instructs men too show them selves most lowly, humile, and obesaunt toward
their Prince. Whosoever has tasted fully thereof, will declare him self in all
things, too be a faithful subject. Furthermore, it is clearer then the light
(most virtuous prince) that it would make much for the weal of this noble
realm, if all me^ with heart and mind, would now as well expulse the
pernicious and deuely she doctrine af that Romish bishop, as his name is
blotted i^ books. There is none so ignorant, but he knows that thorough him
we were brought into a wonderful blindness, thorough him we did sauer of
nothing, but of stynkyng Ydolatry, through him we were deceived with false
Ypocrisie. Now let every blind stiff hearted, and obstinate creature compare
his abomination with the gospel, and if he be not shameless, he will abashe to
smell of his papistrie, and to walow still in ignorance, un lest he be
privily confederate and in heart consent with the detestable fellowship of al
wicked papists. Now would God all such men would reduce ageyn their hearts
unto ye gospel of Christ. would god they would be provoked by some mean to
desire knowledge. O that god would yeoue them a courageous mind too read the
gospel, there they shall sone find all the venoume of the romish sort most
plainly detected. Forsooth we see daily, yt lack of knowledge of the gospel
makes some busserdes run hedlong on all rocks, dangers, and extreme
perilles: yea, and beside that, old popysh doctrine which lies folded up and
locked fast in their hearts, does so sore blind the^ that they have neither
favor ne affection too printe in their minds, the expressed councils,
admonitions, and precepts of the holy scripture, but too stepe still in their
own conceits, dreams, and fond phansies. Wherefore let your dignity note
well this, that all those which be not wyllyng yt gods word should be
known, and that blyndenes should be clean expulsed from all men, which be
baptized in ye blessed bludde of Christ, bewray themselves plain papists: for
in very deed that most deceatful wolf and graund master papist with his
totiens quotiens, and a pena et culpa blesses all such as will be blind
still, maintain his po^pe, drink of his cup of fornication, trust in his
pardonnes, live in popery, ypocrisie, and damnable ydolatrie, shut up the
kingdom of heaven, and never regard the gospel. Contrary too this, christ by
his holy Prophet calls al those blessed yt seek for his testimonies, al
those his elect and chose^ children, which turn from sin, ypocrisie, and
ydolatrie, all those gods yt hear his word, yea, and breuely, al those which
set it forward honorable me^. and in this puincte your grace should ever bear
in mind, that noble and virtuous king Hezekiah, which showed himself very
honorable in setti^g forward ye word of God, and thereby got him glory and
fame immortal, so that now he is most highly praised emongist all men. Ageyn
his subjects did obey his commandment feynedly with Ypocrisie, but in their
hearts they abhorred gods word. O the misery that did afterward sodeinly
ensue upon them, O the wonderful wrath of God that was poured upon them, O
their great and obstinate blindness which caused them most grievously too be
scourged: Their plage was no less then too be utterly spoiled of their
enemies, Their plage was no less then to eat one an other: Yea, their plage
was no less then to eat their own sonues and daughters.

This calamity and sorrow (most noble prince) happened them because they did
not regard the laws of God, but turned too their old abominable Ydolatrie,
and lightelye esteemed gods holy word. Wherefore even now whosoever is an enemy
to the holy Bible, that is, neither studiyng it himself, nor willing that
other men should know it, he can in no wise be a right christian man: although
he fast, pray, do alms, and all the good works under heaven. And he that
has such a mind, is ye most cursed and cruel enemy too god, a plain sower
of sedition, and a deuelishe disquieter of all godly men. For truly those that
read the gospel of Christ, and labor diligently therein: do find wonderful
rest and quietness, from all woofull misery, perturbatio^, and vanicies of this
world. And surely none but ypocrites or else deuilles would go about too stop
or allure men from such a treasure and godly study. And it were conuement,
that all they which will remain still necligent, styffe, and blind: should set
before their faces the fear of pains infernal, and if they have any grace at
all, their spirits ought to be moved: too note the great plages that have
happened the slouthful in gods word, and those that have been stubburne
against the setting out of it. There be a thousand records and examples in
the holy Bible against such as be far wide from knowledge, and lie now
walteryng still in ignorance and will not look upon the bible. It would seem,
they hope for a thing, but their hope is in vain: For saint Paul plainly
writes the hope of such ypocrites shall coom^ too naught. And too conclude
(most honorable Prince) seeing we have such knowledge opened unto us, as
never had english me^, and are clearly delivered from the snares and deceiptes
of al false and wicked doctrine, if we shuid not now tha^kefully receive the
gospel, and show our selves naturally enclyned to set it forward, yea, and
pray day and night unto God, for the preservation and health of the kings
highness, your graces dear, and most entierly beloved father, we were neither
true subjects nor right christen men.

Forsooth, through the absolute wisdom, and the most godly and politic
prudencie of his grace, the sweet sound of gods word is gone thorough out
all this realm, the holy Bible and blessed testament of our savior Christ
are coom^ne to light, and thousands have faithfully received those pleasant,
joyful, and most comfortable promises of God. Surely this thing before all
other, is acceptable too god. This thing especially swageth ye ite of god. This
thing in all holy scriptures god most chiefly requires of his elect and
faithful servants, even too have his little flock know his blessed word,
which would be much better known and more thankful i received, if al
agees and degrees of men with one mind, will, and voice, would now draw after
one line, leauyng their own private affections, and show them selves ever
vigilant, prompt, and ready helpers and workers with God, (according to the
council of saint Paul) and especially priests, scolem it sters and
pare^tes, which according too ye Prophet David are blessed, if they gladly
require ye law of God. They should therefore read ye bible and purdge their
minds of al papistry: for their necligence, in dooyng their duties and
slugishnes toward ye blessed word of god, does too much appear.

Through them forsooth the gospel of Christ should be most strongely warded and
defended, for almost all the Prophets, and a great part of the scripture
beside teach them their duties, and show plainly what manner of men they
should be: Yea, and how grievously the holy Prophets cry out upon false and
ignorant priests, the thing is very evident.

But through the helppe of God all those that be ignorant, or else learned (as
they take them selves) will leave of, and repent them of their wicked and
obstinate blyndnes, and bow them selves with all opportunity too draw men's
hearts too the holy testament of God: considering, yt in the terrible day of
judgment, every man shall yeoue account of his Beliwicke, where neither
ignorance shall excuse us, ne yet any worldly po^pe may defend us. Most happy
the^ shall they be, which have walked tustely in the sight of the Lord, and
that have syncerely preached his testament and lively word without flattery
or iuggelyng: Yea, and in yt fearful day, all they (as writes S. Augustine)
shall find mercy at the hands of god, which have entised and allured other
unto goodness and virtue. Weiyng this with my self, (most excellent, and unto
all kind of virtues most pro^pt and presta^t Prince) I thought it good too
translate this Dialoge, called the Epicure, for your grace: which seemed too
me, too be very familiar, and one of ye godliest Dialoges yt any man has
written in ye latin tongue. Now therefore I most humili pray, yt this my rude and
simple translation may be acceptable unto your grace, trustyng also yt your
most approved gentilnes, will take it in good part. There as I do not follow ye
latin, word for word, for I omytte yt of a certain set purpose.

Your humile servant, Philyppe Gerrard,
groume of your graces Chamber.
The Epicure
The interlocutours. HEDONIVS SPVDEVS.

WHAT means mi Spudeus, too apply his book so ernestlye, I pray you what
is the matter you murmour so with your self?

SPVDEVS. The truth is (O Hedoni) I seek too have knowledge of a thing, but as
yet I cannot find yt which makes for my purpose.


HEDO What book have you there in your bosom?


SPVDE. Ciceros dialoge of the ends of goodness.


HEDO. It had been far more better for you, too have sought for the
begynnynges of godly things, then the ends.


SPVDE. Yea, but Marcus Tullius names ye the end of godliness which is an
exquisite, a far passing, and a very absolute goodness in every puincte,
wherein there is contained all kind of virtue: unto the knowledge there of
whosoever can attain, should desire none other thing, but hold himself having
only that, as one most fully content and satisfied.


HEAD. That is a work of very great learning and eloquence. But do you think,
yt you have prevailed in any thing there, whereby you have the rather come too
the knowledge of the truth?


SPE. I have had such fruit and commodity by it, that now verelye hereafter I
shall doubt more of the effect and ends of good things, then I did before.


HEDO. It is for husband men too stand in doubt how far the limittes and
mereba^kes extend.


SPE. And I cannot but muse still, yea, and wonder very much, why there has
been so great controversy in judgments upon so weighty a matter (as this
is) emongist so well learned men: especially such as be most famous and
ancient writers.


HEDO. This was even the cause, where the verite of a thing is plain and
manifest, co^trarily, ye error through ignorance again in the same, is soon
great and by diverse means increases, for yt they knew not the foundation and
first beginning of the whole matter, they do judge at all auentures and are
very fondly disceaued, but whose sentence think you too be truest?


SPE. When I hear MARCUS Tullius reprove the thing, I then fa^tasie none of
all their judgments, and when I hear him again defend the cause: it makes
me more doubtful the^ ever I was and am in such a study, that I can say
nothing. But as I suppose ye Stoickes have erred the lest, and next unto the^
I commend the Peripatetickes.


HEDO. Yet I like none of their opinions so well as I do the Epicures.


SPV. And emo^gist all the sects: the Epicures judgment is most reproved and
condemned with the whole consent and arbitreine^t of all men.


HEAD. Let us lay a side all disdain and spite of names, and admit the
Epicure too be such one, as every man makes of him. Let us ponder and weighe
the thing as it is in very deed. He sets the high and principal felicity
of man in pleasure, and thiketh that life most pure and godly, which may have
great delectatio^ and pleasure, and little pensiuenes.


SPV. It is even so.


HEAD. What more vertuouser thing, I pray you, is possible too be spoken then
this saying.


Spu. Yea, but all men wonder and cry out on it, and say: it is the voice
of a brute beast, and not of man.


Hedo. I know they do so, but the^ err in ye vocables of these things, and
are very ignorant of the true and native significations of the words, for if
we speak of perfect things, no kind of men be more righter Epicures,
then Christen men living reuere^tly toward God and man, and in the right
service and worshipping of Christ.


SPV But I think the Epicures be more nerer and agree rather with the
Cynickes, then with the Christien sort: forsooth ye Christiens make them selves
lean with fasting, bewail and lament their offenses, and either they be
now poor, or else their charity and liberality on the nedye makes them
poor, they suffer patiently too be oppressed of me^ne that have great power
and take many wrongs at their hands, and many men also laughe them too
skorne. Now, if pleasure bring felicity with it, or help in any wise unto
the furderaunce of virtue: we see plainly that this kind of life is fardest
from al pleasures.


Hedonius. But do you not admit Plautus too be of authority?


Speudeus. Yea, if he speak vprightely.


Hedonius. Hear now them, and bear away with you the saiynge of an
unthrifty servant, which is more wyttier then all the paradoxes of the
Stoickes.


SPE. I tarry to hear what ye will say


HEDO. There is nothing more miserable then a mind unquiet and agreued with it
self.


SPE. I like this saying well, but what do you gather of it?


HEDO. If nothing be more miserable the^ an unquiet mind, it follows also,
that there is nothing happiar, then a mind void of all fear, grudge, and
unquietness


SPEV. Surely you gather the thing together with good reason but that
notwithstanding, in what country shall you find any such mind, that knows
not it self gyltie and culpable in some kind of evil*


HEDO. I call that evil, which dissolueth the pure love and amity betwixt
God and manne.


SPV. And I suppose there be very few, but that they be offe^ders in this
thing.


HEDO. And in good soth I take it, that al those yt be purdged, are clear:
which wiped out their fautes with lee of tears, and saltpeter of sorrowful
repentance, or else with the fire of charity, their offenses now be not only
small grefe and unquietness too them, but also chance often for some more
godlier purpose, as causing the^ too live afterward more accordyngly unto Gods
commau^deme^tes.


SPV. In deed I know saltpeter and lee, but yet I never heard before, that
faults have been purdged with fire.


H. Surely, if you go to the minte you shall see gould fined with fire,
notwithstanding that there is also, a certain kind of line^ that brenneth not
if it be cast in ye fire, but looks more whiter then any water could have
made it, and therefore it is called Linum asbestinum, a kind of lynen, which
can neither be quenched with water nor brent with fire.


Spu. Now in good faith you bring a paradox more wonderful then all the
maruailous and profound things of the Stoickes: live they pleasasauntly whom
Christ calls blessed for that they mourn and lament?


Hedonius. They seem too the world too mourn, but verily they live in great
pleasure, and as the commune saiynge is, they live all together in pleasure, in
somuche that SARDANAPALVS, Philoxenus, or Apitius compared unto them: or any
other spoken of, for the great desire and study of pleasures, did lead but a
sorowefull and a miserable life.


Spe. These things that youdeclare be so strange and new, that I can
scarcelye yeoue any credit unto them.


Hedo. Prove and assaye them ones, and you shall find all my sayings so true
as the Gospel, and immediately I shall bring the thing too such a conclusion
(as I suppose) that it shall appear too differ very little from the truth


SPV. make have then unto your purpose.


HEAD. It shall be done if you will grant me certain things or I begin.


Spu. If in case you demand such as be reasonable.


Hedo. I will take mine advantage, if you confess the thing that makes for
mine intent.


Spu. go too.


Hedo. I think ye will first grant me, that there is great diversity betwxt
the solle and the body


Spu. Even as much as there is between heaven and earth, or a thing earthly
and brute, and yt which dies never, but always contains in it the godly
nature.


Hedo. And also, that false deceivable and cou^terfeited holy things, are not
too be taken for those, which in very deed be godly.


Spude. No more then the shadows are too be esteemed for the bodies, or the
illusions and wonders of wytchcraftes or the fantasies of dreams, are too be
taken as true things.


HE. Hitherto you answer aptly too my purpose, and I think you will grant me
this thing also, that true and godly pleasure can rest and take place no where
but only on such a mind that is sobree and honest.


SPV. What else? for no man reioyseth too behold the Sun, if his eyes be
bleared or else delecteth in wine, if the agew have infected his taste.


HEAD. And the Epicure himself, or else I am disceiued, would not clippe and
enbrace that pleasure, which would bring with it far greater pain and such
as would be of long continuance.


SPV I think he would not, if he had any wit at all.


HEAD. Nor you will not deny this, that God is the chief and especial
goodness, then who^ there is nothing fayrer, there is nothing ameabler, there is
nothing more delicious and swetter.


SPVDE. No man will deny this except he be very hard hearted and of an
vngentlernature then the Ciclopes.


HEAD. Now you have granted unto me, that none live in more pleasure, then
they which live vertuouslye, and again, none in more sorrow and calamytie
then those that live vngratiously.


Spu. Then I have granted more the^ I thought I had.


He. But what thing you have ones confessed too be true (as Plato says) you
should not deny it afterward.


SPV. Go forth with your matter.


HEDO The little whelpe yt is set store and great price by, is fed most
daintely, lies soft, plaieth and makes pastime continually, do you think
that it lives plesau^tly?


SPV. It does truly.


HEDO. Would you wyshe to have such a life?


SPV. God forbid that, except I would rather be a dog then a man,


HEDO. Then you confess that all the chief pleasures arise and spring from the
mind, as though it were from a welspryng.


SPV. That is evident enough.


HE. Forsooth the strength and efficacy of the mind is so great, that often it
takes away the felyng of al externe and outward pain and makes that
pleasant, which by it self is very peynful.


SPV. We se that daily in lovers, having great delight to sytte up long and too
dance attendaunce at their lovers doors all the cold winter nyghtes.


HEDO. Now weigh this also, if the natural love of man, have such great
vehemence in it, which is a common thing unto us, both with bulls and dogs,
how much more should all heavenly love excel in us, which comes of ye
spirit of Christ, whose stre^gthe is of such power, that it would make death a
thing most terrible, too be but a pleasure unto us.


Spu. What other men think inwardly I knownot, but certes they want many
pleasures which cleave fast unto true and perfect virtue.


He. What pleasures?


Spu. They wax not rich, they optein no promotio^, they ba^ ket not, they
dau^ce not, they sing not, they smell not of sweet oynt me^tes, they laugh not,
they play not.


He. We should have made no mention in this place of riches and prefermente,
for they bring with them no pleasant life, but rather a sad and a pe^siue.
Let us entreat of other things, such as they chiefly seek for, whose
desire is to live deliciously, see ye not daily dro^kerdes, fools, and mad
men grinne and leap?


SPV. I see it


HEAD. Do you think that they live most pleasau^tly?


SPV God send mine enemies such mirth and pleasure.


HE. Why so?


Sp. For there lacks emongist the^ sobriety of mind.


HE. Then you had lever sit fasting at your book, then too make pastime after
any such sort.


SP. Of the^ both: truly I had rather chose to delue.


H. For this is plain that be twixt the mad man and the dru^kerd there is no
diversity, but yt sleep will help the one his madness, and with much a do ye
cure of Physicions helps the other, but the fool natural differs nothing
from a brute beast except by shape and portrature of body, yet they be less
miserable whom nature has made very brutes, then those that walowe them
selves in foul and beastly lusts.


SP. I confess that.


Hedo. But now tell me, whether you think the^ sobre and wise, which for plain
vanities and shadows of pleasure, booth dispice the true and godly pleasures
of the mind and chose for them selves such things as be but vexacion and
sorrow.


SPV. I take it, they be not.


Hedo. In deedethei be not dru^ke with wine, but with love with anger, with
avarice, with ambicion, and other foul and filthy desires, which kind of
drunkenes is far worse, the^ that is gotten with drinking of wine. Yet Sirus
yt leude co^spanio^ of whom mention is made in ye commedie, spoke witty things
after he had slepte him self soobre, and called too memory his great and
most beastlye drunkenes: but the mind that is infected with vicious and
noughty desire, has much a do too call it self whom agein?

How many years does love, anger, spite, sensuality, excess, and ambition,
trouble and provoke the mind? How many do we see, which even from their
youth, too their latter dais never awake nor repent them of the drunkenness, of
ambition, nigardnes, wanton lust, and riatte?


Spu. I have known ouermany of yt sort.


Hedo. You have granted that false and feigned good things, are not too be
esteemed for the pure and godly.


Sp. And I affirm that still.


Hedo. Nor that there is no true and perfect pleasure, except it be taken of
honest and godly things.


Spud. I confess that.


He. Then (I pray you) be not those good that the commune sort seek for,
they care not how?


Spu. I think they be not.


Hedo. Surely if they were good, they would not chance but only too good men:
and would make all those virtuous that they happen unto. What manner of
pleasure make you that, do you think it too be godly, which is not of true
and honest things, but of de ceatfull: and coometh out of ye shadows of good
things?


Sp. Nay in no wise.


He. For pleasure makes us to live merely.


Spu. Yea, nothing so much.


He. Therefore no man truly lives pleasauntly, but he that lives godly: that
is, which uses and delecteth only in good things: for virtue of it self,
makes a man to habound in all things that be good, perfete, and praise
worthy: yea, it only provoke God the fountain of all goodness, too love and
favor man.


SP. I almost consent with you.


HEAD. But now mark how far they be from all pleasure, which seem openly
emongist all men too follow nothing, but an inordinate delectation in in
things carnal. First their mind is vile, and corrupted with the savor and
taste of noughtie desires, in so much yt if any pleasant thing chance them,
forthwith it waxes bitter, and is naught set by, in like manner as where ye
well head is corrupted and stynketh, there ye water must needs be un sauery.
Agein there is no honest pleasure, but that which we receive with a sobre and
a quiet mind. For we see, nothing reioyseth the angry man more, the^ too bec
revenged on his offenders, but that pleasure is turned into pain after his rage
be past, and anger subdued.


Spu. I say not the contrary.


He. Finally, such leude pleasures be taken of fallible things, therefore it
follows that they be but delusio^s and shadows. What would you say
furthermore, if you saw a man so deceived with sorcerie and also other
detestable witchecraftes, eat, drink, leap, laugh, yea, and clappe hands for
joy, when there were no such thing there in very deed, as he believes he sees.


Spu. I would say he were both mad and miserable.


Hedo. I my self have been often in place, where the like thing has been
done. There was a priest which knew perfectly by long experience and
practice, the art to make things seem that they were not, otherwise called,
deceptio visus,


Sp. He did not learn that art of the holy scripture?


Hedo. Yea, rather of most popeholy charms and witchecraftes: that is too
say, of things, cursed, dampnable, and wourthy too be abhorred. Certain
ladies and gentlewomen of the court, spoke unto him oftentimes: saying, they
would coom^ one day too his house and see what good chere he kept: reprouyng,
greatly vile and homly fare, and moderate expenses in all things. He granted
they should be welcome, and very instauntly desired them. And they came
fasting because they would have better appetites. Wha^ they were set to dinner
(as it was thought) there wa^ted no kind of delitious meat: they filled the^
selves habou^dantly: after ye feast was done, they gave most hearty thanckes,
for their galaunte cheer, and departed, every one of them unto their own
lodgings: but anon their stomachs began too wax an hungered, they
maruayled what this should mean, so soon to be an hungered and a thirste, after
so sumptuous a feast: at the last the matter was openly known and laughed at.


Spu. Not without a cause, it had been much better for the^ too have satisfied
their stomachs at their own cha^bers with a mess of potage, the^ too be fed
so delitiousli with vain illusio^s.


H. And as I think ye common sort of men ar much more too be laughed at,
which in steed of Godly things, chose vain and transitory shadows, and
rejoice excedyngly in such folishe phansies that turn not afterward in too a
a laughter, but into everlasting lamentation and sorrow.


Spudeus The more nerelier I note your sayings, the better I like the^.


Hedo. Go too, let us grant for a time these things too be called pleasant,
that in very deed are not. Would you say that meeth were sweet: which had more
Aloes myngled with it, then honye?


Spud. I would not so say and if there were but the third part of an ounce of
Aloes mixed with it.


Hedo. Orels, would you wish to be scabbed because you have some pleasure too
scratch?


Spud. No, if I were in my right mind.


HEAD. Their weigh with your self how great pain is intermyngled with these
false and wrongly named pleasures, yt unshamefast love filthy desire, much
eating and drinking bring us unto: I do omit now that, which is principal
grudge of conscience, enemitie betwixt God and man, and expectation of
everlasting punishe^ment. What kind of pleasure, I pray you is there in these
things, that does not bring with it a great heap of outeward euilles?


SPV. What be they?


HEDO. We ought to let pass and forbear in this place avarice, ambition,
wrath, pride envy; which of their selves be heavy and sorrowful euylles and let
us confer and compare all those things together, yt have the name of some
chief and special pleasure: where as the agew the hedache, the swelling of the
belly, dulnes of wit, infamy, hurt of memory, vomyting, decay of stomach,
tremblyng of the body succeed of over much drynking: think you, that the
Epicure would have esteemed any such like pleasure as this, convenient and
wourthy desire?


SPV. He would say it were utterly too be refused.


HEDONi. Whereas young men also with hauntynge of whores (as it is daily seen)
catch the new leprosy, now otherwise named Jobs agew, and some call it the
scabbes of Naples, through which desease they feel often ye most extreme and
cruel pains of death even in this life, and carry about abodye resemblyng
very much some dead coarse or carryn, do you think that there apply them selves
unto godly pleasure.


SPVD. No, for after they have been often familiar with their pretyones, then
they must goo streighte too the barbours, that chances continuallye unto all
whoremongers.


HEAD. Now feign that there were alyke measure of pain and pleasure, would ye then
require too have the toothache so long as the pleasure of quaffing and whor
dome endured?


SPV. Verily I had rather want them booth, for there is no commodity nor
vantage to bye pleasure with pain but only to chau^g one thing for another, but
the heit choice is now not too affectionate any such leudnes, for MAR.
Tullius calls that an inward grief and sorrow.


He. But now ye provocation and entiseme^t of unlawful pleasure, besides that it
is much less then the pain which it brings with it, it is also a thing of a
very short time: but if the leprosye be ones caught, it tourme^teth me^ al
their life days very pitifully and oftentimes co^straineth them to wyshe for
death before they ca^ dye.


SP. Such disciples as those then, the Epicure would not know.


HEAD. For the most part poverty, a very miserable and painful burden,
follows lechery, of immoderate lust comes the palsy, tremblyng of ye
senewes, blcardnes of eyes, and blyndnes, the leprosy and not these only, is
it not a proper piece of work (I pray you) to chau^g this short pleasure
neither honest nor yet godly, for so many euylles far more greuouse and of
much longer continuance.


SP. Although there should no pain com of it, I esteem him to be a very fond
occupier, which would change precious stones for glass.


HE. You mean that would lose the godly pleasures of the mind, for the
colored pleasures of ye body.


SP. That is my meaning.


HE. But now let us come to a more perfecter supputation, neither the agewe
nor yet poverty follows always carnal pleasure, nor the new leprosy or else
the palsy waitnot on at altimes the great and excessive use of lecherye, but
grudge of co^sie^ce evermore is a follower and sure companion of al vnleaful
pleasure, then the which as it is plainly agreed betwixt us, nothing is more
miserable.


SPV. Yea, rather it grudgeth their conscience sometime before hand, and in
the self pleasure it pricketh their mind, yet there be some yt you would say,
want this motion and feelyng.


HE. They be now therefore in worse estate and co^ditio^. Who would not rather
feel pain, then too have his body lack any perfect sense, truly from some
either intemperatnes of euel desires, even like as it were a certain kind of
drunkenes, or else wont and common haunt of vice which are so hardened in them,
yt they take a way ye felyng and consideration of evil in their youth, so that
wha^ agee comes upon them beside other infinity hurtes and perturbations
against whose coming they should have laid up the deeds of their former life,
as a special iuwel and treasure: then they stand greatly in fear of death, a
thing emongist all other most inevitable, and that no man can shonne: yea,
and the more they have heretofore been dysmayed and lacked their senses, the
greater now is their un quietness and grudge of conscience, then truly the
mind is suddenly awaked whether it wol or no, and verily where as old agee is
always sad and heavy of it self for as much as it is in subjection and
bondage unto many incommodities of nature, but then it is far more wretchede
and also filthy, if the mind unquiet with it self shall trouble it also:
feasts, ryotous banketyng, syngyng, and daunsynge, with many such other
wanton toys and pastimes which he was communely yeoue^ unto and thought very
plesau^t when he was young, be now paynfull unto him being old and crooked,
ne agee has nothing too comfort and fortifi

(...) it self withal, but only too remember that it has passed over the
course of years in virtue and godly living and conceive a special trust too
obtain herafter a better kind of life.

These be the two staves whereupon age is stayed, and if in their steed you
will lay on him these two burdens: that is, memory how synfully he has led
his life, and desperation of the felicity that is too coome, I pray you what
living thing can be feyned too suffer sorer punishment and greater misery?.


spu. Verily I can see nothing although some man would say an old horse.


hedo. Then to conclude it is too late to wax wise And that saying appears
now too be very true. Careful mornings do oftentimes follow merry euentides,
and all vain and outrageous mixth ever turns into sorrowful sighs: yea, and
they should have considered both that there is no pleasure above ye ioyfulnes
of the heart, and that cheerful mind makes agee too florishe, an heavy
spirit consumes the boones, and also that all the days of the poor are
evil: that is, sorrowful and wretched. And again a quiet mind is like a
contynuall feast.


SPVDEVS. Therefore they be wise, that thryue in time, and gather too gether
necessaries for that agee coom^.


HEDONI. The holy scripture entreats not so wordely as too measure the
felicity and high consolation of man, by the goods of fortune, only he is
very poor, that is destitute and void of al grace and virtue, and stands in
boundage and debette, both of body and solle unto that tyranne our most foo
and mortal enemy the devil.


SPV. Surely he is one that is very rigorous and impatient in demanding of
his duty.


HE. Moreover that man is rich, which fyndeth mercy and foryeouenes at the
hands of god. What should he fear, that has such a protector? Whether men?
where as plainly their hole power may less do agae^st God, then the bytyng of
a gnat, hurts the Elephant. Whether death? truly that is a right passage for
good men unto all sufficient joy and perfection according too the just reward
of true religion and virtue. Whether hell? For as in that the holy prophet
speaks boldly unto God. Although I should walk in the midst of the shadow
of death, I will not fear any evils because you art with me. Wherefore should he
stand in fear of devils, which bears in his heart him, that makes the
devils too tremble and quake.

For in diverse places the holy scripture praises and declares openly the
mind of a virtuous man, too be the right temple of God. And this to be so
true yt that it is not too be spoken against, ne in any wise should be denied.


SPV. Forsooth I can not see, by what reason these sayings of yours can be
confuted although they seem too varye much from the vulgar and common
opinion of men.


HEDO. Why do they so?


SPV. After your reasonyng every honest poor man, should live a more pleasant
life, then any other, how much soever he did habou^d in riches, honor, and
dignity: and breuely though he had all kind of pleasures.


HE. Add this too it (if it please you) too be a king, yea, or an emperor if
you take away a quiet mind with it self, I dare boldly say, that the poor
man sklenderlye and homely appareled, made weak with fasting, watchyng, great
toil and labor, and that has scarcely a groat in all the world, so that his
mind be godly, he lives more deliciously then that man which has five
hundredth times greater pleasures and delicates, then ever had Sardanapalus.


SP. Why is it the^, that we see communely those that be poor look far
more heuely then rich men.


HEAD. Because some of them be twice poor, either some desease, nedines,
watchyng, labor, nakedness, do so weaken the state of their bodies, that by
reason thereof, the chearefulnes of their minds never shows it self, neither
in these things, nor yet in their death. The mind, forsooth though it be
enclosed within this mortal body, yet for that it is of a stronger nature, it
so^what tra^sfourmeth and fascioneth the body after it self, especially if
the ve hement instigation of the spirit approach the violent inclination of
nature: this is the cause we see oftentimes such men as be virtuous die more
cherefully, then those that make pastyme contynually, and be yeoue^ unto al
kind of pleasures.


SP. In very deed, I have meruayled oftten at that thing.


HEAD Forsoothe it is not a thing too be marueyled at, though that there should
be unspeakable joy and comfort where God is is present, which is the heed
of all mirth and gladness, now this is no strange thing, although the mind
of a godly mad do rejoice contynually in this mortal body: where as if the
same mind or spirit descended into the lowest place of hell should lose no
part of felicity, for whersoeuer is a pure mind, there is god, where God is:
there is paradise, there is heaven, there is felicity, where felicity is: there
is the true joy and synsere gladness.


SP. But yet they should live more pleasauntly, if certain incommodities were
taken from them, and had such pastymes as either they despise orels can not
get nor attain unto.


HE. (I pray you) do you mean, such incommodities as by the commune course
of nature follow the condition or state of man: as hunger, thirst, desease,
werynes, age, death, lyghtnyng yearthquake, fluddes and battle?


SPV. I mean other, and these also.


HEDO. Then we entreat still of mortal things and not of immortal, and yet in
these evils the state of virtuous men, may be better borne withal, then of
such as seek for the pleasures of the body they care not how.


SPV. Why so?


HEDO. Especyally because their minds be accustomed and hardened with most
sure and moderate governance of reason against al out ragious affections of
the mind and they take more patiently those things that cannot be shonned
then the other sort do Furthermore, for as much as they perceive, all such
things ar sent of god, either for the punishment of their faults, or else too
excitate and stir them up unto virtue, then they as meek and obediente
children receive them from the hand of their merciful father, not only
desireously, but also chearefully and give thanks also, namely for so merciful
punishment and inestimable gains.


SPV. But many do occatio^ griefs unto the^ selves.


HEDO. But ^o seek remedy at the Phisicions, either to preserve their bodies
in health or else if they be sick, too recover health, but willyngly too
cause their own sorrows, that is, poverty, sickness, persecution, slander,
except the love of God compel us thereto, it is novertue but folishnes: but as
ofoften as they be punyshed for Christ and justice sake, who dar be so bold
as too call them beggars and wretches? wha^ the Lord himself very famyliarly
calls them blessed, and commands us to rejoice for their state and
condition.


SPV. Nevertheless, these things have a certain pain and grief.


HEDO. They have, but on the onesyde, what for fear of hell, and the other for
hoope of everlasting joy, the pain is sone past and forgotten Now tell me if
you knew that you might never be sick, or else that you should feel no
pain of your body in your life time, if you would but ones suffer your utter
skin too be prycked with a pynnes puinct, would you not gladly and with all
your very heart suffer then so little a pain as that is?


SPV Very gladlye, yea, rather if I knew perfectlye that my teeth would never
ache, I would willynglye suffer too be prycked deep with a nedle, and too have
both mine ears bored through with a bodkin.


HEDO. Surely what pain soever happens in this life, it is less and
shorter, compared with the eternal pains, then is the soden prick of a
needle, incompariso^ of the life of man though it be never so long, for there
is no conuenience or proportion of the thing that has end, and that which is
infinite.


SPV. You speak very truly.


HEDO. Now if a man could fully persuade you, that you should never feel
pain in all your life, if you did but ones divide the flame of ye fire, with
your hand, which thing vndoughtely Pithagoras forbade, would you not gladlye
do it?


SPV. Yea, on that condition I had liefer do it an hundred times, if I knew
precisely the promiser would keep touch.


HE. It is plain God cannot deceive. But now that feelyng of pain in the fire
is longer unto the whole life of man* then is the life of man, in respect of
the heavenly joy, although it were thrice so long as ye years of Nestor,
for that casting of the hand in the fire though it be never so short, yet it
is some part of his life, but the whole life of man is no portion of time in
respect of the eternal life,


SPV. I have nothing too say against you.


HEDO. Do you then thyncke that any affliction or tourment can disquiet those
that prepare them selves with a cheerful heart and a steadfast hoope unto the
kyngedome of God, where as the course of this life is now so short?


SPVDE. I think not, if they have a sure persuasion and a constant hope too
attain. it.


HEDO. I coome now unto those pleasures, which you objected against me, they
do wythdrawe them selves from daunsynge, bankettynge, from pleasant seeghtes,
they dispyce all these things, as thus: for to have the use of things far
more ioyfulle, and have as great pleasure as these be, but after another
sort: the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the heart of man
cannot thyncke what consolations GOD has ordained for them that love him.
Sayncte Paul knew what manner of things should be the songs, queeres,
daunsynges, and bankettes of virtuous minds, yea, in this life.


SPVDEVS but there be some leafull pleasures, which they utterly refuse.


HEDONIVS. That may be, for the immoderate use of leafull and godly games or
pastymes, is vnleaful: and if you will except this one thing only, in all
other they excelle which seem too lead a paynfull life, and whom we take too
be overwhelmed with all kind of miseries. Now I prai you what more roialler
sight can there be, then ye co^te^platio^ of this world? and such men as ye be
in favor of god keeping his holy commandments and love his most blessed
testament, receive far greater pleasure in the sight thereof, then the other sort
do, for while they behold with ouercurious eyes, yt wonderful work, their
mind is troubled because they can not compass for what purpose he does such
things, then they improve the most right and wise governor of all and
murmour at his doings as though they were gods of reprehension: and often
find fault with that lady nature, and say that she is unnatural, which
taunt forsooth with as much spite as can be showed with words, greueth
nature: but truly it redoundeth on him, that made nature, if there be any at
all. But the virtuous man with godly and simple eyes beholds with an excedyng
rejoice of heart the works of his Lord and father highly praysyng the^ all,
and neither reprehe^deth nor finds faut with any of the^, but for every thing
yeoueth most hearty thanks, when he considers that al were made for the
love of man. And so in all things, he prays unto the infinite power, divine
wisdom, and goodness of the maker, whereof he perceives most evident tokens
in things that be here created. Now fain that there were such a palace in
very deed as Apuleus faineth, or else one that were more royal and gorgeouse,
and that you should take two thither with you too behold it, the one a
stranger, which gooeth for this intent only too see the thing, and the other
the servant or soonne of him that first causes this buyldyng, whether will
have more delectie in it? the stranger, too whom such manner of house does
nothing appartain, or the soonne which beholds with great joy and
pleasure, the wit, riches, and magnificence of his dearly beloved father,
especially when he does consider all this work was made for his sake.


Sp. Your question is too plain: for they most co^munely that be of evil
conditions, know that heaven and all things contained therein, were made for
man's sake.


HEDO. Almost al know that, but some do not remember it, showing themselves
vntha^keful for the great and exhubera^t benefittes of god, and al though they
remember it, yet that man takes greater delight in the sight of it which has
more love unto the maker thereof, in like manner as, he more cheerfully will
behold the element which aspireth toward the eternal life.


SPV. Your sayings are much like too be true.


HEAD. Now the pleasures of feasts does not consist in the delicates of the
mouth, nor in the good sauces of cooks, but in health of body and appetite of
stomach. You may not think that any delicious person suppeth more pleasauntly
having before him par triches, turtelles, leuerettes, bekers, sturgeon, and
lamprayes: then a virtuous man having nothing too eat, but only bread potage,
or wortes: and nothing too drink, but water, single bear, or wine well alayde,
because he takes these things as prepared of God unto all living creatures,
and that they be now yeoue^ unto him of his gentle and merciful father,
prayer makes every thing too savor well. The petition in ye beginning of
dinner sanctifies all things and in a while after there is recited some holy
lesson of the word of God: which more refreshes the mind, then meat the
body, and grace after all this. Finally he rises from the table, not full: but
recreated, not laden, but refreshed: yea, refreshed both in spirit and body,
think you that any chief deviser of these much used ba^kets, and deintye
delicaces fares now more deliciously?


SPudeus. But in Venus there is great delectacions if we believe Arestotell.


Head. And in this behalf the virtuous manne far excels as well as in good
fare, wiegh you now the matter as it is, the better a man loves his wife,
the more he delecteth in the good fellow ship and familiarity that is between
them after the course of nature. Furthermore, no men loue^ their wives more
vehemently then they that love them eue^ so, as Christ loved the church. For
they that love the^ for the desire of bodily pleasure, love the^ not. More
over, the seldomer any man does accompany with his wife, the greater
pleasure, it is to him afterward, and that thing the wa^to^ poet knew full
well which writes, rare and seldom use stereth up pleasures. Albeit, the
lest part of pleasure is in the familiare company between them. There is
forsothe far greater in the continual leadyng of their lives too gether,
which amongst none can be so plesaunt as those that love syncerely and
faithfully together in godly and christian love, and love a like one the other.
In the other sort, often when the pleasure of ye body decaieth and waxes old
love waxes coold and is sone forgotto^, but emo^gest right christian me^, the
more yt the lust of ye flesh decreaseth and vanishethaway, ye more the^ al
godly love encreseth Are you not yet persuaded that none live more pleasauntly
the^ they which live continually in virtue and true religion of god?


SP. Would god all men were as well persuaded in that thing.


He. And if they be Epicures yt live pleasauntli: none be righter Epicures
then they that live virtuously, and if we will that every thing have it right
name none deserves more ye cogname of an Epicure, then that Prince of all
godly wisdom too who^ most reuere^tly we ought always too pray: for in the
greek tongue an Epicure signifies an helper. Now when the law of nature was
first corrupted with linne, when the law of Moses did rather provoke evil
desires the^ then remedy them. Wha^ the tyraunte Sathanas reigned in this
world freely and without punishment, then this prince only, did suddenly
help mankind ready to perish: wherefore they err shamefully which scoff and
babble that CHRIST was one that was sadd and of a malancolye nature, and that he
has provoked us unto an unpleasant kind of life, for only he did show a
kind of living most godly and fullest of al true pleasure, if we might have the
stone of Tantalus taken away from us.


SPVD. What dark saying is this?


EDO. It is a merry tale too laugh at, but this bourd in duceth very grave and
sad things.


SPV. I tarry too hear this merry conceit, that you name too be so sage a
matter.


HE They which gave their study and diligence to color and setfurth the
precepts of Philosophy with subtle fables, declare yt there was one Tantalus
brought unto the table of the gods, which was ever furnished with all good
fare, and most nete and sumptuous that might be, when this stranger should
take his leave, Iupyter thought it was for his great liberality and high
renoume, that his guest should not depart without some reward, he wylled him
therefore too ask what he would, and he should have it: Tantalusus (forsooth)
like a very leude and foolyshe person, for that he set all the felicity and
pleasure of man in the delectation of the belly, and glotonye, desired but only
too sytte at such a table all the days of his life, Jupiter granted him his
desire, and shortly his vow was there stablished and ratifyed. Tantalus now
sytteth at the table furnyshed with all kinds of delicates, such drink as the
gods druncke of was set on the table, and there wanted no rooses nor odours
that could yeoue any sweet smell before the Gods, Ganymedes the buttler or one
like unto him, stands ever redye, the Muses stand round about syngyng
pleasauntly, merry Silenus daunseth, neither wanted no fools too laugh at, and
breuely, there there was every thing that could delyght any sense of man but
emongist all these, Tantalus sytteth all sad, syghyng, and unquiet with him
self, neither laughing nor yet touching such things as were set before him


SPVDE. What was the cause?


HEAD. Over his head as he sat there hanged by an hecre a great stone ever like
too fall.


SPV. I would then have conveyed my self from such a table.


HEDO But his vow had bound him too the contrary, for Iupyter is not so easy
too entreat as our GOD, which does unloose the pernicious vows of men,
that be made contrary unto his holy word, if they be penitent and sorye
therefore, or else it might be thus, the same stoone that would not suffer
him too eat, would neither suffer him to rise, for if he had but ones moved he
should have been quashed al in peeses with the fall thereof.


SPVDE. You have showed a very merry fable


HEDON. But now hear that thing, which you will not laugh at: the commune
people seek too have a pleasant life in out ward things, where as noothyng
can yeoue that, but only a constant and a quiet mind: for surely a far heuier
stone hangs over these yt grudge with them selves, then hanged over Tantalus:
it only hangs not over them, but greueth and oppresses the mind, ne the
mind is not troubled with any vayn hoope, but looks every hour to be cast
in too the pains of hell, I pray you what can be so pleasant emongist all
things that be yeouen unto man, that could rejoice the mind, which were
oppressed with such a stoone?


SPVDE. Truly there is nothing but madness, or else incredulity.


HEDO. If young men would weygh these things, that be quyckly provoked
and entised with pleasure as it were with the cup of Circes, which in stead
of their greatest pleasures receive poysone myxte with honye. How circumspecte
would they be too do any thing unadvisedly yt should grudge their minds
afterward? What thing is it that they would not do too have such a godly
treasure in store against their latter days? that is a mind knowing it self
clean and honest and a name that has not been defiled at any time. But what
thing now is more miserable then is agee? When it beholds, and looks
backward on things yt be past sees plainly with great grudg of conscience
how fair things he has despiced and set light by, (that is, how far
he has discented and gone astray from the promyses made unto God in baptime)
and again, how foul and noughty things he has clipped and enbraced, and wha^
he looks forward, he sees then the day of judgment draw near, and
shortly after the eternal punyshemente of of hell.


SPVDE. I esteem them most happy which have never defiled their youth, but
ever have increased in virtue, til they have coomne unto the last puincte of age.


HEDO. Next them they ar too be commended that have wythdrawne them selves
from the folly of youth in time.


SPVDE. But what council will you yeoue agee that is in such great myserie.


HEDO. No man should despair so long as life endures, I will exhort him to
flee for help unto the infinity mercy and gentilnes of God.


SP. But the longer yt he has lived the heap of his sins has ever waxen
great and greater, so that now it passes the number of the sands in the sea,


HE But the mercies of our lord far excede those sa^des, for although the sand
can not be numbered of man, yet hit has an end, but the mercy of God
neither knows end, ne measure.


SP. Yea but he has no space that shall dye by and by,


HEDONI. The less time he has the more ferue^tly he should call unto god for
grace, that thing is long enough before God, which is of such power as too
ascend from the earth unto heaven, for a short prayer forsooth streght enters
heaven, if it be made with a vehement spirit. It is written, ye (...) ye woman
sinner spoken of in the gospel did penance al her life days: but with how
few words again did the thief obtain Paradise in the hour of death? If he
will cry with heart and mind, God have mercy on me after thy great mercy:
God will take away from him Tantalus stone and yeoue in his hearing joy and
comfort and his bones humiled through co^trition, will rejoice that he has his
sins for yeouen him.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London vvithir the precinct of the late dissolved house of the
gray Friars, by Richard Grafton, Printer too the Princes grace. the. XXIX.
day of July, the year of our Lord. M. D. XLV.

EICHDIEN. P


SVSCIPITE INCITVM VERBVM^^ IACO. I



