The Censure and judgment of the famous clark Erasmus of Roterodam: Whyther
dyuorsemente between man and wife stondeth with the law of God, With diverse
causes wherefore it is permitted, with the mind of the old doctors, written
by the said Erasmus in the book of his Annotations, upon these words of Paul.

i. cor, vii. She is delivered from the bond of the law, let her marry to whom
she will, translated by Nycolas Less. Ephe, iiii. Be not carried about with
every wind of doctrine. Nycolas Less, to the reader.
IT fortuned not long ago (most ge^ till reader) that a very nygh friend of
mine, being in a certain company of me^, not only learned, but also of most
sound judgment, and perceuing by their communication, which was of that
thing that is now in all men's mouths and (the more is the pity) commonly
practiced as well of the wicked sort of men and women, as of those, which
according to the law of god, do seek most just remedies and help, for their
paynful greiffes, and most dangerous ^ores, that as touching this matter of
divorce. no man has written more exactly and absolutely, than the famous clark
Erasmus of Roteroda^ has done, in his book entitled (the annotations upon the
new testament, in the first epistel, and seventh chapter of the Apostell Daule
unto the Corinthians,) was thorough their words so kindled, and set a fire,
with the desire of the knowledge of his so absolute censure and judgment, that
he never ceased, yea importunately craving on me till I had both granted him
to translate the said part of his annotations, forth of the latin, into our
mother tongue, and performed it alsoo. Which thing although I was loath for
to do, because I would not, being a man of so simple learning by any manner
of ways, appear to take upon me, to meddle with that argument, which so great
clerks had taken in hand alredye, yet for so much as it could nothing
preiudicate y^ godly doctrine of y^ preachars in this behalf (yea rather
should further their doctrine, than hinder it,) to set forth in wri tynge the
mind of such a noble clerk, as in our time has not ben the like, nor
many hundred years before, I did boothe wyllyngelye and gladlye, satisfye
his most godly request, that in so doing, not his mind only, but also of
those which were the auncyentest and chiefest doctors that the church has
had from the beginning thereof till our time, might be perfectlye known,
^ake therefore this lyghtell work unto the (right genrell Readar) and read
it thorough, or else medel not with al. For otherwise (peradventure) you shall
be brought into more doubts, than thou art in already. And then I trust
thou shalt stick to one truethe, without doubting any more in this behalf.
But y^ all this can not satisfye thy mind, but will rather enclyne to thine
own judgment, then to y^ censures of such holy fathers, with the vniuersail
consent and contynuall obseruatyon of the church, I can not tell to whom I
should send the, for further knoweledge, but only to pray to God, to
lyghten thy heart that thou may se and know the verity, by him which is
the schoolemaister of all verity, yea the verity it self, which hatethe all
lies, to whom I do commend the and al thy studies. Fare well.

Whyther dyuorsemente does stand with the law of God, or nay.
i, Cor. vii. She is set at liberty from the law, let her marry to whom she
will.


ALthough, as I have ons al ready openly declarid in the beginning of my book
(and as the thing it self should and ought always testifye in it self) that
in this my whole work, I entende, or mind in no place thereof, to be the
father or bringe^vp of any new opinion, which should bread contention, but
that my desire is, all that I may to help them forward, which are studiouse,
with the pure and sound judgment of the holy church, and of those, to
whom Christ has geuyn a more large gift of learning, and wisdom: yet for all that, I do proteste the self same thing again, in this place, because of
certain persons which are in these matters, where of we now do speak, more
captiouse, and fynding of faults, than becomes good christen men. But, as I
do think, that it is no contumely, or a thing wherewith men should be
offended, though a man be of an other mind and iud gement, than other authors
be of: (be they never so great of name, and therewith also aunciente) so can I
be content with a good will, to forsake mine own judgment, and to be against
it, if any man (be he never so simple) can show me that which is better. It is
not unknown unto ^e, yt it is a thing among al christen people most generaly
receuyd, and agred upon, that where soeue^ matrymony is once celebrated, that
there it can non other wise be dyssoluyd but by ye death of one of the two
parts, which were so joined together.

Of this mind was Chrisostom, and the old latin wrytars, and with out doubt
the great doctor Augustine, being confyrmed not only by the constytutions and
ordynaunces of bishops, and with the authoryte also of the decretall laws, but
also approved, and allowed by the whole consentes of the schoolmen. But if so
be, ye godly men have always thought it good to alter and change there opynions,
when it is for a better purpose, and is also standing with reason, to make
the laws for to serve us after the fashyon as we use medicines, acording to
the nature of the syknes and disease, wherewith man is payned: then let us
consider, and way, whyther it be expedient and proffytable that the self same
thing should be done in this cause of matrimony: and if we do find it
expedient and requysyt that it should be, than let us se whyther it be lawful,
yea or nay, that some sort of marriages should be undone, not with out a good
ground, but for earnest causes, nor yet by every man that would take upon him,
but by the governors of the church, and lawful judges, and that the same
matrimony should so be dissolved, that both parts might mary again to whom
they ^lese, or that part, which was not the cause of the breach of
matrimonye. I am not ignoraunte, that there are many things, whereof, to make
any doubt, or to bring into question, were great sin: as if we should
dispute, whither Christ were both god and man, whither he was borne without
ye seed of man, whyther our souls do live after the death of ye body: and so,
whyther that our bodies shall be restored to life again in time to come. For
me are taught these things so playnelye by the authority of the holy
scripture, and by the whole consent of the holy church, that it is a wicked
and a very dangerous thing, yea to hold any dysputation thereof, except it
should be our chance to have to do with those, which are infidels. But yet
for all that, I do not think, that that man should be vngentyllye said nay to,
and spyghtfully cast of, which (as the weakness of our humayne nature is)
having some doubt, paraduenture, of some of these things: does open his mind
to those which ar learned, so that he minds none other thing, but ye he
might more firmly believe that thing, which he did not throughlye believe
before. But now let us see, whither this matter, whereof we do now speak, be
of that kind, and nature, ye or nay. Some things there are, which be so
obseruyd and kept by the aucthorite of the chur che, that according as time
and need should require, they may be alteryd and changed. And as it is not
lefull, to abrogate and disanul the holy scripture, which is y^ most right
rule of good life, eue^ so it is the part of a good and a wise stuard, so for
to use it as ye manners of me^ shall require, where of we will speak more largely
hereafter, minding now to go on with the matter which we have in hand. First
therefore of al, I do say, that it perteyneth to ye godly charity of the
church, as much as lyethe in it, to procure the health of al men, and
dilygently to comfort and succor the weak and diseased me^ bers thereof. For we
do se many thousands so vnl^ckelye copeled together, with as evil agreement,
that both parts do peryshe thereby, which (peraduentur) might be saved, if
they had by set a sonder one from the other Whi che thig if it might be
brought to pass, without doing prejudice and wrong, to the holy commau^deme^
tes of god, it ought to be ye desire of al godly men, but if it be so that it
ca^ not sto^d with the law of god, yet I do take it to be a good wish and
desire, for so much as charity often times does desire those thigs which can not
be. For Moses does wyshe, that he might be blotted forth of the book of life,
And the Apostel Daule does wyshe also that Christ would make him to be an
anathem or curse for his brethren. There have been The proposi tion.
many of this opinion, which have thought, that after matrymo ny were lawfully
dyssoluyd, it should be lefull for thee man to marry another woman. Let no man
now streightway condemn this opinion, as strange and soul, and unworthy to
be disputed. For Origin in his seventh Homely upon the Euangelyst Matthewe,
does Origin.
witness that he knew certain bishops: which permitted and gave leave to
wives, which had dyuor sed them selves from their husbands, to marry other
men, and said that in so doing, they did agenst the commandment of the lord,
and of Paul. But yet he doothe notvtterly condemn the deed, by caul he
supposes that they so did upon some probable and good cause, least some
worse thing should have been committed, bea^ynge with the hardenes of their
hearts, following the counsel of Paul which did permytte unto wydows, which
could not live chaste, that they might mary again. This example of Paul, Orige^
does so conferr, examine, and dyscusse that he seems to make it a mich more
hard and straight matter to give leave unto a wydow for to mary, which
desires an hosbond for the pleasure of here bodi and not for children, than
that ye man puttyng away his wife for whordom should take to him an honest
woman mete for him. And A man may lawfulli put away his wife and mar ry again
is shebe a h^re
hereof he seems to make no manner of doubt / but that he may lawfully mary
again whom the gospel does permytte to put away his wife for whordome.
Nether does Daule command this man so divorsed, to be reconcyled again unto
his wife.

But Origin does note in the example of those bishops / that they did permit
that thing unto the wives / which the apostle Paul with expressed words,
seems to prohibit and forbid. Nether does Origin say, that that man isafter
the Iewysh sort, which does forsake his wife for whoredom, but that man,
which being waywarde, and hard to please, for every light cause, seeks to
put away his wife, as the Jews did. For, that man, which is of that Iewysh
sort, and casts with him self how he might go from his wife / does reason
after this fast^ on: Moses did permyt a man to put away his wife for any foul
thing, and for example of a foul thing, he puts adulterye, it is lawful
therefore (says ^e) for a man to put away his wife for other foul things.
This reason Orygen does shake of, denyeng that Moses did mean of aduou try,
when he said for a foul thing for so much as they did not use to In the case of
adulterye there wasno libell of die uorsemente and so no life.
give a libell of diuorsemente, for the crime of aduoutrye, where as they used
to deliver the wooman to them which should stone her to death. But by this
foul thing, whereof Moses spoke, he did mean (says Origin) either some fait
of corrupt manners, or deformity of the body, wherewith the husband were
offended. That this was the mind and opinion of Origin, his words following do
declare.

After this (says he) the lord does not suffer any man to put away his wife
for any otherfault, sauig only for the cause of fornication.

And afterward he moves another question, demandyng, whyther it be lawful for
a man to put away his wife, if she be a murderer of fa (...) question moved of
Origin, where to be himself makes aun swer.
er or mother, if she be a witch, or a thief, as well as he may lawfully put
her away if she be a who ar. And in this question he standethe in doubt,
perceuing on the won side, that it were against the commandment of god, so
for to do, and on the other side he does think it to be an unjust and an un
natural thing, that the hosba^d should be constrained to bear those vices in his
wife, which are more grievous, and heynose, than whordom. But at the last,
sekinge how to wind him out of this doubtful question he says, I do reason
then after this fashion and say, because he did not command this thig, as by
y^ way of aprecept or commandemente, saing: let no man put his wife away but
for fornication, but as one that would make ye matter more plain and open
said: who that does put away his wife, except it be for the cause of
fornication / he makes her an hatlot. I do thynk that Origin was of this mind
/ that the wema^ is dryue^ to be an advouterose person, in that, that she may
not be suffered to mary again, althou ghe she be according to right, and her
nougty deserving put from her hosband: but if she be so, the falte to be in her
self, that she does play the whoar afterward, and not, in her hosband, which
has put her away. And alyghtel before, he made a similytude of Christ,
which did repudyate and cast of the syngagog, being a ma^quellar, taking unto
him a new spouse which is the church. The words of Orygen are these
followynge: we must say (says he) that Christ did not put away his first wife,
that is to say (after the spiritual understanding) the first Synagoge, to
geeue example that he would do according as the scriptur teaches, which
says: whom God has joined together let no man separate) but when his wife is
an aduouterous woman, being corrupted of the aduouterouse enemy, by whose
counsel she sought the death of her husband, etc. And a little after he
says, And Christ for the church sake, did leave and go from his father,
with whom he was, what time he was in the form of god and from his mother
also. etc. Hitherto are the words of Orygen. Thou heareste in this place
(gentle reader) of a diuorsement, and after the dyuorsemente of a new spouse,
whereby, it is manyfeste / and open, that Orygen was of this mind playnelye,
that after a man has put away his wife for whoredom, he may marrye another
wife. But where as he sayethe, that the bysshopps did against the doctrine
of the gospel, which permytted and gave license for marriage, after
dyuorsemente, he does mean of those men, which did put a way their
wives for other causes, as the Jews did. And in the like manner, thou must
understand that which he writes, where he says these words. After the
self same reason, as the woman is an aduoutrous person although she seems to
marry lefully, during the life of her husband, even so the man, although he
seems lawfullye to take that woman to wife, which is so divorced from her
husband, yet dot^ he not lawfully take her according to the mind of Christ,
but he does commit the greater aduoutrye, as one which does take another ma^s
wife. H^e Origin speaks of those, which domake diuorsementes for other
causes, which Christ did not except, or for light causes. And yet those
matrimonis by man's law were not punished, yea they were taken as good and law
full. But Origens reasoninge is, whether such matrimonies be lawful after the
words of Christ or no, namely, where as great offenses did make the separation
be twene the man and wife, as for attemptynge to poison her husband, or to do
murder, and says: Thou shall examyn, whither he has a just excuse before
god or nay. And yet the says, that who so puts his wife away, does give
occasion of adultery, which peradventure, with god, shall be imputed, to the
wife, and not to the hus band, which did put her away. Tertulian does apeare,
not to be much of a contrary mind to Origin, in his fourth book, which
Tertulia^ mind
he wrote against Marcio, expoun dinge these words of Christ, after this wise,
saying: If a man does put away his wife, and maryethe an other, as though he
would say, who so puts away his wife, for this porpose that he might mary
an other, he can not justly putt her away, for he does put here from him not
upon a just cause but he makes on quarrel or other (he cares not what) so
that he man sem^, and apere to putt h^ away justly, whom he does hate and
abhor. For the matrymony or ma riage which is not justly dessolued, stands
in effect still, and that standing still in effect,) which is, contynnyng the
matrymony, to mary to an other, is whordom. And so if Christ under a conditi
on did forbid a man to put away his wife, then did he not utter lie forbydde
him. And that thing which he has not wholye forbidden, he has whollye
permytted. The self same doctor with in few words after, said: and so the
law of dyuorsment has Christ for the menteinar, and defendar thereof. Thou wylt
say Objection.
(peradventure) that Tertulian is not to be admytted, forsomych as he went
away from the church. Howso ever he did, yet in this matter he was not
reprehended of the godly learned men, which he should have been, if this opinion
had been contrary to the mind and judgment of them that were in the treuth. Of
the same mind also, was on Polentius, a man (as The mind of Polentius
it apeareth of great grauite and of no less lerning, against whom saint
Augustine wrote. ii. books not in this case, as though he had been one of the
great hedds and masters of heretics, but as one which had bi^ in contention
with him, whose sentence, mi^d, and iugme^t he does so refel and improve, that
yet for that opinion, he does lay no point of heresy to his charge. S.
Ambrose also, which was a man praised without al doubt, not ambrose per
nuttethe the man to mari after diuors men: and not the woman
only for his sound docryne, but also for his godly living, says that it is
lawful for a man to ma ry another wife, after he has put away his first
wife for whoredom. And truly there is nodoubt but that this bishop did practyse
that thing in his flock, which he wrote to be just, and according to the
law. For in thexposition whi che he made upon the seventh ch, of the first
epistle, to the Corinthi ans, he said after this wise: (and that the man do
not put away his wife) you must understand (says he) except it be for the
crime of for nication. And therefore (says he) the Apostel speaking of the man
did not put thereto (if he does put her away, let him continue syngell) as he
did when he spoke of the woman, because it is lawful for a man to mary another
wife if his wife be a whore, which he has put away: for he is not in so
straight bondage of the law, as y^ woman. For the head of the woman is the man.
And the self same doctor said a little before. If she ca^ not live chaste
(says he) because she will not strive against ye flesh let her be reconcyled
to her husband. For there is no such leave given to the woman, that she may
mary again, although she does put away her husband, for that he has playde
the whoremonger or has forsaken his faith, or unlawfully has desired the use
of his wife. The reason whereof is by cause the inferior has not that same
prerogative in the law, over the hedde, which the superior and head has over
the inferior, that if the man does forsake the faith, or would contrary to
godlynes peruerte the lawful use of his wife, yet can she nether marrye, to
any other, nor yet return to him again. In this place where he says that
the inferyoure has not that same priuylege, that the superyour has, he seems
(although he says not so openly) to give leave to the man to mary another
wife: But / within few words after he permytteth the wife alsoo to take
another housbande, although her first husband be alive.

For in his exposytyon upon these words of Paul, (for a brother, or a sister
is not bound in such case) that is to say says he they ought not to receive
any ho not by matrymony which do disdayn and hate the author and maker of
matrimony. For it is no good or fyrme matrimony, which is with out the love of
god, by the which reason, the woman, which is put away because she does
fear and love God, does not sin if she join her self to an other
husband. For the coutempte, and hatred of God our maker, does loose and undo
the bond of matrymonye, and settethe at lybertye / the party which is so put
away so that he, or she so for taken may with out blame and offense cople
them self in matrymony again with other. And the infydel person does offend
both against god, and the holy state of matrymony because he would not in the
love and honor of god contynewe therein. And therefore, the faith, and promise
of matrymony is not to be kept with him, or her, which therefore forsakes it
and is gone from it, because he would not here and believe that the god of the
Chrystyn people, who^ theye do worship should be the author and maker of
matrymony. For if Esdras did command the wives, and hosbandes, which were
infidells to be put away, that therefore god should be merciful, and not
displesed if they tok other wives or husbands of there own nation (for they
hade no sich commaundemnt that they should so put them away that they should
take none other:) how much more if an infidel person does depart on his own
will, may the faithful woman or man take in marriage one of their own law? For
that matrimonye ought not to be taken for matrimonye, nor imputed to them:
which is without the law of god. Hitherto are the worcester des of Ambrose. And here,
I do think that no man can quarrel, that Ambrose did mean of that woman
which by ignorance, did mary an infidel whom she believed to be a christen
man, for so much as Daule does approve and allow the conjunction, in marriage, yea
of those also, if the infidel does consent / and is wyllyng to continue with the
faithful still. For by that reason, if this ignorance was at the time of the
contracte, then could she by no law continewe with him still, with whom at
the first she could not make any such contract of matrimony. And truly The
faith full may not wytting by contracte matrimonye with the un faithful but
if they were marted to gy there not kno wng one the others says they ought not
afterward to go a fonde^
it is a very faint reason, where with Detrus Lombardus, in ye fourth book of the
sentences, goith about to put away that place of S. Am brose, which we first
rehearsed, for to say / that it was noone of Ambrose writing, but thruste in
of some other into his works, for somuche as it differs nothing from his
style, and manner of writing, nor yet any thing there added or written, as an
exposition of any of his words. After this fashion, a man may easily make
answer to every doubt, if it would be so admitted. For there are many things
written in Cyprya^s works in H^omes works, in The maiste^ of the se^te^ce
Sayncte Augus^ynes works, and in the works of Thomas of Aquyne, which the
church does improve. And wherefore do we not excuse these authors, with the
like reason, and say. It was noone of there own wrytynges, but thrust in of
some other corrupter of their works* But now, if we would dys cusse, and search
out the mind, and opinions of the late writars, (whi che do bear great swinge
both in court and in schole) we shall find, that there were among them,
which thought it lawful, that matrimonye might be dissolved, or at the
least wise, which denied not, but this matter was dispu table. First of all,
Johannes Andreas Johannes Andreas
determyneth, and decrees, that matrimonye, before the man and the wooman do
lie together, may be dyssoluyd, not only if either of them do profess the
rule of a monastical life, but also by the only authority of the bishop of
Rome. But if they will grant me, that this matrimonye, is a true matrimony,
which is con tracted with the consent of both parts, having and speaking
the words one to the other, which do partayne to that same contracte of
matrimony, and that the contract is made between lawful and meet persons,
(such as the law does permit:) they must alsoo grant, that the strength and
bond of matrimonye, depends of the law of god: It must follow then that
either the law of god does not so take and understand matrimo ny as we do, or
else, that the bishop of Rome has power to undo that which the law of god does
command and decree. Again, the same Johannes Andreas, techeth for a
doctrine, that matrimonye which is ratefied, and full finished by the carnal
copulatio^ of the man, and the woman, can not by any means be dissolved, for
the proffe and confirmation of the which defense, which he makes, I do
perceive as yet no good reason or cause alleged. For the reasons, which
Hostiensis, Augustine, and pope Leo do bring for ye purpose, beside, that they
are but the opinions and minds of men, they do also permytte against the
doctrine of Christ and of Paul, that matrimony may be dissolved, and also / y^
after the dissolution, and losinge again of the said matrimony, ye man and
the woman separated / man marrye again. And therefore, we must either deny
that same to be matrimonye, which is not confir med with the carnal
copulation, or else we must grant yt matrimo ny may lawfully be dissolved. Or
else / what god (I pray you) gave this revelation unto these doctors that the
profession of a monastical life, and the change of religion, which is of the
ordinance of man does lawfully depart man and wife / yea, although yt either of
the^ would stand in the denial thereof, and were not wyllyng to go a sonder. Yea
(will they say) we do mean yt matrimony which is but ratefyed and agreed upon
between the parts, not that which is made perfect, and full ended by carnal
copulatio^. If it be so, where, and when did god ever teache them, y^ heresy
should de part man and wife, yea after it were full fynished and made perfect
by the mutual copulatio^ of y^ parts? and so depart the^, ye it should be
lawful for the man or y^ woman which did persist in the faith, to join in
matrimony again with who^ they would. What should I speak of Sachary Pope Za chary
the bishop of Rome. with as we do read in the. iiii. book of y^ sentences, and
the, xx^iiii. distin^ does dissolve matrimony, if a man does ly. with the sister
of his wife, whose words a^ these. Thou have medeled with the si ster of thy
wife. And therefore if you have so don, you shall have nether of the^, and thy
wife (if she be not gylti of thy wickedness, and not wyllig to live chaste) we do
permytte that she in the name of god / may marry to whom she wyil. But thou
and the aduout^ous woman shall mar ry no more, but shall live still in sorrow and
penance during yo ure lives. Thus fa^ are the words of Sachari the bishop.
Now as tochyng this gloss which Petrus lomba^dus does make upon (...)
his words, I do take it to be far from the truth, and nothing after the
meaning of the bishop, as follows, whereas he does say (says Lombardus) let
her mary to who^ she will, we must understand, that he does mean after the
death of her hosband. I pray you heartily would the bishop have omytted, and
forgot so great a matter as this T^ (...) her^by p^r (...) that both zacha^i
and Erasmus ar in the m^d that th^en der sh^ulde not marrye.
is, if he had been of that mind, as this man does understand him? What and if
he which was here hosband had lived lengar, than his wife, shall not then in
this be half the pain of the innocent par ty be as great as of him which was
the offender?

But how soever this is, some man will say peraduentur / that that is no lawful
matrymony, which is contracted against the consly^ on and ordinance of the
bishop. Well, if it be so as he says, where fore is not the woman in this case
set at lybertye, that she may marye again? Let this question now pass, for we
will go no further there with. But as teching the profesfion of a monastical
life, no man Goy^ into a cloister some time did dis solue matry money and he
resy also
douteth that it does undo that matrymony, which is but agred upon, and sured
between the parts, and for heresy, that contract al so is undone yea which is
gonn through, and full ended between the parts. But if a man may dys solue and
undo yt matrymony, why che is notful ended / because the reason and cause of
the sacrement is greater when it is fynyshed, by the copulation of the parts
than it was before, by the same reason it shall be lawful also to undo the
marriage after it is perfect and full ended, because that frutfulnes of children
in matrymony is a grea tar cause than bare^ys, and the cause in the first
contract is grea ter than in the second or the third. But this me thinks by
man's laws may be reasonable enough that the marriage which is not con summat
and full ended might some ways be undone, because that the woman which has
not been toched of the man to whom she was married, shall sooner find an other
man, which will take here to wife, than she which has carnally known her
hoband. But we (I can not tell for what purpose) have so men gelyd gods law and
man's laws to gyther, about this busynes, that we have made it so dark that no
man can tell what to Johannes Andreas.
make of it. But for all that, Ioha^nes Andreas does apere not alto gyther to
dyssent from this opynion, if a man should say, that matrymony, which is made
perfect may be dyssoluid upon some great urgent cause, forsomyche as he
dysputeth this same argument in the rule which begins* Actus li gitimi and
the syxt book De regu lis iuris, whom Panormitanus does aledge in y^ cha.
which begin neth Ex publico, de conuertione co^ iugatoru^, For after he had put
the case (whither the bishop might dispe^ce and give license, yt a kings son
which is a monk, might (his father the king having no more so^s but him) might
mary a wife, and keep her till the time he should beget of her a man child, and
so when he has brought forth reasons on both sides, both with it, and against
it, he gives no sentence or determination, whither he might so dispense or
nay, but leaves the matter to the judgment of other men. But at the last,
Panormitanus does thus end his whole disputation, (...) upon die ^semente.
and says: I could be of this mind, that the pope can not undo the matrimony
which is co^ summate / and made perfect between faithful persons, so that I
would chose to take and defend the negative part, that he can not dispense
in this casse. And he^e he does not affirm the thing, but he puts forth
this question, as a disputable argument, whereof he thinks the contrary part
to be y^ more probable, and truar. The same Panormitanus, among other matters,
whereof he wrote in y^ chapter, beginning with this word Q uanto, and title, de
diuortijs, does say these words (And this text does serve very well, and is
the best that can be for this purpose, whereupon we might ground our reason,
that the church can not dissolve, and undo that contract of matrymony. And
hear again he does not say affirmatively yt the church can not undo that
matrymony, which is consummated and thoroughly ended: but rather co^ senteth
that it may, although (he says) an argument might bemade out of that chaptr,
which should be to the contrary. For it follows not that streyghtwaye it is
ouercom and cast down, because it may be ouercom and cast down with argument.
Hostiensis also appea reth some time to be on the contra ti part. For in the
chapter begin ning. Ex part in the tytil de co^uer tione coniugatorum. he
moves ye question, whither the church may now statute and ordeine yt when the
either part of the faithful persons which at married together is fallen into
heresye ye other part may go to the second vow of matrimony. And he does
answer that it is lawful so to do, proui^g it by this argument. Likewise
(says he) as the church has ordained between infidels, which do contracte
among them self lawefull matrimonye, as Codicc de infideli bus and consanguini
and affini, so may the church decre and ordeyne among the faithful persons:

For the confyrmation of the ma trimony of the faithful comes of the
sacrament of baptym, as in the said chapter Quanto, and that by the dysposition
and order of the church. The church then has power to ordeyne, alsoo to y^
contrary. Does not Hostiencys here openly pronounce, that the church may
decre and ordeyne, that some matrymony may be dissoluyd be it never so perfect,
when either of the parts does fall into heresye, so that the innocent party
may go to the second vow, (that is to wit, may make a new con tract of
matrymony with some other? And yet he denies that this thing may be don, except
the chur che does so ordeyne it. Antonye Antony (...) po^ diuors meant
also doothe certefye us that he has seen a bull of the byshope o^ome his
gyuing forth, whereby he did separate man and wife af ter that that matrimony
was fully finished and made perfect. But how myche these authors at to be set
by, and regarded, let it be thee judgment of other men. As for me I have here
brought the forth and showed you what they do say because that they which
think them to be of great authoryte, should not think that I have done
otherwise than well in that I do desire, that by some way or other, it might be
brought to pass, that by the authoryte of the church, some remedy and help
might be proui ded for them which do live myserably and ungodly together with
the great peril, and danger of both there sowl helthes. But now no man can
deny but that the laws of Christ at most ryghtwis of al, and most full of all
equity / exellynge and passing al other whyther we do compare them with the law
of nature, or man's law. Christ does not strayghtly requit of us that we should
live as vir gens, lest he should apere to go against the law of nature,
althou ghe he does pronounce them to be blessed, which can take it. ^owe
are these were des to be un derstanded, (to be gelded for the king dome of hea
uen.)
But to those words he does add thus miche more, saying (for the kingdom of
heaven). And the kingdom of heave, he calls the preching of the gospel, that
this saying: should most apear to serve for that time. For there is a time to
marry and a time to abstain from marriage. Do thou think then, that it
stondeth with equite and justice, that a man should be compelled to live with a
wife / which is kiuered all together with myscheuos and shamful deeds, whereof
he gave none occasion nor yet can bring her by any means from here lewdnes with
whom for to live, weras bad as to be slain, and better to be dead: Or do
thou think it good right and reason, that if this man do depart him self from
her that he should be dryue^ to lead all the days of his life after without a
wife al a lone, as a man that were no man: Let it stond well with right and
reason, that ye parti which was occasion of the diuorsment and separation shall
have no more lyberty for to marry, but wherefore should he be ponyshed, which
has not deserved, except ye would say that he is worthy to be ponyshed because
he was so vnluckey, to marry so ungracious a wife. But I pray you, what man
did ever se that a man was ponyshed for his mysfortune, if there was none other
falt in him than that, special ly by the law of god. What other thing is this,
but to heap on afflyction upon an other, and to make him, which is miserable
to be more miserable, whom our part were to help? For where as children
unlawfully begotten, who^ we do call bastardsar debarred from coming to certain
promotions and other proffets, first thou shalt understand that it is by ma^s
law and not by the law of the ghospel: Secondly, that it was thought good to
the magistrates so to po nyshe the unchaste life of there parents. And finally
they are not so excluded, but y^ they may otherwise help themselves, by their
v^rtuose and good acts, although their fortune in that case be against them.
How be it it is not al won, nor a like thing to be barred from receiving or
coming to dignite, and to be a whole life time in continual torments, and in
so many dangers and perylls, where the man deseruith no syche thing. And if yt
that man does make his wife to be a whoar, which does put her away, without a
lawful cause, does not he then as well make here to be a whoar, which does
prohibyt her being unjustly put a way to mary, when she is of that manner of
nature, and disposytion of the body that we should do her wrong to command
here to live chaste: But as toching that they do ley against us, thexample of
monks and noonse (which have no wrong done unto them forsomyche as wyllyngly,
without any compulsio^, of them self, there took so straight a vow upon them,
as they could not undo afterward) I might peraduentur answer, ye thexample of
a thing which is in contention and in controuer^ye and in doubt (as this is,
whyther thee vow of monks and nons be abrogable or nay) cann not resolve the
doubt of an other thing which is in like controversy, as this our matter is.
And yet for all that if we will believe some lawyars, ye The bishop of Rome (...)
make of a Monk n^ Monk
bishop of rome may make of a monk no moonke. And as tochi^g that which they
do allege spe king of a soleme and a pryuate vow / I can not se any
substan cial reason whereon it is grounded. But if this there reason (theye took
it upon them willingly by there own minds) were of so great force that the
thing which theye ons do, should never be undone, but be perpetualle, it
does follow, that al manner of contracts and bargayns which are made between man
and man, by there own fre wyls, and voluntary consents should never be undone,
but always stond, and be perpetual, which (for all that) we do se by experience
for new considerations and causes, which do often time rise and come between,
ar by the equity of ye law quyghte dyssoluyd, and made void. But, sum man
here ^peraduenture) will say unto me, that in matrymony a law is openly
prescribed, and known, that after it is wonse contrac ted, yt can not be
dyssolued, of the which thing those which do marry, are not ignorant / and yet
wyllyngly they do put there own necks in the halter, where they ned not. But
truly, that thing, which is our matter, whereof we do rea son is, whyther the
rigor of this law, may any thing be mitigated, and losed any manner of ways
forsomyche as often times, syche causes do com betwe^, that it should apere a
cruel thing not to help the party which is in danger. But if this law does
seem to be some thing repognane to the equity of nature, we must se then, why
there that which is written as concerning this law by the Euangelystes, and
apostells in there wrytynges, may receive any^ (...)

interpretation or meaning than that, which is according to the open words of
the law. And I would, that it should be lawful for us to do in this casse,
as we are bold to do in other places of the scripturs. And lykwyse, I would
that we should dyscuse, and examine what time, to whom, and for what occasion,
it was spoken, and peraduentur, we shall find out the right vnderstondig
thereof. Now, let every man be content, and not tale streyghtwaye into a rage
and cry out upon heaven and earth, and say: This man does goo about to break
the decrese of the church. For thereunto I do answer, that I do go about no
syche thing (as I have protestyd before) but only by the way of dysputati on to
reason the matter. Then let us se, for what purpos the church has allowed
this. For it has or deyned some things, not to stand in effect and to be
obseiued for ever, but for a time only. Second ly, if the church, (if we may
so call it) or else the bishop of rome has at no time alteryd, and changed any
of his decrese and ordinances nether will I require, that any thing shall be in
this casse changed and alteryd otherwise than it was first ordained. But if so
be we do find, that the church or the bishop of rome has made at any time
any change or alteration in things which are of greater weight but not so
mich perteinig to the health of me n, as this is / for what cause should we be a
feared to do the like and that specially, when we may thereby ease and help
the paynefull greifes of so many men? Our master Christ is content, for won
pore sheep whi che is lost to seek about every where, that he might find it
out, and so found, bring it home again, upon his own shoulders: and should we be
loath to seek and to prove, if we might find remedy and help (...) of all (...),
for so many as do peryshe daily, sithe that Christ is aucthor of all health,
and man's laws should non otherwise prevail, and be of strenght, but so fair,
as they do conduce and ar profitable for the preservation of man? Finally,
forsomuche ^hyther the bishop may sta^e and or dey^ ^nye thing again ^the
decre es of the apo st^s
as there are certain great masters in deuinite, which do gra unt and give to
the bishop of Rome so large auctorite and power, that it lyethe in him to
abrogate, and undo any thing, which the Apostles, (yea Peter him self) have
and has ordained, and forsomoche as there be some doctors, which make a
question and a dout of it, whyther he may ordeyn and decre any thing against
the doctrine of the gospel, not altogether deni enge but that he may after a
certain fashion, do it, although not clean disanullynge the doctrine thereof /
that is to say / either by interpretation, or else by restraining, or
enlargynge of his words (as Daule did when he said, I not the lord, by
permission, and not of commandment do. etc.) for what cause do they more
bind him in this case, that he cannot do the like, as he may in other things,
which are more great wherein he is permitted to do what he will?

Forsooth as concerning matrimony, Ihon Andrea, which is a great author among
the lawyers. affirms that the bishop of Rome may decre, and ordeyn, that by
the second contracte of matrimonye, the first may be made void, so far as
the first was not consum mate, likewise as it is undone, and made void, by
entering into religion. And of this man's mind is Panormitanus, asye read in
their commentaries, written upon the chapter, Quoduotis / in the tytell. Deuoto
and uoti redemptione. In the syxt book, and in the chapter, Expublico, in the
title, Deconuersi one coniugatorum. In the acts of the apostles we do reed,
that in a certain solemn counsel, it was decreed and published, that as ma
ny, as were admitted from the infi delitie of the heathen into the christian
flock, should absteyne from meats offered up to ydols, from strangled
beasts, from blood, and from whoredom. This can not be called a conciliable or
pryuate con gregation, where so great a number was, neither can it be called a
counsel without a head, where Deter him self was present. And yet, that
which was at yt time decreed, is gone so far, and so long time out of use,
that now who yt would abhor to eat of a strangled hen, or of podynges which are made of The decres of the apo stles chaun ged, and for what intent it was
made
blood, men would take him to be a right Jew. And yet do not I blemysh the
authority of the Apostels, but only I do excuse the thing done by them at
that coun sell to be ordained for a time, for the pacifienge of the minds of
the Jews. The Apostle Paul for byddeth that a nouyce in the faith which is
new come thereto or else a feyghter. or a dronkatde, should be made a bishop.
But at this dat Paul's con stitution
we dose, that the bishop of Rome does make a child a bishop, whi che was
borne but yesterday, yea, and yt it pleases him, of a pirate and a thief,
which robs upon the sea, he will make a bishop also, being nothing a feared
of Dau les constitution. Furthermore, it was long or the church did
determyne, Transubsta^ tiation not beleuedofthe prymytyue church.
that transubstantiation was in the bread of the altar. For it was sufficient
many years, yt a man did but believe that the body of Christ was under the
consecrated bread, wone way or other so that they believed that he was there.
But afterward upon a far there respect they determined otherwise thereof. The
time harhe been, when they wexe not taken for heretics which believed that the
holy ghost did proceed only from the father, and I am not certain, whither the
most part of the chri stians did in the prymytyue church so believe. But when
they had wayed the matter well, the church did defyne that way, which we now
do follow. The like thing The concep tio^ of the (...) gin
was about the conception of the blessed vyrgyn. But whyther the church did
at the first determyne and judge that man, which would doubt thereof, that he
should be taken for an heretyque or nay / I can not tell very well, although
there are some, which do affirm that it was so concluded in y^ coun sell
holden at Basyll. And here a gain ^iseth a double doubt, whyther all the acts
of that counsel do stand or nay, and farther with what words, and for what
purpose / this case was determined. If it were then defyned to be as an
actycle of our faith, what shall become of the friar Dominikes, of whom many be
yet still of the contrary opinion. There are many such like matters as this
is. For there was none of them, which were the very old wrytars, that durst
pronounce openly / that the holy ghost was of one substance with the father, and
ye son, no not the^ when the question about the son, was so contentiously
handled al ye world over. And that more is, in ye psalm of praise geuynge,
which the church began to sing after y^ Arryans were expulsed, where as is
attributed to the son, that he is the light, of light, and perfect god of
perfect god, the same is not there / with open and plain words ascribed to the
holy ghost. But now we are bold to say, that The holy gh oste is of one
substance with the fa there and the son.
the holy ghost is of one substance with the father and the son, and perfect
god of the father, which is very god, and of the son whi che is very god.
There is no man (I do thyns), which will so ^t y^ church of Christ, (which
stondeth of the congregation, and fellowship of men) quight and clear from all
error, that it should be ignorant in nothing. It is suffi cient that it be so
far forth, void of error, that it does houlde and keep the chief points of
our faith and christen religion. For it may hap that the church shall err
in the number, whereby they should know the day, when the feast of Easter should
be kept and holde^, whereas this point perteynethe no thy nge to the matter of
our faith / or love toward god. I do speak of that church, whose auctotyte
we do follow that is to wit, the church of rome.

But if it be true, as some do houlde, that the bishop of come whyther the
Bishop of rome may be deceived, and give a (...) sentence or (...)
can not etre by no error iudy^yall at any time, what ned we to have general
counselles, for what cause should we cale men of law unto the counsel / or
learned devynse, (...) he ^e not err, when he gyuethe sentence in any cause.
Where fore is place given after he has pronounced his sentence, that men may
appeal from him to the Synod, or from him, to him self again, after he is
better aduysed and instructed, and informed of the matter. What need so many
vnyuersites be trobeled, in dyseussynge the doubts of our faith, when a man
may go to the bishop, and have the truth of every doubt at his mouth? Yea
how does it com to pass that the decrese and statutes of won bishop are
contrary to the ordinances of an other? I will not speak of Pope Formosus, but
what say you by Pope Ihon, which was the two and twenty pope of rome poope
(...) and pope Ny cholas decre es (...).
and pope Nicholas, are not their decrese statutes, and ordinances clean
contrary the on to the other, yea, in those matters, which do perteyn to the
chief points of our faith? O^ the which twain the one did pronounce
iudicially (to use there manner of speaking) that Christ and his apostels, had
nothing in possession, either in common or private: that other pro nounced
clean contrary, that they had. This thing a man may learn forth of their
decrees, which are entitled, Extrauagants.

But that which follows, does ser ue better for the matter, which we pope inno
cent and pope Celestine made contrary decres
have in hand, that pope Innocent the third, and Celestyne also, bishops of
Rome, did determyne co^ trary conclusions, concerning how matrimony may be
dissolved. For pope Celestyne did ordeyne, that either the man or the wife,
which did stand still in the faith might marry again, it that either of the^
did fall into herely, which thing pope Innocent does deny, as we ^ede in y^
fourth book of the decretals, in the title, De diuortiis and chapt. quanto.
Neither does pope Innocent in that place omyt to de clare, that a certain
predecessor of his did otherwise ordeyne, meaning Celestyne (as the Gloose in
that place does open, declaring that there was sometime in the de cretals a
constitution of pope Celestyne / in the third book thereof and in the tytell
De conuersione in fideliu^, in the end. And that seems most like to be true,
because that tytell contains very few chapters, that thereby thou may
understand and perceive / that it is cut of and made shorter than it was at
the first making. Beside this pe^ w^ an aduers^ to the marya ge of preests
Pelagius (as a man may se in the decrees, in the. xxxi. distinction, and
chapter Ante triennium) did ordein that the Subdeacons of Sycyll, should
absteyne from there wives whom theye had lawfully married before the making of
that same ordynance and constytution.

This decre, as unjust / and contra ry to the commaudemente of the gospel,
Gregory, the first of that name, did pluck back and Gregory the (...) did
succeed to Pelagian by s^ of rome
clean abrogated, which Gregory succeeded unto Pelagius, and made a constitution
and dear, that no man from thense forth should com and be admytted to that
order, except he vowed the vow of chastyte. But it is a very hard, and
Erasmus do th s^d much with the in ^cent parti ^athe or she whichis inno ce^t
may mar ry again.
an unjust thing, that a man should be forced to chastity, which has not
vowed yt, nor deserved to be driven thereto, whyther he will or nay. But that,
which Gre gory here does take to be unjust does not so appear to Inno
cent the third, as appears, in that same place, which I have here before
alleged unto you, which doothe after this fashyon make answer to those men
which do obiecte, that it seemethe a thing against reason / that the
husband without any fault, should be deprived of the benefit of
matrimonye, specially, seeing that, that man does more grievous lie offend, and
is a greatter enemy to CHRIST, which after he has received Baptysme,
doothe fall into heresye, or to the beleiffe of the Daganns, than he, which
was boorne an Ethnycke, and doothe forsake, to be converted to the profession
and faith of CHRIST.

Be side this the church of Mutyn, was certain hundred yers of this opinion
that if a man had made a lawful contract of matry money with won woman (as for
ex ampl with Barbara) wherein both ^hyther the second contracte of ma ^monye,
where is also ^copulatio^ of the parts (...) vndooe the (...) co^ ^act which
^ath not this ^opulation.
there words (...) there mynds did agree, but had no bodily conversation with
her, and afterward did contract with another whose name was Corn^ia, having
copulation with her, he should be constray ned to forsake his first wife, and
live with her with whom he made the latter contract, the carnal copulation
going therewith.

But that constitucion. Innocentius the bishop of rome does open ly dy^anul and
undo, making a clean contrary decre, which is that the first woman, was the
^ight and lawful wife, and all that was done with the last woman to be no
matrimony but plain adultery, and whordome, as ye may There be some, such
co^tractes in London, the moore is the shame that they are suffered
read in the fourth book of the decretals, in the tytul, quanto, and chapter
Tuas dudu^, and also i^ the chapter Licet, of that same tytul. Alexander the
therd declares by a certain wryt that his predycessers that is to say, the
bishops of rome had a fore time ordained y^ same thing, which Pope Innocent did
condem in the church of Mutyn: How much more daungeros a matter was this, than
the cause of dyuorce, and yet the bishop of rome did alter the decres and
constitutions of other bishops? What need I tell you of the university of Paris,
which did wonse openly The university of paris
disprove the sentence and opinion of the bishop of rome inso much that they
drove him to recant, and deny his words, which he had spoken before ^yf we may
give any credit to histories?) Except, pataduenture we do think it to be but
an idell fable or tale, which Ihon gerson doothe rehearse in a certain Easter
Ser mon of Ihon Bishop of Rome, which was the two and twentye of that name,
that he did precisely affirm, that the sowles of wicked men, should not be
punyshed before the day of judgment, whi che error, all the whole school of
Paris did openly condemn, and brought the Bishop to that, he was feign
to deny and re cant his opinion. Neither can Pope Ihon ^
it be said that no manne held this opinion beside the Bishop, so that he
only should be in a wrong mind, yt must neds be a publyque / and almost a
general ex^or, which was publyshed either by letters or by some drecre, that
should somyche move and styer all the whole realm of France to be against it. But
what do we spea ke of Pelagian, of Alexandre, and of poope Innocente, seeing
that Peter, which was as it were thee chief of the apostels, was not a shained
to hecken to better counsel, when being admonyshed by Paul, he did knoledge
and confess his error, if thee words of saint Augustine are to be believed
herein.

Now truly, although we do con fesse and grant, that matrimony it self is of
the law of god, yet many cyrcumstaunces which do pertain to the causes of
matrimony, depend of the posytyue law, as degrees of kynred, impedimentes of
marriage, and dyuorsements. Nether have we these decrees, and ordynaunces given
to us by famous and general counsels, but only at the hands of pryuate
bishops being the aunswers, which they made to this or that man's consultation
for the time, as they thought good, and according to conscience, yea other
whyl^s swaruig from that which they them self, had determined and decreed
before. But this constitution, whereof we do now dyspute, was, as I do suppose,
at the first, was y^ deed but of one or two bishops, which afterward, by
lyttel and little, cre pynge farther abroad / is growe^ to be so great a
matter as it now is. No man can say nay, but they were men, and every e man
does know, how mighty and strong every thing is, after it is grown into
a custom. And it is not a thig to be merueyled at, that the laid oulde
fathers, were so soore offended with dyuorsementes, which was abhorred yea of
the Ethniks, Now they will marrye svx or seven times. yea though the^ have not
on tooth in there head
when that some of them could sca^t abide matrimony, much less, that a man or
woman should be twyse married. All this before, we have showed unto you, because
no man should think it, to be an unseemly thing, though we do dyspute about
the altering and chaun gynge of the laws of dyuorsme^t. But now if it please
you, let us ex amyn the places of the holy scrip tures, whereby we do seem to
be constrained to receive, and admi^ this law. Our Lord Jesus Christ, as ye
do read in the ryft chapter of Matthewe, what time he did sow abroad his
heavenly philosophye, and prescribyd a perfect example, where by he declared,
and made open, what manner The place^ which do^ some to dys prove dyu^r semen^
of men he would have his dis ciples, and those which were his folowers, to
be, said these words: It is said (says he) Whoo so ever doothe put away
his wife, let him give to her a testi monyall of dyuorsemente. But I say unto
you, y^ whatso ever he be, which does put away his wife except it be for the
cause of fornycacyon, he doothe make her too be a whoa^e, and who that doothe
mattye a wooman which is put put away from here hosbonde, does commit
adultery. But, forso myche, as in that same place he does t^he many goodly
lessons which do bewtifye him, that is a pure, and a right christen man, for,
what cause can we be content to admyt in all the rest of the worcester des a gentyl
exposytyon, and interpretation to be had, and in this matter of dyuorsmente
only we make our selfs so straight, that we do streyn the words of Christ mich
more narrowly, than ever he spoke them. For whereas he left to the holboud,
wone cause of dyuorsment, we do bind that same cause with many bonds, adding
myche more thereto, of our own self. And first (as here for example) we
may put away our wives but then, we must live as no men, like persons, that
were gelded and never to have issew. Beside this, if thou do com panye with
thy wife, after thou have won^ suspected her to be nou ght, thou shalt not
enjoy the be nefit of diourseme^te. Furthermor if a man be an adulterose
person himself, he shall not forsake his wife, which is as noughty a woman, as
he is a man, finally we do wrast and wrythe this term of ex ception, which is
(except for etc) somy ch that we do deneye that it does give any power to a
man whereby he may put away his wife, but that it does serve only, for to
certefy the, if tho^ do put away thy wife, that by thy put tinge her away
from thee, thou shalt not make her to be a whoar forsomych as she is a whoar
when thou do depart from her. For so is the mind of Augustine. But I do call
that to be a true diuorsment, which at those days, was A right d^ uorsmente.
allowed, and none other, when a man might lawfully take another wife after he
was separated from his wife. For, where as we do understand that to be
dyuorsment, when the man and the woman ar so^dcrid from dwelling together in
won house (the bond of matrymony nevertheless remayneng still) was Sych
divorce me^t is of our own brain
there ever any of the old deuyns and lawyars, which did defyne sych a manner
of dyuorsment? But of this matter we will speak more herafter. As tochyng this
point then, we are so straight, and so nighe that we go to the very rigor and
extremite of the law, but in thee rest, we care not how largely, how
favorably every man does take and understand the words thereof, we can be
content to receive every manner of interpretation. The lord does forbid us in
that place that we should not swear at al, yea he does forbid that much more
The makig of (...).
straightly, than he does forbydde dyuorsement / and with mo words he beats
the matter into our hea des, and yet, for the valor of. xii. d. we care not
how often we swear, excusing the matter with this ex position, that we are
commanded not to swear vnaduysedlye with out a cause. And wherefore do we not
as well say, that we must not put away our wives unadvisedly for every
trifell? He does forbid us, to be angry, we do expound it with this word
unadvisedly and cashlye. He forbyddyth us to give any evil name to any man.
We Thou shall sclander no man
do give him blows also, yea and oftentimes kill him, coulorynge our offense
with these words, saying: we did not the deed for any hatred or malice, but
for the desire of amendment, and ponyshinge of this or that noughty deed. He
bid death also / that we shall not offer The offerig up of the gyste. with out
charity forbidden
our gift, except, we be first in love and charity with our brother, we do
clooke that saying with these words, if he will ask me forgeuenes, and make
me a good recom pense, and a mendes. He commands us / that we shall not go to
law Going (...) law
for debt, which is due to us, but that we should fall to some agremente with
our aduersarye, and we, for a matter of two pense, will cast our neighbor
into prison, and say, we do no more but seek our right, acccordinge to the
law. Yea we do judge him to offend, and call him a neglige^te person, that will
not this way seek to come by his own. He commau^ death us that we do no wrong
to him again, which does wrong to us, although we might by the law be
justly revenged. For in ye old time the requytyng of like, was permytted not
without consi deratio^. Again, if a pore man does steall but a small tryfell
from us, we bring him straight way to the ^ow we co lorably do de ^end our de
^sh (...)
gallous / saying, that we do follow our right and not to be reue^ged. Christ
also commaundethe us. not to resyst evil, which saying we say is of
counsel, not of precept, and that we may neuertheless lawfully with forse,
repel force.

And to be short, we be commaun ded to love our enemy^e, to do good to them
which do evil to us to pray for them, which do cur^e us, and for this also we
have a cloak and say: I will pray to god to give him a better mind, but I am
not bound to show tokens of famylya^ite to him. And fynal ly on excuse
serves for them al, which is, that these things are commanded not to al men,
but to them which are perfect. And yet for all that, none of them all, whi che
do boste them self of most perfectnis. will knowledge the pro fession of a
perfect man, showing him self to be syche a manner of person, when the dewty
of a perfect man is required at his or there hands, so that these words of
Christ are almost spoken in vain. Christ speaks these words, not among
the common people, but to his dys^yples, and that in the mount, showing, and
setting forth unto them, which was the purest, and godliest part of his body,
which had no need of any laws, which he calls the kingdom of heaven.
For, what need is it that there should be any law, that a man shall not kill,
where is found no man, which though he be offended, that can find in his
hatte to be angrye, nor yet to give none evil and noughtye word, where he
which has taken wron ge does seek upon the love and frendeshyppe of his
ennemy, where every man had rather to give away part of his right, than to
follow the law. What need is it to have a law there, where no man does
couytte, that which is noone of his? Wherefore should there be any swearynge
there, where no man does go about to deceive won an other, yea where no man
does mystruste any deceyte? What should the law set ponyshment, that a man
should be revenged upon his enemy, with the like grief and hurt which he
has sustained, where men do love their enne myes, where a good turn is done
for an evil. where good words are given against badde? Likewise there is no
need of a testimonye of diuorsemente / where is non evil man, or if there be
any other fault (as we are all men) it is ey there borne with all, or else it
is straightwaye amended, and hard no more of. Show me such a kind of people as
Christ does wysshe they should be, and there should be then nether
dyuorsementes, nor yet oaths. But and if for the weak sake, which the church
has in so great a number, no man is forbid to seek after his tight by the law,
no man is prohybyted for to swer so it be for his own, not falsely for
swearyng him self, no man also is constreyned to do good for euel, for what
cause is this wone point as tochinge dyuorsmente required of all men a like?
If the Jews, for ye hardness of there hearts were permytted to put away there wives
for every tryfel, lest they should do a worse thing, and we do likewise
perceive, that among christen men, beside the uncharitable agreement which we
daily se to be among married folk / that there are greatar perylls and dangers
(yt is to say) cruel murders, poysonynge one the other, and enchauntments, for
what cause, if there be al wone disease, and sycknes, is not the like remedy
and help found for the^? The apostel Paul does not commend, that a man, or a
wooman, should be twyse married, and yet for to avoyde an unchaste manner of
living, he does permyt that thing which he dares not command them to do:
taking it to be better to marrye, than to burn. And shall we abate nothing
of the rygor of dyuorsment? The Jews did interpret, and expound that, which
Foy^es wrote, of the lybel of refusyng their wives, to be as though he did give
them leave to put away their wives for every tryflyng matter, as for example,
if they should find any blemysh or foul thing in (...) bodies. For after that
manner they do demand of Christ in the xix chap. Math. Whyther it be lawful
for a man to put away his wife for every light cause. Christ does restrayn
the separation of man and wife to won cause only, not that there at not greatar
offen ces and more greuos offenses tha^ adultery, but because whordom ^herfore
do th christ na (...) but won ^use of die (...) s^eus
in wedlok is all manner of ways repognant, and dyrectly contrary unto the
state of matrymony, For matrimoni does make of. ii: bodis but won body, which
unity of bo dys, adultery, which is whordom in matrymony does cut a sonder.
Christ then does permytte unto his people no more but won cause of dyuorsment
not al together for bidding them of that Moses did suffer the^ to do for the
hard nes of there hearts but saying only that it was not so from the begin nyng.
For if man had continued in the first state, wherein he was made at the first,
there should have been no manner of dyuorsments* Christ does call his people to
an innocencye of life, and would not have syche separation between man and wife,
because he will not have them to be hard of heart, and yet Paul does bear
with the weas nes of man, enlarging often tims the precept of the lord. For
what cause can not the bishop of rome does same? But, as tochynge These worcester
des, that which gol^ has joined. etc, how they are to be under sto^d
that, they do obiecte forth of thee self same place, That, which God has
copeled together, let no man separat, it may be quykly answered unto. That,
which god has joined, is well joined, and that, which god does separate and
put a sonder, is well separated. Among the Ethnickes, matrimonye was not
lawful, except it had been confyrmed, with the consent of the pa tents, and
aucthorite of the tuters of them which were married, yea, not among y^ Jews,
was it other wise lawful, and yet with them both, matrimonye might be
dyssolued for certain causes. Among y^ Christian me^, marriage is exceeding
lightly made, and after it is ons mad The (...) contractes of matrimonye
between par (...) cornars without con s^t of the pa rents
it can not be undone again. For matrimony is contracted secretly in corners,
after a stealyng fashyon, between boys and young wenches, by the help and
counsel of baudes and whoares: it is contracted between tools and dronkards,
and yet this shameful contracte, can not be undone, yea (which is a more
strange matter) they do make of this fylthy, and ungodly contracte an holy
sacrament. For / our common dysputations, which are of mutual consent, of the
words perteynynge to the present time of matrimony fullye confyrmed, and not
confyrmed, they be but the minds and interpretations of men, and not the very
express words of god. I do grant, that there is no matrimonye, with out the
mutual consent of the par tes, but I would have a sober, and a godly consent,
not such a consent as is won by craft and giel, and by dronkennes. I would
have such a consent* as should be made by the counsel, and advise of both
their friends, as is mete and convenient to be, in sych a thing as can never
be undone again, after it is wons knyt, yea and syche a thing as deserves to
be no^bryd among the sacreme^ts of the chur che. But when the bishop, or other
lawful judges knowing and being certefied of these causes between any parts do
separat them a sonder, which are so contracted together / then does not man
separate that, which god has joined, but that which chyldyshnes, folishnes,
want of wit. and of kno ledge, and dronkenys has joined together, that (I
say) which the devil has joined together by ba^ des, as well men baudes as
women baudes, and by whoars, which at his mynnsters / and true wey ghtyng
servants, that same does god very well separate and undo by his mynysters.
But here they do make an other objection, and say, The church dooethe allow
dyuorsemente and separatyon of man and wife to be made, so far that after the
separation, neither party does marrye again.

I pray the tell me, doothe CHRIST so mean, in this kind of dyuorsemente?
The questyon was put to him of the Jews, and he made the answer again unto
the Jews. But the Jews knew none other kind of dyuorsement, but that, which
did bar them from taking that woman again, whom they had put away, and
gave them liberty to marrye another. For, that the women of the Jews might
marrye again wtanother man after they were put from there hosbonds, it is
easly enough to be prouid, by that the priest is forbid in the law to take that
woman to wife, which is dyuorsed from her hosbonde / which law should have
stond then in none effect, if the woman which was put away might not marry
again. For the instrument of diuorsme^te The (...) whi the libel was comma^ ded
to be ge uen
was given then for that porpose and intent / that the man might not by any
law have tytul to claim to take her again, whom he had putt away, that the
second contract of the woman, with an other hosbond might be fyrme and stable.
And so is ye mind of Chrysostom, which lyketh me better, tha^ that which. S.
Augustyn does w^yght* in his. xix. book and five and twenty chapter, which he
wrote against Faustus. But, i^ Christ did speak of the right dyvorsment, from
whense then is comme this new kind of dyuorse, which is rather a name of
dyuorse, than a dyuorse in deed. But if we should grant that Chri ste spoke of
this diuorsment, that we do observe and use, forsomiche as he did permytte but
only one cause of seperatio^, wherefore does Augustine make other causes, ye is
to wit ydolatry, and heresy being led thereto by no^e other reason, but because
these crimes, are (as it were,) a certain fornication. But after that reason
every grievous offense, which does separate the soul from god, may be called a
kind of fornication. Wherefore do our laws put so many casses, that almost
they can not be nomberyd, wherein they do permyt dyuorse? Hyerom doothe
pronounce that a man may pute Follow not (...) thee (...)
a way his wife freely / if he doothe suspect her to be a whoat, as these his
words do testefye, which are. where soever (says he) is found for nycatto^ or
the suspycyon thereof, a man may freely put away his wife. But if we may
lawfully by any means make any manner of alteration, or change in the
commaundeme^ts of god, wherefore do we not seek some remedy for those which are
til copeled together, and do live in peril of both there helthes? If we may
not, how durst these doctors be so bold, of won cause of separation make so
many. The laws which, they call the ca^ ^on laws do give license to that man
or y^ woman, which is turned from infidelite to (...) law of Christ to mary
another if y^ hosbond or y^ wife will not forsake there infydelite, and
blasphemye of god. Christ did permyt no cause of marienge again but only
fornycation.

And yet in this casse we will grant, that, which we are afraid to do in y^
other. If a woman be die uorsed from her hosbond, because the disposition of his
body is fich that he is not apt for marriage / she may mary again, but if her
hosbond were a parycyd from whom she is dyuorsed, she may not mary again. In
there laws if a woman did mary a bondsman or a slave, whom she believed to be a
fre man the contracte of the matrymonye, although it be consummate, is thereby
dyssolued, and fordone which is not so, if she were deceived in thee qualyte
of the person, (as though it were a greatar matter, and more intolerable to
be married to him which is a bondma^, tha^ to him which is a socerar, a man
quellar, or a parycyd. That point which is of less weight, is not exactyd, and
that which is more greuos, is stre^ ghtli required. Some mansperaduentur) will
say unto me, that in this casse, which is of the bond man, and fre woman,
matrymoni is not dyssolued, but declared only, that it was no true matrimoni
which apeared so to be at y^ first. I do here him well enough what he seythe*
but I do ask him this question again, by what authori te theye do pronounce
that this cause is suffyciente to undo that matrimony, which was so thought to
be, and other causes / which are as great, and greatar tha^ that, to be
vnsuffycyent. Or else wherefore do they not make the same ex cuse, to help them,
which are ungodly joined together and to pro nownce, that it was no right ma
trymony, which was contractyd by dronkennys, and crafty counsel of baudes,
between young laddes, and wenchys without the consent of there parents, under
whose custo dye they are? But now let us dyscusse, and examyne the causes,
and consyderatio^s, which did put the old fathers in mind, that they thought
it good that neither party should mary again after dyuorse, yea though the
dyuorse, was made for the crym of fornica tion. Hyerom shows this cause
saying: least, if he does marrye Hierome.
an other, he should seem to put away his first wife not offended with any
enormytes of his wife, but because he would mari a more bewtyfull woman than his
wife is. These following are his worcester des. And because (says he) it might
chau^se, that some man would find falte, and accuse his wife sclanderosly,
which in deed is an honest woman, and so, to the end that he might mary
another wife would ley some greuos crime to her charge, the man is so commanded
to forsake his first wife, y^ he shall not be suffered to mary another, so
long as his first wife does live. Which words do sygni fie asmych, as, if
thou do put a way thy wife not for y^ dyspleasur y^ do bear to any synful
act of the flesh, but for some injury, which y^ have received by her, for what
cause sithe y^ y^ have found thy first marriage so vnlokkey, and contrary to thy
mind, do thou put thy self in danger to suffer the lyk if thou do mary
again. Lykwise, for so myche as it might so chanse that the woman according to
that same law might sew a dyuorse from her hosbond, the self same order is
taken for her, that she shall not mary again, if she be wons deuor sed. And
again, because the woman which has pleyd the harlot and adultros person,
did not fear the great opprobry and shame which should follow that shamful act,
therefore, the man which does The woman divorced for whoredom* may not, marye
again,
mary her bring dyuorsed, is war ned that if he does mary sych a woman, that
he shall live with here in the sin of adulterye and so to be an adulterar.
Thus far ar y^ words of Hyerom. But let us a lyghtel whyl now not look of how
great authority this writter is of / but let the redar weye and consider the
matter with me, whi there this be suffycle^t causes where fore the innocent man,
her hosbond which has not offendid, should be bound to a wicked woman, so that
he should live alone without frut of his body and burning in the lust of the
flesh, lest (I say) he should be taken for a man of small wisdom, which would
again take upon him that thing, whi che at the first did not go well with
him: as though it were a shame for that man to go again to the sea, which
had ons been in foul storms and tempests of wether, or for him which being ons
deceived in chosinge of a friend, would seek him an other whom he might find
true and faithful, or that he should be taken for an ill liver, and a covetous
person, which would be content to change, not his wife, but the favor and
dowry of his wife / if it might be brought to pas. I pray y^, t^l me what so
ever they be which do suspecte any such thing after the bishop has don with
the matter, and the dyuors iustlye confyrmed by the authority of good and
lawful judges, ar they to be thought good and honest, or noughty and wicked
persons which so do? Doubtless they are wicked creaturs, and no good men. But do
we thynk it to be according to right and conscience, that for a few of wicked
and evil thinking persons, the husband which has not offended, or the wife
which is an honest woman should be driven to syche a miserable state of
living, against his or here will. The like causes Saint Augustyn does al ledge
in his book, which he wrote to Pollentius layinge, lest thee woman for the
hatred she doothe bear to her first hosbond should seem to set more by an
other man, and so should apere not to be so myche offended with the falts of
her first hosba^das she was gredy and desyros to have a new) wh^r he spoke
somewhat iestinglye, and denied that for the complaynte and quarells of the
ungodly, the gho pell, which is the euangil of god, should in any wise be
peruertid. But treuly, the ghospel does not prohibit the to mary again after
thou haste put away thy wife justly and lawfully. As toching y^ worcester des of Paul
we will speak of them more hereafter. And forsomyche as nether Christ, nor
Paul do not require nor will, that he shall live continent and chaste, which
can not, for what cause should they be said to be noughtye persons, which
nether can do it, nor yet have bound them by any vow thereto? This is the
fault of the body, not of the mind. And where fore is he compelled to suffer
ponyshment, which has committed none offense? Yea, and is in great dysquyetnes
and affliction al ready. But now where as theye do make it a sacrement, whereby
they will have, y^ no matrymony which is wonse contracted shall be at any time
dissolved, let us se what manner a won it is.

Neither this same Augustyne, which ascribes three virtues unto matrimonye,
when he does call it the third sacrament, thinks, that it is won of the
seven sacraments, (which thing Petrus Lombardus does seem to note in the.
xxxi. dystynction,) yea, I can not promysse you for a certaynte, that this
which is now the seventh sacrament, was so taken among The reasons which
do make him be (...) that ma trimony is none of thee seven sacra mentes The
first ^se
the oulde fathers. First, because, when Dionyse did teken up all the
sacraments, by their pro per names severally, showing the virtue and strenght,
with the ryts and ceremonies of every won of them, he does not among all the
sacraments, speak wone word of matrymony. But where as some do say. that it
is comprehended under the sacrament of orders, that is no more, but to show
that thou haste some thing to say, when thou would apere to have some answer
to make, though it were never so slender, as though the li^ ceremonys were
observed in joining the man and woman together in wedlok, as ar, when the
bishop does make a pressed or a minyster. Truly sithe that Paul did speak so
myche of matrymony as he did he should have written two words more than he did,
gyuinge it some name or other, whereby we might have known what sacremente it
were. Secondly, by cause y^ Greks and the laten have written so many volums,
wherein they do treat of the state of matrimony, and not won place can be
found, wherein they may apere to be of y^ mind / that it should be counted
among the seven sacraments and specially* forasmuch as saint Augustine which
is an earnest fauorer and Thee third cause
defender of matrimony, does rehearse, and in^ulke into our headdes all the
virtues, and godly commodities, which at in matrimony / not wonse namynge it to
be wone of the seven sacraments. Yea, Iouiniam, which did so earnestlye (...).
favor the state of matrimoni, that for that cause, he was judged an heretic,
when he had turned over all the bible, both the owlde testamente, and the
new, making every place thereof, where he could have any^ howld^, to serve for
the (...) of matrymonye, would not hau^ omytted so substancyall a thing, as
this, and so strong an argument, as this would have been for his defense*
bu^ would have beaten it into their ears, saying, yea, and crieng out after
this wise. Matrimonye is wone of the seven Sacraments of the church, Uyrgynyte
is not. Neither do I think that S. Hierome would have stomacked the matter
so much, against those, which would marry any oftener than wonse, if it
had been known, that wedlock had been wone of the seven sacraments.

But for what purpose, do I speak all these words, sithe that Durandus
dooethe confess, that theye, which wear (...)
the latter wryttars upon dyuynytye, wear the first, which in their
writings did begin to name matrimonye, for to be among those, which properlye
are called the sacraments of the chur che. But, where as the oulde writers,
following Daule, do otherwhyle call matrimony a sacrament, I do think them to
be of y^ mind that in the copelynge together of man and wife, because it is a
most sure and fast bond of amyte and frendshyp, is represented unto us a
certain figure, and image of Christ, ioynynge his spouse unto himself, which
is the church.

And truly, matrimonye being well kept, is a very godly, and an holy thing.
Yea and also that, the which of it self is not holy, may be a type / and a
fygur of an holy thing, as was Bethsabe the wife of Uria taken from him, and
joined to Dauyd, as was the aduou try of Oseas the prophet, the fable also of
Sampson and Dalila / as Hierom does manifestly affirm. And again it is not
requisite and necessary, that the figure should be in all points / like unto
whether the figure of a thing must in all points be like the thig fygured
the thing figured. For otherwise should it be no sacrament, when a man
fortuneth to have a barren wife, or when a woman is combered with a dronken
husband an evil liver, and a dysar. And although we should grant, that
matrimonye is a very sacrament indede, yet shall it be no sacrament, where an
oulde man does marrye an oulde woman, a dronken man, a dronken woman, which the
church, for all that, will have to be a sacrament. A thousand such like
examples, might be brought forth, in the which the image of the heavenly, and
spiritual matrimonye should not answer in all points to the corporal
matrimonye. Neither does the sacrament of Baptyme sustain any detryme^te
wherein the spiritual and corporal mo trymony do (...)
or wrong, although some afterward be of an unclean, and unwashed life, nor
yet does it follow, that wedlock is no sacrament, although that married folk
be often times noughty lyuars. For then, the dyuorse, which we do so lightly
permyt for such cau ses; should preiudicate the sacrament of Christ. Again, we
do separate oftentimes, the man from the wife, where as Christ doothe always
cleave unto his spouse.

And finally, matrimony should^ not be dissolved, no, not with death if we will
have the fygur answer to the thing figured in all points. Yea, if we will so
narrowly look upon the type, Origin says, that Christ did dymysse the sinagog
from him, because she was a mur thereat of her hosbonde, when she said: Take
him: Take him, and crucifye him, and puttyng away the same synagoge he joined
the church to him for his spouse.

After this image, and symylitude a man may put away his wife which has
sought the death of her hosbond, and may mary an other woman, more mete for
him. And as tochinge the congruency with what mind mary ed foles oug ht to go
toge there
of the mystery, it is enough that always won man does join him self to won
woman, with this mid and full purpose, that there should be never any separation
between the^ which among some is a perpetual matrimony. Truly, I do meruail y^
where as so many owld writars in the greek and latin tongue have ser chyd to
find out the causes wherefore that matrimony should be indyssoluble, that no
such reason could fall into their heads, as is into ours, y^ matrimony should
never be losed again, after it is wonse made and done. There is no man which
does contract matrimony, but is of that mind, that he would that it should
continue whole, during his life, never to be dissolved. For no man at that
time, when he does marrye / will think on any separation or dyuorse. But yt
so be, it does so chau^ ce afterward, upon any necessary cause (according to
the fashion of the world) what hurt (I pray you) is done to the sacrament,
if that remedy be found for them, which can not live chaste? For likewise as
a privilege granted to a few, does not dysanull the law which is made
generally to all men, so though some be vnlockye in marriage, and many do
offend, what is the sacrament the worse? Finally, it shall follow that either
it was no sacrament in the oulde law, or else it ought not to be undone, and
that specially, for so much as in the peryls and danger of murder, we may
remedy the party which is in fear, by the way of our separation, and dyuorse.
Chrysostom does show Chrysostom
two causes, wherefore the Jews might put away their wives, ge The first
cause why thee Jews were permit ted to put a way their wives
uynge to them a lybel of dyuorse. They are suffered to put away their wives
(says he) lest bearing hatred unto them, they should seek their death, Should
then the wickedness of the wicked persons among the Jews, be commodiose and
proffytable unto them, and not as well the innocency of the hosbond among us,
which are christen me^, be help to him which is innocent, and without fault?
The man is commanded (says Chrisostom) The cause (...) ^ly (...) give to the
wife
to give to the woman a lybell of dyuorse, that he might not afterward
command her to com to hi again, whom he had wonse cast of, to avoid the
confusion, and often commyttyng of adulterys. But truly this cause is not
rekened for any bar to us, but that we may make it lawful to thee hosbond
to take his wife again whom he has wonse put away. And again Christome
does say, that the cause, why a man might cast of his wife, being a
whoar, then, and no wis al won, that they should not every where commyt
fornication and adultery won with the others wives. If then, that same be a
very true cause, in deed, wherefore among us chryste^ men is no man compelled
to put from him his wife, when she is a whoar, but is plainly forbidden and
restrained from putting her away, except he does entende al his life after
to be made like a man, which has lost the use of nature. Innocentius the
third in the chapter, Quanto, which we have alleged before, does show this
reason, wherefore the wife of a man, which is fallen into heresy may not take
another hosbonde. Because (says he) if they do hate there wives, or else the
one of them at a time, being dyspleased wy^h an other, if in syche a case as
this is, they might be dymyssed, and delyueryd or there wives, they would make
asthoughe they were in some heresy, that theye might quyckly be departed, and
mary again. The lycke reason is rehersyd in the gloss made upon y^ chap ter:
Dixit dominus, in the three and thirty cause, and the first question, which
gloss we alleged forth of Hyerom, a lyghtel before. But truly if we do admyt
this cause to be good, then may not that woman he married again, which by error
was married to Peter, whom she took for to be Ihon / or else was married unto a
servant, whom she thought hadd been a freman, least when she were in mind to
be departed from her hosbo^d she would subornate, or feyn sych causes, whi che
were not true: how be it the chapter which is recyted in thee gloss does not
seem to make mich for the purpose of Innocentius. For his meani^g is of the
hosbond which does feyn him self to be an heretic, that he might fray his
wife from him, and as soon as she is married to an other man, feyne him self
again that he is amen did and turned from his heresye: So might the man feyn
him self to be a servant, which would seek to drive his wife away from hi^.
And the like may be said agai^ste our dyuorsments and separatyons, that the
hosbond will fordge and deuyse sum fault, whose wife does not please him at
home that he might by that means thruste her forth* of his doars, king it a
sufficient great reward of his falset, and crafty dissemlynge if he may be,
but somich as with out the sight of his wife in his house, who^ he does hate.
Hitherto have I showed the causes, for the which dyuorsment / was not
permytted. Now, if ye will, let us examine the places of Paul, whe^se our
bishops do seem to fetch, that they do make so great a dyffyculty and hardness
in dyssoluinge of matrymony, and undoing of maryages. Paul, in the seuenth^
chap, of the epistell to the Rom, says, Be ye ignorante brethren, (I do
speak unto them, which know, what is the law,) that the law has dominyon
in man, so long as the man lives? For the woman which is in subjection to
the man, so long as the man lives she is bound unto ye law, but when her
hosbond is deed, she is losed from the law of the man: And therefore, so long
as the man lives, she shall be called an adulteros woman if she be with an
other man. But if her h^bond be deed, she is set at lyberty from the law of
the man, that she shall not be an adulteros person, although she takes an
other man. Paul in this place does not treat of dyuorsme^t or separation between
man and wife, but he makes a similytude unto the Jews, which is taken out of
there own law, whereby he might teach and perswad them, that the law of Moses,
being taken away by the law of thee gospel, theye are no lengar bound to the
obser uation of the ceremonis of y^ law, sith that they have taken to them a
new spous, which is Christ. Ne is it requisite and necessary, that the
similitude or parable should in all points se^ue for the thing, whereto they are
compared. For thus the parable of the thief / which breaks into the house
by night, the parable of the money which is due and owing to the vsurar, the
parable of the wicked and noughtye stuarde, the parable of the vine, and the
branches thereof, the parable of the children, singing in the market place,
and such other innumerable, should seem very fond, if it should be examyned
and tried by this streighte rule, to have all points agree. It is sufficient,
that they do declare, and make open the thing, wherefore they be applied. It
is the manner and fashyon of Paul, to draw, and wrynge what so ever he can by
any means, to serve for the gospel after a godly craft and subtylte, while he
does turn him self into all things, that he may win all men unto Christ.
But our men, now a days, are nothing like un to Paul, which do turn them
selves into al things, that by that craft and polyeye, they may call men
away from Christ, and so come to great riches and promotions. How be it, if
we will take these words of Daule as they do lie, and sound, no man shall put
away his wife, although she does play the whore. For he ma keth in this
place, no manner of exception. Again / Paul shall not seem aptly to allege
the law of Moses unto the Jews, if they do take his words after that fashion,
forsomuche, as the law doothe permyt the hosbonds for every cause to put away
there wives / so that theye do give unto them, a wryght of dyuorse, Herby ye
may perceive ye Paul did not exclude and put away dyuorsment, for so much as
the law it self, does openly permyt and allow it, but went about that thing,
which he had in hand, making asthoughe he had nothing to do with this our
matter, which did not toche for his purpose. And again in the seuenthe
chapter of his epistell to the Corynths, he does wryghte these words (He then
which does ^oyne his virgen in matrymonye, does well, and he which does not,
does better. The woman is bound unto the man, so long as her hosbo^d lives,
but if her hosbond, sle^ peth, she is at lybertye from thee law, let her mary
to whom she will, only / that it be done in y^ lord. But she is more happy if
she can so abied, after my counsel. Nether yet does Paul in this place reason
the cause of dyuors, but exhor teth according to the state of those times, that
theye, which are free from marriage, and specially wydowes (for in this place
he does speak of them) should abstein from marriage, that they should be thee
more fre, from the busynes of thee world / which was then a wicked, and an
idolatrose world, and could not choose, if they did marie, but must needs
ioyn them self in affynite with the wicked and ungodly.

And yet for all that, he does not require this at there hands, ye theye so do,
but he commands them, that if they which are syngyll would marrye, that
then they do take to their hosbandes such asar Christen men. And also, he
does not pluck a Christen woman from her hosbande, which is an infidel,
except he does first depart from her, and says also, that she does not
sin, if being at lybertye she does mary again. For so long as she has an
hos^ond, she has no ned to seek another. This there fore after mine opinion, is
the chetest, and surest key, to the understanding Note a good lesson for the
understa^ding of ^iptur
of the mystycal scriptur to mark and consider dylygentli the thing whereof
the author wry tethe, and what his purpose is that he goes about, and that
spe cially in Paul which is somewhat slypperi and starting in his dys putacion,
and reasoninge, now leapyng hither, now thither, that (as Origin does say*)
the redar can scant understand and perceive, when he is out whyther The
hardest place which forbids di uorsementi^ all the scri^ tur
he will go. Now remains the great matter of the chief dy^yculty of al,
which went before in the same chapter, in the which place treating of married
persons, he speaks after this wise: I say (says he) to them which are not ma
ryed, and to wydose, that it is good for them, if they do abyd so still, as I
do. That if they can not live chaste / let them mary. For bet ter it is to
mary that to born. But to them which are joined together in matrimony, do I
co^mau^d, and not I, but ye lord, that the wife do not depart from her
hosbond. But, if she does depart, that she do abyed unmarried or else be
reconcyled again to her hosbond, and that the man do not put away his wife.
These words do seem to be spoken where the matri money is between like persons,
that is to say, a christen man, and a christen woman. And the words, How ought
Paul to be ^stand (...) this (...) after the (...) of Ambrose,
which follow: (The rest I do command, but not the lord) ar spoken of the
unlike, and unequal matrimony (that is to say) between a christian, and an
infydel. First whereas Paul in nether of these places does not make that excep
tion openly, which the Euangelystes do, Ambrose does counsel the, to supplye
it, with thine own understanding, lest the apostel should seem to be against
the commandments of his lord And belyde this, Paul does not (...)

^ere to speak of great offenses, syche I say as are, as greuos as adultery /
or more greuos, but of slyghte matters, for the which chefely were many and
often separations, and dyuorses, among the greeks, according to the saying of
Iuu^nal. And thus, in five year has some women eyghte housbandes. And this we
may ge there of the words which do follow for else be reconcyled again to her
hosbond. Those men we said are made friends again, which through some
offense, or dyspleasure have been at variance And again that party is said to be
reconcyled, which has trespased, not he or she to whom the tres pase is done.
But, and if she departed justly and for a good cause, wherefore does thee
apostell command that she should be reconcyled, which should rather have been
intreatyd, and de syred to be content, and to leave of all displeasure. But,
if the fault was in them both, that the one of fended as well as the other, he
for byddeth / that she shall not marye an other man, whereby her first hosbond
should be put clean from her, but that she should con^ynew unmarried, and so
(peradventure) they may ^be brought at one, and made friends again. Also, thou
shall understand, that the Apostel in this place does speak of the^ woman
only, and not of the man, forsomych, as the woman among the Jews, had no power
to put away her hosbonde from here. And as tochynge the man, he does no more
but exhort him, that he does not put away his wife for sych light causes.
For he does not add these words (if he does put her away, let him contyneue
unmarried, or be reconcyled again to his wife.

Thus myche does Ambrose note* and observe in this place, all be it Augustine,
would have, that thee woman should have in all thing as much power as the man,
which The wo^ bath the like power over the (...) that the man ^h over the woman
thing, like as he does earnestly and constantly affirm, so sanne he not
find to make his word good. But I am not here sure, whyther Paul did in this
matter, give any thing to the ob seruation of his own law, which gave lyberti
to the men for every light cause to change there wives and not only that, but
also if they were in ielosy, there was a cruel remedy provided for them, where as
no syche thing was for the woman. And more than this. The Apostel in all his
epistels does not give to the wives any great aucthorite or rule, who^ he does
make subject to the ^power of there hosbo^ds, whom he will not have to be with
there head vncoueryd, whom he does not suffer not so much as to speak in the
congregation.

Therefore it should apere, ye Paul did forbyde, that the wife for fich as at
light and common faults, should not forsake her hosbonde. But if she so did,
that then she should not marye again, that they might be made friends, and
come together as they did before. Nether does he commend, that the woman,
which is set a sonder from her hosbonde, should not mary again, if he will
not have her, but this he doothe choose rather, than that she should marye
again, and undo the first contract clean. But if sych a casse as this is, had
been put to Paul, (won fool, has made a contracte with an other, a boy and
a gyrle together, baudes, and whoars made the marriage, wine and dronkennys were
counselars, theye have by craft been thus brought into a snare / and also if
it had bynne said unto him / that the world is full of syche marriages, and
tha^ thousands ar unhappily / andyl^ ^angelyd together. Beside that, Theye do
also but make a beck won upon the other, and thee mariag is made up if they
do but wonse familiarly co^pani together after syche signs and tokens o^ love,
yea and also, although they do not company together. And when they are joined,
theye agree not together, so great dyuorsyte and contraryte is in there
condicyons, manners, and naturs, that there is between them continual
braulynge and chiding, there is such great hatred, as can by no means be
swaged. The won fea^eth to be poisen^d of the other, the on^ dreadeth to be
murdered of the other and no kind of mischet there is, which the one does
not look for at the others hand, nether of them can live without a make, and if
they do abyd still together, they be either of them, doble cast away^: and
contrarywyse / if theye be set a sonder, and be suffered to mary, yet there is
hope that theie shall both be out of peril and danger. If syche casses (I
say) were put to Paul, peradventure consyderyng the cyreumstances of the
cause, he would make some other answer than he has made, he would somewhat
release the rigor and streyghtnes of his fore mar counsel, and peradventure
would otherwise also and more gentely enterpret, and understand his wrytyngs
than we do. Or else if that noble woman Fabiola, who^ Hyerom in his works has
shryned up to a perpetual memory, which was made to do penance in goinge
barefote, and wearynge garments of here, because she forsook her first
^hosbond, being yet very young, and married an other ^but Hyerom apeareth to
show un to us, that her hosbonde did use her otherwise, than beeam a man to do,
in that he reports, that she was forsed to suffer syche things of here
hosbond, as no handmaiden would abide of her master. For, yea the bond men
might fly from there masters, unto the image of the prince, if that they were
attemptyd, and provoked of them, by any shameful act) if this noble woman (I
say) hadd fled unto Paul, and had said unto him Thou will not require of
me (O paul) that I should abyd with syche an hosbonde, who I can not obei and
plese, except I would be content to be made abhomina ble, and worthy to be
abhorred of men. Yea I know, thou will not suffer me to be with sych man ner
a man, although I would, and I do now feel thee dysposition of my body, to
be such, y^ it were not good nor profitable for me to live alone woman. Nor yet
wylt thou require so great a gift, of them, which have it not. ^i uen to them
of God, which doeste command, that young wydose, which are lascivious and
wanton, should take them husbands. If Fabiola had said thus much or such like
words unto Paul, I think she should have found more humanite / and gentleness
in him, than she did in that bishop, (what soever he was) which did put an
innocent and a fautles young woman, to such an open shame and punishment, as
though she had poisoned her mother, and specially, forsomiche as she did not
take an other husbonde in contempt of the bishops law / but through
symplycytye, and lack of wysedom. But if so be any man will say that Paul
does speak in this place as tochynge the cause of adultery Paul i'this place
meneth not the cause of adulterye
/ for what cause did he not make that same exception, which the lord did
make, yea wherefore did he add more words unto the thing than the lord did,
in that he byddethe the woman to contynewe unmarried / wherefore does he forbid
ye man to put away his wife, whom Christ permytted so to do, if she were an
adulteros woman. I do not speak these words to thentent, that we should have a
gappe made open, to often dyuorsme^ts and separations of married persons. But
when al manner of ways and means have bin sought and attempted for the
quyetnes of the parts, and al in vayn, I would wyshe that remedy were provided
whereby the person which has vnfortunably married and ca^ not be with out
remedy, may be pre served and helped. Neither have we need any thing to fear,
least by this occasyon, every place of y^ world should be filled with
dyuorsments, sithe that, yea among the Eathnyks, the state of matrimony, was in
an honorable estimation, and had also there mutual dyuorsments, but yet not with
out a good ground and consideration.

Wylt thou have, that there shall be The remedy against d^ sement
few dyuorces; Find some remedy that maryages may not so ^yghtly be made and
knyt up. Let the par tes go to gyther with iudgmente and good dyscretion, and
by the auethoryte of the parents, which have most to do with the matter, as
the^ did in the old time among the Hebrews, the Greakes, the Romans, and
the Barbarous nations. For who was he among the Christians, which did fetch
this at gods mouth that to ye contract of matrimonye / required no more but the
consent of the parts? Yea though it wet against the mynds of them, to whom god
would have children be obedyent and in subjection? But this argument, Tho mas of
Aquine does very slight ly put away, saying: She is not Thomas of Aquyne
in the power of her parents as a handmaide^, but as the daughter? Wherefore
then, was it not lauful among the Jews, that the dough ters might marry
against their Erasmus does reason agens^ Tho mas of A^ne
parents will? And thus much more does Thomas add, making a chain of like
lynckes, even as well (says he) as the daughter man enter into religion without
the co^ sent of her parents, for so much as she is a free woman, and not a bond
woman. The euangell itself does teach us, that the children, may go to the
profession of the gospel, although their parents be against them. But here they
do not resyst the authorite of the parents, none otherwise, but when they
would have the^ to do wickedly. But that the daughter or the son, yea being
but yet children, should forsake there Christen father and mother, to who^ they
at doble bound to obey, and give the^ self to ye order of Beuet or Do mi^ik,
where they may live more licentiously, not ponyshed, nor ye^ more godly than
they did before, and also that contrary to al common laws / they should exempt
the^ s^fe, from the power of them (to who^ both the law of nature, and also
the law of god and man, wyl^ have them to be in subjection, and yield up them
selfs (I can not tell to what kind of people) in to a certa^ seruytude, that of
children, they should become forsaken of there parents, and the bondmen of other
men, I can not tell, with what reason it can stand. This con sitution and
ordinance, seems to have proceeded from the self same persons, which
ordained, that a man might forsake his wife, whom he had lawfullye married,
yfhe had not had copulation with here, and make him self a monk, or a friar,
and yet should ^t not be lauful for ye young woman (...) ^mary any other, before
the day o^ his profession be past, and known, and in casse before the day of
profession he does go out of that monastery unto another, and so from that
again to an other, so that it were now wholl four year before he were
professed, his sured wife shall continewe all this while unmarried. And finally
if after he has been so long away / he will be professed in none of all these
foresaid monasterys, but would return to his wife again she shall be co^pellyd
to here great sclander and infamy to have him to a hosbond, which has so mani
years lived in a relygious habyt.

This is goodly equity, and justice: This is a goodly favor that is borne to
religion, ye for man's ordinance / the law of god should be broken, with thee
greatte injury and peril of ye innocent, and good young woman. And here again
they do utter an other point of They have (...) to (...) ^shly (...) but it
(...) the ^tue (...) ^ir religi (...)
there crafty conueyance, and al not worth a straw. Monks at dedde (seye theye)
unto the world. And the death of the body does dyssolue matrymony, much more
then the spiritual death. Although in deed, all Christen men had not in
there baptysme professed this death / and are not buried with Christ in that
same baptysme. But they do make a great matter of that, they be wholly
addyctyd, and yielded up, although the other christen men were not whole ly
addyeted, and yielded up unto Christ. Those men therefore why che have been the
authors, and doars of syche ordynances, either un derstode not y^ strenght of ye
law of god, or else theye gave to much authoryte unto man's statuts, and laws.
But to comme to our mat ter, I would wyshe, that somyche at the least should
be permytted to the innocente party, whose fortune, it was to be vnlokkely
matched with an ungodly person, as among the Jews, was permytted to the
froward bytternes of hosbonds, which would never be pleased, or else asmyche,
as Paul does permyt to lasciuios and wanton wydowes, for fear lest theye
should do that thing which is more wicked. A woman, which is married unto a
man that is cold and unapt to the conversation and company of a woman, is
helped by a certain condytyon in the law, not expressed: and wherefore should
not the like remedy be in this case? Dyuorsemente (say they) among the Jews
is not allowed and praised, but it is permytted only. Common places for
whoares are suffered among the Chrystyans alsoo for the voy dynge, of a greatet
inconuenyence.

But I can not se^ that any lykelyhode of a verytye is in it, that a Jew
should have offended, if he had put awe ye from him a woman of moos^
wicked condytions, and taken another home again unto him, forsomuche as the
law did openly give him ^aue, so to do, v ythoute any addytyo^, that it was
permytted to the hardenes of their ^arte, and that namelye, where as by no
natural sense and understanding, that thing, might be vnderstonded, which
we do interpret and expound. But if it was granted to the hardness of heart,
then is that thing lawful, which GOD doothe grant, specyallye, where as,
it can not be proved by any signs, or tookens, that they are culpable, and
blame woorthye them self, which do take and use that same per The wo^ being
put a way for any manner of cause in the oulde law, might mary but if she
played the whore. she dyed (...) it.
myssyon.

But how so ever these things are, the permyssyon is such, that the
husband might freelye marrye whom he would, yea, and the women alsoo,
wherefore soever they were put a way.

For oftentimes, we do call that thing lawfullye done, which the law does
not punisshe. But among us Christen men, that same is not only not tolerable,
but it is ponyshed, as a great offense, yea somewhat more greuosly than the
committing of adu^ N^te well. (...) saying (...) August
tery, although that Augustyne does openly pronounce and declar that it is a
greater wyckednes and sin to commyt whordome out of marriage, than to take an
other hosbonde with whom she may live after she is dyuorsed. Nether does he
say plainly, that she is not his wife, whom she has now taken, but, he says,
that she is ^a there his wife, from whom she is gone, than whom she has taken.
But now let us end this dysputation, which is more like unto a wholl bok^.
than to a small annotacion. Now be it, I thoughts good to speak somwhate of
these things, that those which ar stu diose, and learned, may have more matter
to think on. Nether is it my mind, to have my judgment preferred, before them
which are our elders, much lose, before that which the holy church has de
termyned.

But for so much as in my former edition of this my book of Annotacions, I did
somthyng declare and show my mind, what I would have done in this matter,
whither it was according to reason, or o therwyse, I am sure of a godly af
fection, and a good desire, that no man therefore should enterpret and
understand that otherwise than it was written for, of me, I thought it mete
to declare here again, what reasons adduced and caused me, that I should
wyssh and desire sych a matter to be brought to pas, if the authorite of the
chur che / could be content to allow it. It grieved me much, and I took
T^eresons, which mo^ to (...) ^nge (...) of (...)
pytye of them, whom I did se tied with such paynfull bonds, as were unable
to be losed, of y^ which sort I knew very many, but specy ally in England, where
I began first to wryght this book. I consi dered also, that many years ago,
there were men both of godly lernyng, and of virtuous life / which
notwithstondyng the word of the gospel and of Paul, did admytt ^ (...) that
(...) received the word of god and this wic Kednes ten soulde more
dyuorsment: and separation. Beside that, I considered also, that some things
might be otherwise expounded: than they have been hither to. I considered also
that the bishop of rome had so much liberty given to him, that he might, in
terprete, restrain, lose, dispense yea and also, after some men's minds, in
some things abrogate y^ doctrie of the gospel and of the Apostells at his own
pleasure. I considerid beside this, that yea in our days, matrimony might be
dyssolued, although it had bin confyrmed by y^ copulatio^ of the parts, if
either of the^ had bin deceauid in the per son, or in the qualyte of the person
taking Thou for Wyllyam, or a bondma^, whershe thought he was fre. I perceived
also ye for falling into heresy it is undone, although matrimonye was never so
strong ly confirmed, and well known of al me^ to be perfect matrimony. I percea
ued besyd this, ye for y^ profession of an order inverted by man for ye chan
gynge of wone garmente into an other, the lawful husbonde is depryued of his
lawful wife. I per ceaued again, that by the bishop of rome, those persons
were made unable, whom nether nature, nor yet the law of god, at any time
ever had dy^habeled, considering therewith, that the same aucthorite and power,
may dyssolue the contracte of matrimony, which may forbid, that they shall not
go toge there in matrimony. (...) considered also with my self, that the
scripture is perplex and doubtful, as well in this, as in some other things. I
did se again, that thould expositours, which were exelently learned / did
dyff^ sometime fro^m them, which are writars of latter days. I did wey with
my self, how great authorytie was given of Christ unto the church; whereto he
gave the keys of the kyngedome of heaven. I did also remember well, that the
church had Note to (...) om christ did give the (...)
with her the spirit of her spouse, and that nothing could be done amys, that
by that spirit should be ordained to the health of man. I considered also: with
how great clemency and pity, the bishop of Here w^ (...) goodly mo^ for
th^bishop y^ (...) ^oly (...) would (...) seen (...)
come does succor and help, yea those which are tormented, with ye pains of
hell, if they be not condemned for ever. And me thought that I might also
wysshe and desire, that some help should be found for them, which were many
ways in this life, put to pain and torment / not without great danger and
peril of their souls, without any of their deseruynge. I per ceued also, that
their objections a against us, may lightly be put of without any prejudice of
our re lygion. I consideryd also that the ^asons which both the old and ^he
new wrytars, do bring in for this cause for them, at not so vrgente and
strong, that they should bind al men to sy^ a violente, and s^yght necessyte.
And therefore a godly and a christian love being stytred, and provoked with
these consyderations, caused me to leye this matter before them, which do se
farther, and more, tha^ I do, that they might study, and weye among them, if
by any mea nes they may find that the words of the gospel, and of the
apostel, might be despe^syd with, for the commodyte and health of ma ny, for the
whythe intent, all thin ges are written unto us yea where unto Paul him self
does often tyms somewhat wraste the holy scripture himself. But if this ca^
not be brought to pass, which I wyshe might be, yet am I sure that this order
may be taken, that maryages shall not, so sleyghtlye and unadvisedly be made,
contrary to the manner of the eldars, and against all natural equity, and
reason. For, if the bishop of rome may decre, that matrimony should not be
contracted between persons which are of the third degree, and that it is no
matrymony / if lyche persons go together, after the sa^e manner, it may be
enacted, that these persons, which are in thee power of other me^ nether yet
yo^g men and maidens nether dronkardes, nor foles, going together with out the
counsel of there eldars, but only p^ycked thereto, by whoars, and baudes, without
any manner of good consideration or wit, should either be suffered to marrye:
or being married, should be thought laufullye married. And y^ they will go this
way to work: there shall not be so many myser^ ble knottes, so fast knyt, as
there at now of days.

Thus ends the disputation of dyuorsement.
The Censure of Ihon Brentius in his treatise upon the cases which are
concerning matrimony* whose words are these following, as they are written in
his book.
HEreof ryseth a question, whither the persons which were divorced, may again
make another contract of matrimony, or else should continue still unmarried? At
this present, as touching the party which has offended, we will speak
nothing, but let us leave him or her to the magistrate, whose office and duty it
is according to the heinos ^es, and greuousnes of the crime, to punyshe it
worthelye, with the pain ordained for it. And if the magistrate will be
negligente, and not do his duty, in punishing this crime: our mind is, that y^
ministers of the church, The minysters ought to excommunicate tho^ fe^ders,
and not to permyt them to marrye,
should pursue the crime with excommunication. But on ye other side as touching
the innocent person, whither he or she after divorce may with the law of god,
be suffered to be ^oyned in matrimony to ano there, we will now reason the
matter. And herein I do not pass, for should and rotten custom, by the which,
the innocent party, could not be suffered to marrye, before the death of
tho^ender, for so much as this custom did ryze up, and come of the ^gnora^ce and
lack of knowledge of the scriptures, beside that, by the words of Christ, and
sayings of Paul, we do find nothing, that is more contrary unto the
scriptures, tha^ is this. etc. The rest of his words, with the whole book, god
willing we will give you into our mother tongue, or it be long.

Henry Bullynger.
First, that is called a just divorce, when likewise as nether party may take
the other again, so is it in the lyberty of the fautles party, to marry
another. And there fore, that dyuorse, which was for every light cause, was no
true divorce. etc. And in the syxt part of the same chapter he says: The
Papystes have forbidden the innocent, and unguilty, ^o marrye after the dy^
^orse made. Uvhiche yet was nothing else but even violently to cast a snare
about poor peoples necks, and to draw the^ unto vice and sin. For the
divorced could not refrayn, and to marry they were not permytted, therefore
with violence were they forsed to whoredom. But Paul says otherwyze, Better
it is to marrye than to burn, and God ordained wedlock for the auoydinge of
whoredom. (...) touching y^ person that committed the offense to y^ dyuorse,
he was punished with death, what ^de we then to reason for the marriage of y^
unguilty* Therefore where as some do ob^ Paul's words saying: (The woman is bound
to the low so long as her husband ^yueth, but when her husband dies, she is
(...) to marry unto whom she will, only, y^ it be done in the lord) it
hinders not our purpose. For where as ye adulterer does yet ^ue, it is against
gods comau^dement, which has condemned him to death already: therefore in such
a case, ye faithful estemeth him but dead (though through ye negligence and
suffraunce of the would) he be yet alive. It is no reason that such suffraunce
should (...) the unguilty from his fredom and right seeing the judges do not
execute justice. etc.

Prynted at London in Aldersgate street, by the wydowe of Ihon Herforde, for
Robert Stoughton, dwelling by Ludgate at the sign of the Bishops Myter.


