A Declaration and Catholic exhortation to all Christian Princes to succor
the Church of God and Realm of France.

Written by Peter Erondelle, native of Normandy.

Faithfully translated out of the French.

AT LONDON, Imprinted for Edward Aggas. 1586.

To all true lovers of the pure Gospel and holy doctrine of Jesus Christ, and
to all those that desire the preservation of the Realm of France, Peter
Erondelle wishes health in the Lord.
I Doubt not but do steadfastly perceive, that whosoever shall consider of my
calling will disdain to look upon this brief Treatise, as proceeding from a
person unworthy such a work, yea and will marvel from whence J should
gather such boldness, since I am not adorned or furnished with any human
wisdom wherewith to beautify or rather paint out the same. But what answer
shall J make them? For it is not I that have wrought this work, but even GOD
himself through the virtue and power of the holy Ghost working in me, who
word by word has showed and enstructed me in all that is herein set down, as
using me a poor and miserable sinner to endure and persuade or rather
command all those that have the fear of God and doctrine of Jesus Christ
before their eyes, to succor his afflicted people who are on every side
oppressed, but principally in our France by some tyrants, unto who^ J present
not this brief discourse, for I am sufficiently persuaded that this kind of
people do but seek occasion to subvert and set at va^^^nce such a Commonwealth
as before remained in peace and unity: But unto you my brethren, do J direct
the same, desiring you not to disdain the sight thereof, but in equity and
without al passion (other the^ reason) to read it, notwithstanding therein you
find some fault: Neither would I herein seek to flatter or conceal the
aucthors of these present troubles: namely the house of Guyze, who are the
chief Captains and conductors thereof, as also I should get nothing by
concealing them, as being a matter which every man knows better then J can
tell them how it stands. Besides I will not delay the time in beautifying
this discourse with any painted speech to adorn it withal, as some do when
they seek and go about to persuade lies in stead of truth under the color
of a pleasant phrase and painted speech which is sufficient to lead the
Readers thereunto, and lulling them on sleep procures them, as before is
said, to admit lies in liew of truth, even as the Mermaide who by her pleasant
song overcomes the Sailors, and when they be at rest deuoureth them all. J
would not therefore imitate them, but only speak plainly according to all the
words that have fallen into my mouth whereby God has helped me to bring the
same to pass. To him therefore are we to yield thanks, and withal to pray him
to direct al our works to the glory of his name and excellency of his
justice, as also that through the blood of his well-beloved son Jesus Christ,
he will vouchsafe us remission of all our sins. Amen.

A Prayer.
O Lord God almighty who know the hearts and thoughts of al men, so as we
do not so son^ imagine what to say but thou know better then our selves
what our tongue should pronounce, and that there is nothing upon the earth or
under the same how secret soever, but is manifest unto thee. We beseech thee
O Lord in the name of thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ, that it may please
thee to open and reveal whatsoever the wicked purposes of the perverse,
whereby they may have no means left to persecute thy faithful. Nevertheless
if it please thee O Lord yet to continue the afflictions of thy Church, like as
we know thee to be a just and true Judge, we do notwithstanding beseech thee
not to punish us in thy wrath or according to our deserts, who deserve only
everlasting damnation, but thy will be done, for so it is most expedient. We
confess that we have grievously provoked thee against us and are greatly
endaungered to thy most just judgment, howbeit we beseech thee O Lord, enter
not thereinto with us, for our sins in thy sight are innumerable even as the
sand of the Sea or drops of water of the same, it may please thee therefore O
Lord, not to call the^ to thy remembrance, but through the death and passion of
thy well-beloved son Jesus Christ to wipe the^ away. We beseech thee also that
it may please thee to preserve those Kings and Princes that are endued with the
knowledge of thy Gospel, and do daily fight for the same, thereby under the
shadow of their wings preserving many faithful poor persons: vouchsafe them
the increase of thy grace. Touch also the minds of such Kings and Princes as
do vex thy poor servants, and suffer not their hearts to be hardened like as
was the heart of Pharao King of Egypt against thy people of Israel, and
especially O Lord vouchsafe to bring them into the bosom of thy Church, so to
enjoy the clear light thereof, which is, to see and know the truth. And
this do we most humbly beseech thee in the name and favor of thy dearly
beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ as himself has taught us saying. Our
Father which art in heaven, etc.

FINIS.
A Declaration and exhortation to Princes, etc.
LOng time have we seen our France thus tormented and afflicted with wars,
miseries and calamities, under color of religion, and yet even to this day, do
we behold how it does daily waste and decay more and more, which causes me to
think, that unless God do speedely set to his hand, we shall in short time
behold the destruction and dissipation of the most flourishing Realm in
Christendom, at the appetite of certain particular parsons, who upon a
desire and insatiable thirst to reign, do seek no other but the loss, or
rather usurpation thereof, as seeming to them that God is blind, and sees not
the torments which they inflict upon his people, in banishing some, and
defrauding them of their goods, and in putting other some most cruelly to
death. They might surely think, that if the Religion which they term new,
were not good, it would soon waste, and be in a moment swalowed up, but that
contrariwise, if it be according to God and Christ Jesus, all the weapons and
power of the world are not able to destroy it, no not so much as any whit to
diminish the same, and therefore they ought rather to follow the counsel of
the Pharisaicall Doctor of the Jewish law Gamaliel, who being in the Counsel
house when they sought to put the Apostles to death, said, that if their
Religion were of Man, the remembrance thereof would soon perish, but if it
were of God, they should never be able to destroy it. How many bloody battles
have we seen? How much Innocent blood shed, not only in our France, but even
throughout all Christian-dome for this only point, and yet do we see this
holy doctrine flourish and augment all over the world. Besides it was never
seen, neither in the time of the holy Patriarchs or Primitive Church that
Religion was decided, confirmed or disputed upon by force of Arms, but only
by the Sword of godliness, and the pure word of God contained in the Bible.
How many errors did spring up in the Primitive Church, and yet there needed no
other weapon then the holy scripture, neither did we ever know false doctrine
but the same immediately vanished through the power of Christ Jesus. We may
therefore easily presume, that the aucthors of these civil wars, covering
themselves under the vizerd of religion, do seek no other but the utter ruin
of this Realm, whereof they were to make their profit and commodity. We
know, that before the decease of the late Lord Duke of Anieow and Alencon the
Kings only brother there was nothing spoken of, But they will now say that
the Crown belongs to them, then should they greatly deceive themselves, for
in liewe of benefiting the Realm, they consume all the substance thereof in
the charges of the War. If any man ask who be these goodly aucthors of
these present civil Wars, I will answer that it is the house of Guize,
which says that in case it should so come to pass, that the King should dye
without issue, the Crown can not belong to the King of Navarre, because he is
a Heretic: But truly any man endued with the fear of GOD, which will judge
uprightly, may well know that Popish Religion is mere error, besides that in
the Primitive Church the sheepeheards and Bishops lived not in so great pride
and superfluity as do the Popes: for since that Christian Emperors, Kings and
Princes permitted them liberty to rule, they have not only abandoned the true
Church of Christ Jesus, but also have embrased falshoode in stead of truth,
and lived over losely and dissolutely. Neither is it the office of a Bishop to
seek the dominion of a whole climate of the earth, but rather only to
instruct his flock according to the holy scriptures, and the true doctrine of
Jesus Christ. Let us consider whether Saint Peter (whose successer the Pope
chalengeth himself to be) or the other Apostles sought to rule Monarkes. No,
no, but contrariwise Christ himself said, that no man could serve God and
Mammon. But let us return to our purpose, for I am not to meddle in matters
which so many learned Parsons have debated upon, in presenting to the view and
palpably feeling of the Popish errors, neither is it the mark that I level
at, who do pretend only to show unto you what just occasions we have to take
arms for our necessary defense. For it is extreme cruelty and mere tyranny
to banish the poor, and usurp their goods, as in these doyes they do in our
France. I do therefore most humbly beseech all true lovers of the Gospel,
and such as desire the preservation of this crown, not to suffer, for want of
taking arms, and succouring of us, so flourishing a Realm, as ours to be lost:
for all men may see, and it is most evident, that the aucthors of this war
do seek the only decay thereof. Have we not seen all Germany, England,
Scotland, and the most part of Europe troubled for this only cause of
Religion? and yet now we find, that at this day they do enjoy most blessed
peace through such agreements and order as on either part have been taken.
These men cannot excuse themselves of seeking the utter destruction of this
country: for we have had so many Peaces and Agreementes in time past, that now
it is a most manifest matter, that the only point of Religion is no cause of
present troubles, but rather an envious desire to usurp. They minister cause
never to repose confidence in whatsoever promise or peace, which properly be
termed a Childrens pastime, who may say and unsay, and all with one breath,
what soever they ^st. How many holy and just edicts have we had, and especially
the Edict of January made in the year of grace. 1561. under King Charles the
ninth, which was both good and lawfully made, to the benefit as well of the
one as other religion. Was not the same sufficient, whereby we might enjoy an
assured peace, as do other the bordring realms our neighbors? But what? It
was of over great importance to the enemies of peace. What shall I say more?
have we not since that had many other edicts? and by ye last, was not the
French Nation assured to enjoy a blessed peace, though to the great prejudice
of our reformed religion, and very beneficial to the contrary, as wanting more
then half the liberty of that of January, which notwithstanding, the wicked
could not continue in that Peace. This sufficiently shows their perverse and
mischievous minds, as also that they have no other desire, but to destroy or
usurp this Crown of the Flowerdeluce: But what need I so largely describe a
matter which all the world knows better then my self? Wot we not that this
house of Guize and their associates, are the chief Captains and Conductors of
all this alteration? See we not that they seek to deliver and abandon, as it
were in pray, this poor kingdom, to the Spanish nation? Moreover, have we
not already found how they have endeavored, and still do go about to bring
all Christiandome into confusion. And how? In Scotland have they not sought
to drown the Realm in troubles and Civil wars, so as we have seen the
Nobility and Commons so sore bent one against another, that no peace could be
obtained without most grievous and horrible bloodshed? Yea, had it not been by
means of the most sacred of GOD, the Queens Majesty of England, the troubles
had yet continued, and al through the Guizes. Undoubtedly we can not think
but that after so many mischiefs God will power out his just judgment upon
that Family, notwithstanding many times we see the perturbers of public peace
and ennemies to the truth prosper more then the good, neither are we to
marvel, when we see the wicked exalted before our faces, for God will
sometimes use such instruments to try the patience of his elect. Now have I
sufficiently showed you the just causes that we have to defend our selves,
there rests no more but to open unto you the end whereto I do pretend, which
is, to desire all true lovers of the Gospel not to suffer the tyrannizing of
the faithful flock of Jesus Christ, who says that his shall be known by the
brotherly love that they shall bear one to another: but what amity is it to
see his brother or neighbor dye truelly before his eyes? undoubtedly if we
would consider what charity and brotherly love to our neighbor is, we should
feel our consciences wonderfully oppressed. I we see a thief or robber take a
pooremans purse in the wood, and do not our endeavors to deliuor him from the
said oppression, shall not we be guilty of the trespass? If I demand of you
who is the better or who is most worthy punishment, the thief or the receiver*
you will answer they are alike guilty the one one as the other: who then is
the better, he that commits the tyranny, or he that being by goes not about
to let it: In this case you will say, he is not guilty of the deed because
he furdereth it not, neither helps to do it, whereto, I may well reply,
that no more does the receiver steal, and yet is he not free from punishment,
for if there were no receiver, there would be no thief: even so if every one
would endeavor to withstand the perturbers of common peace, we should not have
so many cruel wars and tyrannyes, as at this day are in force: We may
therefore well think, that those that look upon the executing of such
tyrannies, and do not oppose them selves against them, are in as great or
rather greater fault then those that commit them: A man disposed to do evil,
if he find any let, will not go forward therein, and so shall not his offense
be so heinous in the sight of men, as if he had done it, notwithstanding I will
not quite excuse him, or say that he ought to be exempt of punishment, since
God says that will is reputed for the deed: but he that sees the wickedness
committed, and to his power lets it not, is worthy double punishment, for
both him self offends, and his winking is cause that the other proceeds in
his bad purpose, which he would not have done if he had been let: He
therefore is guilty both of his own fault and yt others also, and so such
persons can not eschew the just vengeance of God either in this world, or in
the world to come, unless his great mercy deliver them. For God says, love
God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self: if then we love our
neighbor as our self, we can not before our faces see him oppressed with
tyranny, but we must needs afford him some help and comfort, and therefore we
are herein guilty both to God and our neighbor: But was there ever greater
tyranny practiced then the same that the Guizards do now use in France? They be
thieves, murderers and perturbers of public peace. For can there be any
greater thieuery, then to banish an infinite number of poor peoplee, and to
usurp their goods, Lands, Lordships and enheritances? But now we see some
that are willing to withstand them, but do fear to be over weak: Let us not
fear my friends, but consider for what we fight. We fight for our peace, our
country, our lives, and the restitution of our goods: for the delivery of our
brethren, for the obteining of peace and quietness, and to be brief, for all
most just and lawful causes: Contrariwise our ennemies fight only for the
maintenance of their tyrannies and ransoming of the poor people, yea only of
a gready desire to reign and usurp. If we would consider al these things, we
should conceine a greater courage to defend our selves, then the others have to
assail, besides that we see our great captain Jesus Christ, who takes our
cause in hand, as being most just and righteous. Let us not quail though we
see our ennemies to be three times more then our selves: For if they fortefie
themselves it is only for fear of us, as also the force of man is nothing in
respect of the power of God, who names him self the God of Arms and
battles: who grants victory to whom he please, who also will reveal his
might in us in breaking the greatest Army that may be levied through eue^ one
small handful of men: Let us couragionsly go to the Combat, and steadfastly
beleene that our good God and Lord Jesus Christ will grass us the victory, so
as we crave it at his-hands in faith: for of him we obtain whatsoever we
faithfully do crave: But first let us also see that our army consist not of
wicked parsons, but let every one enter into his own conscience, for God
neither is called, neither will be leader of perverse and wicked people, so no
doubt we shall obtain a perfect and full victory: Let us so march as the
boulder may be an example of virtue to the rest. Again I beseech all Kings,
Princes and Lords, both strangers and others, that have any means to succor
us, or that do bear any goodwill or favor to France, not to suffer so
flourishing a realm to be lost for want thereof, at the appetite of a famely
which seeks no other but the usurping of the same under shadow of religion,
so shall ye accomplish the works of charity, and fulfill the Commandment
of GOD, which is, love thy neighbor as thy self. And in as much as we all are
brethren and neighbors, let us one help another in our necessity, for so
shall the noble hearts and virtuous parsons be known. I know some may reply
and say, that foreign Kings and Princes are not to enterprise upon the
Dominions of other Princes their neighbors, for sometimes under such a cloak
of Godliness they do extend their own limits with the loss of their
neighbors, and therefore it is not their parts to set foot into other men's
Lordships: For answer I would feign ask them whether we do not all agree
that there is one only universal Church whereof Jesus Christ is the head and
the members are so united and confoyned that the least of them can not be
grieved but the rest must feel some smart, according as we see that the holy
Scripture does testify. See we not many times the whole body perish through
some wound, not only in the Arm or Thigh, but also some times through some
small inconvenience happened to the little finger? Mark the Serpent or any
other venomous beast, when it stingeth any body, it seeks not the head or any
other principal member of the body, but only or for the most part, the foot,
and yet ye see the parson so hurt dye of such a stinging. And what? would you
make any account of such a Physician as has respect only to some one part of
his patient? no, no, he must look upon and visit all the whole body, even from
the foot to the head, to see whether any other me^^^^ be infected. Even so do
we compare the Church to this body which has diverse members, some in one
place, some in another* Now as this Church is only and universal, so is it not
committed to the chardge of one only King, but generally to all christian
Princes, and perticulerly to every one, because it were danngerous to leave the
custody to one only, and yet the unity thereof is such, as can by no means
be separated, notwitstanding it be universally dispersed over the whole fate
of the earth. The Church of England and the Church of France are not two
Churches, but all are members of one. God has committed it wholly to every one
perticulerly, and all the parts thereof to all in general, to the end not
only to preserve it whole and sound, but also more and more to increase it, so
that if one prince cares but for part of the Church, as of that of Germany or
Scotland, and the whiles contemns and abandoneth an other part that is
oppressed, and it lies in him to succor, he has abandoned the Church, for
Christ Jesus has bnt one only Spouse dispersed throughout the whole world,
whom every prince ought so to defend and keep, that she may not be any where
defiled, if possibly he may, neither is it to any purpose to excuse himself
by such usurpation as a Prince might take hold of in an others country: for
who so is led by a will proceeding from the spirit of Jesus Christ, can not
under such a false title expel his neighbor out of his patrimony: as being a
matter far repugnant to Gods commandment, which is, that he shall not
covet any thing that is his neighbors. Such superfluous allegations are not
therefore to be feared, for whatsoever is guided by the holy ghost, can yield
nothing but what proceeds from the same: and since the holy ghost proceeds
from the wholly perfect goodness, namely God, who is contained in the three
parsons, the Father, the son, and the holy ghost, who proceeds from the
two, we must needs believe, that who so is guided by God, can do nothing
contrary to his will. I say therefore, and it is most certain, that God
wills Christian Princes to take arms in defense of his afflicted people
which are of the Church, examples whereof we find in sundry places of the holy
scripture. We see that in the time of Ezechias King of Judah, the kingdom of
Israel had long continued in subjection to the Assirians, therefore if only the
Church of Judah, and not the universal Church had been committed to the charge
of Ezechias, also, that if in the preservation of the Church, he ought to have
kept like measure as in the division of the land, no doubt Ezechias would have
contained him self within his own bonds, when the Assirians ruled over the
rest, but he sent Posts throughout all Israel to summon them to the
observation of the Passover. Do we not read also of good K. Josias, that he
put out Idolatry, not only forth of his realm, but also out of the kingdom
of Israel, and that justly? for when the kingdom of Christ is in question,
there is neither bounds nor limits that should stay the zeal of Christian
Princes. These examples of such and so good princes might stand for a Law, but
let us also look what God himself pronou^ceth by ye mouths of his holy
Prophets against those that make no account of his Church: besides we do
road, that the Gadites, Rubenites, and the half tribe of Manasses, required
Moses to alot the^ their portion on this side of Jordan, which Moses did
grant to condicionally, that they should not only help their other brethren
the Israelites to conquer the Land of Canaan, but also should march foremost
and make the auantgarde. Have we not testimonies enowe to prove the duty of
Princes to succor the Church? surely if we would allege all other the
examples that might be found in the word of God, we might have enough to make
a very large volume, but because I mean to write only a short declaration, I
would make no further mention thereof, as also this is enough, and therefore we
want only goodwill. Alas, I fear God will one day reprove us of
unprofitableness in this world. And what? you Kings and Princes do you not
fear that God will ask account of you for your governments? and wherefore it
is that he has made you his ministers and preseruers of his Spouse? Is this
the oath that you make at your admissions, when you take the sword into your
hand, and look both East, West, South and North, as if you would infer, that
there shall be no corner in the world, but you will endeavor therein to
maintain and increase this Spouse? This Church of Christ is it comprehended
within your dominions, and is it not universal over the whole face of the
earth? No, no, we can have no lawful excuse, and truly I doubt the reproach
of the Prophetess Debora against the Rubenites, will fall upon us as also the
judgment: for we profess our selves to be Christians, and yet charity
dwells not in us, when we suffer our brethren, who also are members of
Christ's Church, to be thus tyrannized. I beseech you let us eschew the just
judgment of God that is ready to fall upon our heads: let us give over all
excuses, for we have none sufficient. Let us leave all amities for the Church
of Christ Jesus, for it is he only that can save us: let us immitate the good
Princes Josias and Ezechias, also that virtuous Prince Constantine, who with
open War assailed Licinius even in his own country, because he prosecuted
the Christians: But as says the common proverb, It booteth not to preach to
him that cares not for well doing, neither is it to any purpose for me to
allege examples, since they will not be followed: We term our selves
Christians, and know the duty of Christians, and yet do not the works of
Christians. Christ Jesus teaches us that he is more worthy of punishment that
knows his masters will and does it not, then he that not knowing it does it
not. Having therefore attained to my principal purpose, which is, to desire
all Christian. Kings and Princes, that do profess the pure doctrine to Christ
Jesus to grant succor to his people in France afflicted by tyrants and mere
bloudsuckers, who draw forth man's blood to glut therewith a foreign famely:
and having showed as well by Gods word, as by good and holy testimonies taken
out of the same, how by all law, as well of God as man they be bound to do the
same, I have no more to do, but to require the Readers to read and consider
of this discourse with reason, and throwly to way the matters therein contained
without any passion, and to judge according to equity: so shall they perceive
that it proceeds not of my self, but of God, and therefore not to have any
respect to my age or calling: for any man knowing me, may well judge, that of
my self I am utterly incapable of such a deed. Take it therefore as
proceeding from God, who for the most p^rt reuealeth him self to the ignorant
and doultes, and hydeth himself from the wise of the world. Consider Saint
Peter, who was a simple Fisherman, also the rest of the Apostles, who were but
of mean calling. For likewise God has used me in this work, whom I do
beseech to open the hearts of Kings and Princes, and to deliver them from
blindness which stops their sights, and to make them partakers of his
clear light which is the knowledge of his will. So be it.


