DECLAMATIO IN LAVDEM nobilissimae artis medicinae.

A Declamacion in the praise and co^me^dation of the most high and excellent
science of Phisyke / made by the right famous clerk doctor Erasmus of
Rotherdam / and newly translated out of Latin into English.

CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.

The praise of Phisyke.
THe ofter the science of phisyke with curious and labored oratio^s has been
here in this place before ye more pert of you come^ded, Atte^cion
and that of men of singular eloquence (most noble audience) so much surely
the less trust and confidence have I, that I shall either satisfy so great a
thing, or answer to the expectacion of your delicious ears. For neither a
thing in manner divine, our rude infancy shall easily attain, nor a vulgar
and commen oration of a thing so oftentimes herd may in any wise escape
paynful tediousnes to the hearers. But yet, lest I should seem to be
defectyfe, and disobedient to the right wholesome ordinance of our fathers,
which have judged it mete and expedient with solemn orations the hertes and
courages of youth to be awakened, kyndeled, and enflamed to the study,
admiration and love of this noble science / my self also purpose to assay, to
my power (if so be your atte^tifnes and gentleness will vouchesaue to help me
in my speaking, tenderly fauorynge whom your authority has driven to take
this office upon me) of the right excellent science of phisike the dignity,
the authority, The proposition,
profit and necessity, I will not say to open and expound, which were
utterly an infinite business, but in a brefe sum only to knyt up, and as it
were to show to the sytes of the studious youth a glymmeryng (as a man might
say) through a lattes^e wyndowe of the most copious and ple^teful treasours of
a rich queen. Per transennam.
Of whom truly this (if there were nothing else) is a sovereign and excellent
praise, first that she neadeth not at all that any man should her commend or set
forth, being set forth sufficiently of her own self with the utility, The
exceeding praise of this science.
and profit, which mankind takes by her, and also by the necessity and need
that we have of her. Secondarely that where as she has been already so oftymes
of excellent wytte^ commended, yet she fyndeth of her self always to wits
also that be not very pregnauut new matter to praise her, so that it neadeth
nothing to praise here (after the commen usage) with envious and hateful
comparisons not without the prejudice and slander of other lernynges and
crafts. Nay rather this thing is more to be feared, lest her own propre and
domestical gifts and qualities, lest her natural and germane amplitude,
left her majesty greater than is man's estate and capacity, no mortal
man's speech of tongue can compass or attain. So that she neadeth nothing
at all to be auansed and lyfted up, other with any despitefull rebukes of other
crafts, other with some borrowed and painted colors of the rhetoricians, or
with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions. It apperteyneth to mean beauties,
A sente^c^
by comparyson of the fowler, or by gorgeous deckynge and payntynge, to be
set forth and commended. But things truly and of them selfs excedyngly
and passing beawtifull, it is enough to have showed them ye naked to the eye.

For now first of al (to haste us to The dignity and the authority of
phisike.
our matter) the other sciences I can not deny because there is none of them
but has brought some great commodity and profit to the life of man, have been
in high pryse and reputacion. But of phisike in times passed so wonderful to
mankind has been the inuencion, The inue^cion of phisike.
so sweet the experience that the authors and first inuentours thereof, have
other ben taken plainly for gods (as Apollo, Apollo.
and his son Aesculapius) ye rather, Aesculapius.
as Pliny witnesses, every thing invented in this faculty and science was a
cause sufficient to deifie and make gods those that ware the inue^tours, or
at least, they were esteemed worthy of heavenly and divine honors, as
Asclepiades, Asclepiades.
whom the I^^iricans receyuyng in manner as a god, gave him egall honor with
Hercules. Surely I do not allow that the antiquity did in this thing, The
zele of y^ old fat^er toward phisicia^s
but yet I can not but praise and commend their affection, zele and judgment,
which ryghtly both thought and declared that to a konnyng and faithful
physician no sufficient nor worthy reward can be yielded. For, if a man
rec^unteth with him self, how many-fold diversity there is in the bodies of
man, how great variety of ages, The difficulte of phisike.
of male and female, of regions, of ayers, of educacion, of studies, of
customs, how infinite difference in so many thousands of herbes^ (though I
speak nothing at this time of the other remedies) which grow in sundry
countrees, some in one place and some in an other, Than how many kinds of
diseases, which Pliny writteth were rekened up in old time iii.hondreth by
their names, beside the members and parts of every kind, of which al, how
innumerable a multitude there is, he shall easily guess which only knows
how many forms and fashons the fevers or ague has (so that of one the
residue may be esteemed) beside those which daily increase new and new, nor
none otherwise increase, than if of purpose they seemed to have taken upon them
open wars with our craft. Beside, more than a thousand peryls of
poysoninges of which how many sorts there be even so many kinds of dethes
therbe, requiring as many differe^tes of remedies, Beside the daily casualties
of falls, Casualties.
of ruynes, of bra^tynges, of brennynges, of wrestynges out of joint, of
wounds and such like which in manner do compare in number with the very rought
of diseases, finally he yt pondereth with hi^ self, The knowledge of Astronomy
is requisite to a phisician
how great difficulty is in the obseruyng the heavenly Planetes which, oneles
the phisician knows, aftentymes that shall be a poynson which is given for
remedy. I will not here rehearse the often desceyuable tokens of diseases, other
whether ye behold the hauour of the color, or enserche the signs of the
urine or observe the harmony of the pulse, eue^ as who should say the euyls
of mankind were all to gether bent and set to deceive and mock their
ennemie the phisician. So great a quantity of difficulties and hardenesses on
every side come about and ouersprede them selves that it is hard for me them
all with my words to compass. But, as I began to say, al these varieties of
things with study to attain, these obscur^ties with wit to comprehende^
these difficulties with labor to overcome, and persyng through the bowels of
the earth, bultynge out every where the preuities of all the hole nature, out of
all herbs, shrubbes, trees, beastes^ precious stones ye finally out of eue^
the very venyms and poisons, to all the euyls of ma^s life, lively and effectual
remedies to s^ke, and of these the right and due vs^ out of so many authors, so
many scie^ties ye even out of the very sterres and planettes to fetch, These I
say so hid, with care to rote out, so hard, with the powers of the mind to win, so many, with memory to compass, so necessary to the preseruacio^ of al
mankind to bring forth abroad, do it not seem utterly beyond man's compass,
and plainly a certain divine thing? Phisike is a certain diuyn thing.
Let no man have envy at my saynges. Suffer me boldly to speak that which is
true as the euangel, I do not boste my self, but I extolle and magnify the
very science. The effect of physike.
For if to give life is the propre and peculiare benefit of god, surely to
keep and preserve it wha^ it is ones given, and to retain it still when it is
even now fleyng away, we must of necessity confess to be a gift and
benifite next unto gods, how be it not so much as yt former benefit which
we will have appropriate only to god, the plucked not away from the phisiciens
cra^te, which antiquity although they were light of credence geuyng, yet
undoubtedly they were full of gratitude and kyndnes. For by the help of that
worthy physician Esculapius, It was thought in old time that the cra^t of
phisicians raised the deed again to life.
it was thought in old time that Tyndarides and after him many mo returned
forth out of hell into life and light again. Xanthus an historiographer leuyth
to us in w^ittyng that a young Lion which was slain, and also a man whom a
dragon had killed were restored again to life by the virtue of a certain herb
which they called Ha^in. More over one Iuba witnesses that in A^rike a
certain person was called again to life by an herb. Iuba.
Nor I do not greatly pass although some persons perauenture will give little
credence to these. Surely (the thing that we go about) these wonder^ull
effects of phisike do so much the rather augment and increase the admiration
of the science, the more that they appear to be beyond the credens of the
truth and they constrain men to grant that thing to be of an incomparable
excellency, which in manner seem to surmont the truth. How be it concerning
him which is restored to life, what recketh it, whether the soul be put again
by gods ha^dworke into the forsaken lymmes, or by the craft and cure of the
physician, the life or soul of man utterly buried as it were in the body and
oppressed with the powers of the disease which like a co^querour has gotten
the upper hand, be raised and subtylly fetched out and hold still, which else
should without fail forth with have departed away? be not these two things in
manner of like virtue and egal power, to restore the deed, and to save him
which by and by should have dyed ^But Pliny reherseth very many and that by
name in the seventh book of the history of the world, Pliny.
which after ^hey were deed and borne out on the bear revived again partly
in the very pytte where as they should be buried or (according to the usage of
the country in the pyle of wode wherein they should have been burned, which
pyle was called of them Rogus) and partly they revived many days after they
were deed and before any burial. This we take for a miracle and a wonderful
thing / which a chance and a casualtie has given to a few. And is not it
than much more to be wondered of / which daily our science gives to many?
how be it I can not deny but the goodness of god is to be thanked for this our
science, to god we owe it / to whom, there is nothing but that we owe^ lest
perchance a man would think these to be spoken more presumptuously and
arrogantly than truly. Of many diseases such is the violence and strenght,
that death is certain oneles the present help of the phisician be at hand,
as that kind of trance which is wont to chaunc^ most to women, and as a
deep and profounde syncopis, the palsay, with such^ like. Nor there is commonly
none but that ones in his time other sees or hereth of such examples of what
nation so ever he be. He than which in this case dryueth away death which
even now hangs over the pacientes heed and ready to stryke with his dart, he
(I say) that thus calls again life suddenly oppressed / is not he always
to be had and reputed in a manner as a certain merciful god? yes undoubtedly.
How many men, think ye, were buried before their day in old time before or
the witty inuencion of phisicians had found out the strengthes of diseases
and the natures of remedies? how many thousands of men at this day do live
and farewell which should never have been borne oneles the same our craft had
invented as well remedies for so many dangers of chyldbaryng, as the feat and
polecie of mydwyuyng? So eue^ forth with in the very entry into life as well
the woman that lies in and laboureth^ as the child that is in bearyng with
lamentable voice cry for the wholesome aid of phisicia^s. To the phisicia^s
craft he owes his life, ye which as yet has not received life, while through
it abortions be prohibeted, whyl power is given to the woman of receiuyng and
reteinyng man's sede, finally while the power also of deleuering and brynging
forth the child into this world is given. That if it be truly spoken of them
in old time. Deus est iuuare mortale^, that is to say. A Latin proverb.
To help mortal men, is to be a god or ye properte and work of a god, truly
i^ my mind yt noble proverb of the Greeks (...) which is, A Greak proverb.
that man is a god to man, other has no where his place, or upon a faithful
and good phisician it shall be principally verified and have place, which not
only helps, but also saves And is not he than an excedyng unkind person and
in manner unworthy to live which phisike the second (next god) parent of life,
the defendresse, the saueresse, the protectresse can not find i^ his heart to
love, to honor, to magnify, to worshipe? Of whose aid and socours there is
no person but needs continually, for o^ the rest of crafts neither we all,
nor yet always have nede^ but in the profit and vtilite of this, all the hole
life of man stands, for ymagyne diseases were gone, ymagine prosperous health
to be with every one, yet how shall we keep it, oneles the physicyon taught us
the diversity of wholesome and unwholesome meats, oneles he taught a way and a
form to diete our selves? Age is a grievous and paynful burden to mortal
creatures, which to escape is no more lawful for us than death it self.
Phisicia^^ craft keeps back age.
But yet this age through the help and pain of the physician chaunseth to
many men, both later tha^ it should else have done^ and also much more easelier
and lyghter. For it is no fable, that by the quinte essentie (as they call it)
agednes driven away, man does floryshe and wax a young man again by castyng
a way (as it were) his old skin, sithe there be both in writtynges and other
wyses, many records of the same. Nor again not only of the body which is
the vyler part of man this our craft takes cure, nay rather it takes the
cure of the hole man^ although that the divine and professor of Theology
shall take his beginning of the mind, and the phisicio^ of the body. For
truly, The phisician cures the hole man.
because of the most straight alliance and knotte of familiarity of them
twain to gether, like as the vices of the mind do redownde into the body, so
again on the other half the diseases of the body other do let, or else do
utterly quench the stre^ght and power of the soul. who is so styffe and
strong an entyser and mouer of abstinence^ of sobrenes^ of mesuryng ire, of
fleyng heaviness, of eschuyng surfete, of castyng away love, of refrainyng the
lust of body, as is the phisician? who more lyueshely and effectually
counsels the syckman that if he will live and feel the wholesome help and aid
of the phisician that first he repurgeth his mind from the filthynes of vices?
The same phisician so often as he by giving and prescribing a form and manner o^
diete, or by ministryng of medicines do minishe the colar or black Iaundies,
refreshe the feeble powers of the heart, underset the spirits of the brayne^
pourge the instruments of the mind, mende the wit, repair the habitacion of
the memory, and change the hole ha^^our of the mind into better, do he not
by the outward man (as they call it) save also the inward? He yt restores the
frantyke, the mad man^ the lethargike, ye siderate, the lymphat do he not
restore the hole man? The diuins effect and work is, that men convert them
selves from vices, but the phisician brings to effect that there may be one
that may convert him self and forsake his evil living. In vain were he a
phisician for the soul, if the soul already be fled, for whom the salve was
prepared^ when the palsay, the apoplexia, or any other sudden scorge do take a
wicked man which disease will sooner take life away tha^ suffer him to think of
the amendeme^t of his life he that restores this person which else should have been miserably buried i^ his synfulnes, does he not i^ manner call back again
from hell both body and soul? Surely he sets again the man i^ that plyght
and state, yt now it may be in his election wheter he will flee or not eternal
damnation, what shall the divine persuade the person that raueth, or is i^ such
taking that his wittis and senses be clean taken from him, if he can not hear
him that goes about to persuade and counsel him? what shall the preacher or
the curate move the frantyke, if the phisicia^ do not first of al repurge the
color? Charity and the other virtues wherein the felicity of a christian man's
life does stand and henge chefely and principally of the mind I deny not,
but hycause this mind being so knytte and copeled with the body must of
necessite (will he or will he not) use the instruments corporal, it comes to
pass that a good pert of a good mind does depend upon the nauour and
te^perature of the body. An unhappy temperature of the body which we call
commonly a complexion (the Greakes call it crasis or sistema) draws many men
to synfulnes yea in manner against their wylles and stroggelyng and wra^tyng
against it, The phis^cia^ does a nende an evil complexion.
while the mynd^ which ^ytteth on the horse back gydeth the brydel i^ vain,
dig the spurs in vain but maugre his will is constreyned to follow heedlong
the wyld and furious horse. I grant it is the power of the mind which sees,
it is the power of the mind which hears, but yet if any infirmity take the
eyes, if the poores and is^ues of the ears be stopped and beseged with any
gross humor, i^ vain and al for naught has the mind his power. The mind
hates, ye mind is angry I agree well / but yet the vicious and corrupt humor
beseging the orga^s or instruments of the mind is the very cause why thou
hate hi^ whom thou iugest worthy to be beloved and art angrye with him with
whom thou would not. Plato confesses the su^me and chief of philosophy to
consist and lie here in, Plato.
if the affections obey the reason, but to bring this matter about the phisician
is the chief helper whose work and labor it is that that part of man should
have his strength and savor by whose arbitrament and guidyng al things be
done, whice be done well and laudable If they be judged unworthy to bear the
name of man which after the fashon of brute beasts be drawn and carried with
lusts and sensualities, surely than we owe to the phisicia^s a great part of
the worthynes of this name^ which being an high and great thing in private
and common persons, how much more greater and nobler benefit is it being
wrought in a prince. A phisician most necessary to pri^ce^
None estate is more encombered with such euyls than the estate of most
fortunate and blessed kings. what array what busynes and mischife shall the
corrupt^ brain of one person styer? In vain may they that be of his
counsel cry out against him, thou art mad sir ^ynge, come to thy self
again, if so be that the physician with his c^afte restore not his mind and
wits again unto him, nether it wyllyng nor felyng. I^ the Emperor Caligula
had had a trusty and fayth^ul phisician, Caligula
he should not so with poysonynges and pryue morders have raged to the great
destruction of mankind. And for this very cause it is come^ly used through out
all the uacions of y^ world yt the prince keep nor abide in no place without his
phesicia^s wherefore the wise princes in times past have given to no science
more honor or reuereuce than unto phisike. The honor had in times part unto
physike.
For Erasistratus (to pass over with silence the residue) neuewe by the
daughters side to Aristotle for the helyng o^ king Ant^ochus was rewarded with
an hundredth talentes of Ptolomeo his son. More over also the holy escripture
of god commands due honor to be had to the phisician not only for the
profit and vtilite which thereby aryseth but also for the necessity so that
the ingratitude and unkindness which is toward other well doers and welde
seruers, Honora medicum
is against the phisicia^ an impiety or ungodliness, since that the phisicia^ as
it were the helper of divine benefit save up and defend that with his art
and science which god has given to man most dear and best, that is to say
life. we have nothing but we may thank our father and mother for it^ because
by them we seem i^ manner to have received the benefit of life. But we owe more
in my mind to the phisician to whom we owe oftymes the thing which we owe
only but ones to our pare^tes, if yet we owe any thing at al unto them. we owe
charity and a certain natural zele to them which drive away the ennemie from
our neck, and do we not owe much more to the phisician which for our health
and preservation fyghteth daily with so many mortal and capital ennemies of our
life? we adore and worship kings even like gods, because it is thought that
they have power of life and death, which yet although they may kill yet surely
they can none otherwise give life but in as much as they bereue and take it
not away, ^uen as we say that thieves do save those men's lives whom they murder
not, nor these princes can give none other life, but the life of the body. But
how much nerer does the benefit of the phisician approach to the benignite
and goodness of god, which draws even out of the mouths of death with his
craft, wit, cure, and faythfulnes the man which was even now destinat and
appointed to the fyar of hell. In other things to profit man, we call it an
humanite or a gentylnes^ but to save a man even in the very daungeer of body
and soul is more tha^ a piety or godlynes. Put here unto, that what so ever
is great and excellent in man, as lernyng, virtue the gifts of nature or what
other thing so ever it be, of altogether we thank ye art of phisike, in so
much as it saves and maintain that thing without which we could not keep
up the residue. If althynges be for man, Argume^^ations.
and the phisician preserves man undoubtedly we may thank the phisician for
all. If he lives not, which lives accombred with diseases, and the phisician
is he which restores and preserves the prosperous health is it not convenient
to recognize hi^ as the pare^t of life? If immorta^^te be a thing greatly to be
desired and wyshed for, ye industry of the phisicians does (asmoch as may be)
counterfayt it, which with their diligence attempt to prolonge i^ so far as
is possible, for what shall I here recount unto yo^ the comen^y known
examples, Pythagoras / Ch^^^pp^s / Plato / Cato sensorius / Antonius / ^astor^
and beside these innu^erab^e other of whom the most part by the observation
and marking of phisike did prolonge their life beyond an hundred years without
sycknes, neither the freshnes of wit endulled nor abated, nor the surenes and
styfnes of memory not shaken, nor yet the senses brosed or enfeabled. I pray
you is not this to show as it were even now here in this present life a
certain spyse, represe^tacion, or image of immortality? Also Christ selue
him the only author redeamer and conqueror of immortality took a body upon
him which though it was mortal, Christ was never sick
yet it was combered with no disease he abhorred not the cross but he abhorred
diseases. And were it not a fair and a godly thing for us, also in this part
to follow to our power our prince and lord? The apostles lived in manner al a
long life, The apostles.
we read the^ beten, we read them slain, but we read not they were sick.
By what means so ever this thing chaunsed unto them, surely the phisicians
craft parforme the same to us, which their felicity performed unto them For I
count not the^ worthy to be herd which no less vnlernedly than unshamefastly
ar wont to cast this in our tethes, A confutacion.
Virtus in infirmitate perficitur. That is to say, virtue is perfited in
infirmity, dreaming that Paul was combered with grievous heedage, where as he
calls the infirmity, either the temptation of the mind, or which is nygher
to the truth the bacbytyng and persecution of wicked persons. But the same
self Paul, among the apostolical gifts reherseth also the gift of curyng or
healyng. Donu^ curationis.
More over this also augmenteth the glory of phisike not a little, that as well
the majesty of the emperors laws, as the authority of poPes laws do freely
submit them selves to the judgment of phisicians as in cases of nonage which
they call pubertie, in cases of chyldbyrthes, and poisonynges, also in certain
questions touching matrimony. O a new and strange dignity of phisike. They
go upon life and death of a man, and the sentence of the judge hengeth upon the
foreiudgeme^t of the phisicia^. The charity of the pope when he pardons any
thyng^ he pardons or lycense the none otherwise oneles the phesician allows
and counsels the same. Also the pope in his decrees, that bishop which is
co^playned upon to have any foul or horrible disease by the judgment of
phisike iugeth him other to be put out of his byshopryche or else to be restored
again to his place. Also saint Augustine co^me^deth al things to be done by ye
advise of the phisicians although the pacient would not. Augustine
Also the honor which is due to the phisician that is the reward of his
craft and labor the same saint Augustine writteth very well yt it is wrongfully
taken away of him that with old it, as of an unjust possessour and occupeyng
with an evil conscience that which is an others and not his, ye more over these
persons which with certain oriso^s and prayers made to the same purpose drive
out of men's bodies wicked spirits and deuyls, ofte^tymes take phisicians with
them to have advise, as in those diseases which by pryuy and secret means do
mar and corrupt certain organs and instruments of the ^enses and spirit
and do so counterfeit a demoniacal spice, that they can not be discerned but of
very connyng phisicians, other whether they be certain grosser deuyls (as it is
said ^heyr natures to be divines and sundry) which can fel^ the cure of the
phisician, or whether the sycknes remains so deaply i^ the most inward
parties of the mind that it seems to be clean strange and of an other
nature^ than the body is. An example.
In prove and witness of which thing, while that I repor^ unto you of
innumerable examples one which I saw and herd my self I pray you to hear me
patiently. Panacens a phisician of an excellent and renowned fame floryshed
when I was a young man and was of my singular acquayntance. He (I present and
being witness) re^tored to health a certain person called Phlyari^s a spoletan
borne which by reason of vermyn was fallen into a new kind of madness in so
much yt in his sycknes he did speak very well Dut^he which thing before wha^
he was hole (it was manifestly known) that he could never do. who not connyng
nor seen in phisike would not styflye have sworn that this man was possessed
with some spirit? But this phisician with an easy and ready remedy did restore
him, to his right mind again. And wha^ he was ones restored again to him
self, he neither could speak nor yet understand the Dutche tongue. That if
perchance some men would contend with me and say that this man was in deed
possessed with a devil, surely this thing do most of al auance and set forth
the noble science of the phisicians to which (it is manifestly proved) that the
wicked spirits do also obey, which our noble science is not only the ministre
but also the counterfettour and follower of the divine virtue and might as well
in the restorynge of life, as in casting forth spirits. Nor there lacked
none which slau^derously reported that this thing was wrought by art magyke
or wytchecraft, whose slander I do turn to the great glory and praise of our
art whereby those things are brought to pass which the vulgar and lay people
believes to pass man's powers. wherefore not without great and just ^auses in
the old world when vile gaynes and foul pleasures had not as yet vitiate nor
corrupted al to gethers, The regard of phisike i^ old time
among all other sciences the only art of phisike was chiefly regarded of the
divine and most noble men, of most happy and rich princes, of most renowned
senators, nor there was no craft more acceptable to mankind, for that great
man Moses Moses.
(as it is thought) did in his laws make distinction of his meats by none
other wisdom or pollecie tha^ by the reason of phisike. Orpheus
Orpheus the most oldest of ye Greeks did bring to light many thynges^ (as it
is read o^ him) of the natures and powers of herbs. Homere.
Homere him self which was without question the only fountain of wits is
much busied both i^ the rehearsal of herbs and in the praise of phisicians. He
also painted and describes unto us Moly, The herb called Moly.
of all herbs (as Pliny witnesses) most comendable which is good and
effectual against poysonynges, the invention of which herb he assign and
attribute unto Mercury, with this herb he armeth his wise man ulysses against
the drynkes of the voytche Circe. Nepenthes.
The selue same Homer shows yt Nepe^thes an herb ought to be had in feasts,
by cause it dryueth away care and heaviness Moreover he reherseth and rekeneth up
oftymes with great honor Machaon, Machao^,
Peon, Peon.
Chiron, Chiron.
Podalirius as excellent men in this faculty, Podalirius.
by whose cure and handewerke he fayneth that not only the noble the dukes and
princes were helped, but also ye gods them selves meaning without doubt and
signifieng unto us that the most high princes have need of the help and
socours of the phisicians, and that the life of them is in the phisicia^s
hand, which in all other seem to have jurisdiction and power both of life and
deth^ ye what will ye say if the selue same poet in the.xi. book of his Ilias
has renowned and nobilitat the profession of this science with the most
high and singular commendation that can be given, sayng. The only phisicia^
is to be had in greater pryse and reputacion than a great nombre of the rest
of men, Again in an other place he notes and marketh the phisician that h^
called him learned in all things, openly testifienge that which is matter in
deed that this science do not stand in one or two lernynges but in the
knowledge and circuit of al arts, and more over (beside the exact wit) in
the much ure and experience of things. pythogoras wrote of phisik
The great clerk pythagoras of the isle of Samos to whom the people of
ancient time did attribute a certain divinity left behynd him (as we read) a
noble volume of the natures of herbs. what great philosophers did study phisik
Mithridates king of Po^tus
And to pass over with silence Plato, Aristotle, Theophrast, Chrisippe, Cato
Censorius, and Varro, whose study it was to intermeddel this science other
with their gr^^t studies or else with their great pain and businesses, surly
Mithridates king of Po^thus was not so greatly renowned neither by his realm
though it were never so rich, nor by the wonderful knowledge of the.xxi.
strange languages which he both understood and could speak as he was by the
knowledge and experience of phisike, which thing declared him a great man in
deed, which noble king (Pliny being mine author) lef^ in writtynge
commentaries, exampl^^^ and experiences or effects of this science. By whose
name yea even now at this day there is a soueraygne kind of triacle named.
Now comenly it i^ counted a princely pastime and mete for a noble king to
play at dyse, The (...) of old princes and lords
to hunt, to do trifels. But in times passed to the princes and rulers of the
people of ^ome nothing was regarded and more their care than to further the
art and science of phisike with bryngyng home new and strange herbs out of
far countrees, nor to that people which at that time had the dominion of
al the world there was no manner of gift, no manner reward is more welcome and
more acceptable, Christ called hi^ self a phisicia^
yea what that Christ him selue the author and prince of al disciplines and
teachynges professes him self to be not a great doctor or a great
counselor of the law, not a great Rhetorician^ not a great Philosopher, but
a great phisician, whiles wha^ he speaks of him self says that they have no
neade of a phisici^n which be in health, and whiles he resembling him self
unto a Samaritan pours oil and wine into the wounds, and whiles he
temperyng the earth with his spytel, sprede it on ye eyes of the blind man,
Christ gate the love o^ the people by hel^g their infirmities.
what that the self same Christ chiefly by this commendation what time he was
as yet unknown to the world did by little and little wind him self into the
minds and affections of men, not with gold, not with empyrs, but with the
remedies of sycknesses. The thing that he did with a beck, or with a word of
his mouth, the same the phisicia^ does to his power counterfeit and follows
Nor there lacks neither to those remedies and medicines a divine power and
virtue, for the operatio^s and strenghtes of healyng is even from god to this
very purpos and intent given to things. Nor he has instructed the apostles
with none other viauger more than with the gift of healyng, comaundyng them
that forthwith with this deserte and benefit they should win the favor of
their ost that logeth them, healyng (que he) their infirmities and diseases and
anoyntyng the sick with oil. S. paul plaith ye phisician
That great man Paul wha^ he counsels his disciple Timothy to take a little
quantite of wine to stablyshe his stomach and the feebleness of his brains, does
he not openly take upon him the parts of ^ phisician? But what wonderful thing
is this in the apostle, The angel Raphael.
sith the angel Raphael healynge the blyndnes of Tobie got hereby also his
name among the writters and students of divine things? O how heavenly and
right holy is this science, Raphael is interpreted medicina de^.i. the phisik
of god.
of which the heavenly minds have their dominatio^? Among mortal people some
study and profess one science, some an other, but only this science ought to
be studied of al, sith it is necessary to al. But alas alas ye crooked and
perverse iugementes of me^. No man can abide to be ignorant of coin, which is
current and lawful and which is unlawful or cou^terfait, lest they might
perchance be deceived in a thing most vile and of little importau^ce, but they
will not study to know by what skylles and means they may preserve that which
is the best thing that they have. In money they believe not other men's eyes. in
the matter of life and health do they blynfelde (as they call it) follow other
men's judgments? That if the absolute and parfite knowledge of the hole scie^c^
can not chance but unto a few which have appointed and as I might say
dedicate their hole life to this only study, It is very expediet for every
man to learn so much phisike that he may preserve his own he^the.
at lest it were mete and convenient that of that part of phisike which
apperteyneth to the governance and preservation of h^lth no person should be
ignorant. Although to say the truth a great part o^ the difficulty and
hardness comes not of the very science but other of the bungerlynes and blind
ignorance, ^r else of the vain glory and ambition of leude phis^^ia^s. Always
ye among the wild and barbarous nations the name of amity has been counted
holy and honorable, and he is taken for a singular and ^ure friend which is a
co^paignon and a fellow both in prosperity and in adversity because yt the
common sort of fren^es, like as swalowes in somer, Swalowes.
so they in wealth and prosperity be present and at hand, but in adversity,
like as the said swalowes against the coming of wynter^ fly away. Birds
called Se^eucides.
But how much more sure and substanciall a friend is the phisician which
(after the example o^ certain birds which be called Seleucides which as they
say ca^ ^o where be espi^d of the inhabitants of the mountain of Casius but
when they need their socure and help against the violence and power of great
butterflyes destroyng their corues / when all things be well and saufe he never
puts him self in peril, but in such casualties in which both the wy^e and
the ^hildren oftentimes forsakes the man as in the fransie, the lowsy evil
(which is called Phthiriasis) and the pestilence the phisician only is
constantly prese^^ and he is present not with an unprofitable service, as the
most part of the rest^ but he is present to help, he is present to fight with
the sycknes for life and death of his patie^t, and yt many times putting his
own life i^ ieopardy. And O more tha^ unkind persons which preserved by the
service of such a friend can find i^ their hertes wha^ the ieopardy is now
driven a way to hate the phisicia^ and do not rather r^uere^ce and worship hi^
instead of a parenteA common friend yt bideth the^ good morrow, or good eue^ so
often as they mete hi^, i^ for his kind salutatio^ called to super, he yt takes
the^ curtesly by ye arm^ him they recompense with like kyndnes, and will they
shake of such friend wha^ they leave neadyng of him? and for this very cause
shake him of, because they perceive that they be not able (were they never so
rich) to yield due thanks unto his kind deservings? That if he is the best
man which most profit the common weal, than surely he that coueteth to be
best ought pri^cipaly to study this faculty. A co^mendatio^ of the gaynes and
lucre.
But now if there be any of thi^ appetite which had rather measure the prisel
of things with profit and gaynage (albe it this art is more high and more
divine, than that it should be esteemed by such reasons) yet I say if there be
any of that apetite which regard lucre and gains, this art will give place to
none other science neither in this behalf, for there was never none more
fruteful, and auaylable, and so ready a craft to get riches suddenly as this.
Erasistratus.
Erasistratus of who^ I made mention before was as we read in Cronicles
rewarded of king Ptolome and also Critobulus an other phisician was rewarded
of Alexander the great^ with rich and in manner incredible gifts, Critobulus.
how be it what reward can not but seem to little whiceh is given to the
savior of the life of him for whose only life so many thousands of men did
put their bodies and lyfes in ^eopardie? what should I now make reher^al of
other noble phisicians, as of the Cassians, the Caipitans, the Arunkes, ye
Albutis, of whom Pliny writteth that they had unmeasurable gaynes in Rhome
as well with ye prince and emperor as with the people. How be it what search we
these histories out of old times, as though at this day every man can not
remember enough whom this science has brought up to riches ahoue the riches
of Cresus? Rhetorike, or poetry, find none oneles he be excellent. The
musician except he be passing co^nyng he has but a cold supper. The man of
law has thine gaynes if he be not depely and profundly studied. Only phisike
fyndeth and supporteth him which is but so so learned. A mean sight in phisike
gets a living.
Phisike consist in innumerable disciplins, and in infinite knowledge of
things, and yet it is often seen that one or two medicines or remedies shall
find a fool that have no lernyng at al. So that in no wise this art ca^ be
condemned of barennes. Put this ^o, yt of other crafts there is no ready gaynes
in every place. The phisician where so ever he goth gets his living.
The Khetoritia^ may blow his nails among the Sermates. The Civil law is not
so hyghly esteemed in England. But the phisician whether so ever he goes, in
what parts of the world so ever he keeps has his honor and worship, his
viauger follows him. So that also the comune proverb of the Greeks can be
applied better up on no science than it is upon this, A prouerb^.
(...) ^he craftesma^ gets his living where ever he goes. A confutation.
But pliny or surly other yt Pliny speaks of, take great indignation and be
hyghly disco^tented yt the profession of phisike should be a gayne^ and a lucre.
I grant, this faculty is greater tha^ yt it should be subject and seruiable
to lucre and gaynes. I grant it is for vile occupations to serve for gaynes.
^ut again on ye other side how great an ingratitude, what an unkindness were it
to do fraud and deprive this science only of his mede to which no due no^
sufficient mede can be requited? A noble phisician even like a certain god will
save freely without reward, he will save yea them that be unwilling to be saved
but again it is an impieti^ and an ungodliness not to considre and acknowledge
the benifite of the godly person. He little pass on thy reward, but yet thou
art worthy to be punyshed by the laws for thy notable ingratitude. But yet
this natwithsta^dyng I know right well that this noble sciece has been evil
spoken of both in times passed among the old fathers, and also now at this
day is evil defamed among certain unlearned persons. This art plesed not Cato
not because he damned the very thing, Cato dipraysed this science.
but that he could not abide ^he vain glorious profession of the Greakes,
being him self a mere Rhomane. And he gave so much to experience, yt he would
not have it a science. But the self same Cato judged it expedient that all the
philosophy of the Crekes were utterly expelled and banyshed the city, for ye
gross and hard man thought that brassica and often vomites did suffice to purge
man's body, and yet he him self so styffe an ennemy of phisicians by the
observation and keeping of phisike did (as it is written of him) preserve his
might and strength hole and sound even unto his very extreme age. Also ye
rude and unlearned people cast in our tethe, that the phisicians ar licensed
with out punisheme^tes to kyl me^. Mary for this cause the rather good
phisicians ar to be magnified and hyghly co^me^ded which where as it is in their
hand not only without punishment but also with mede to kyl, An objection.
yet they had rather save. That they may, i^ is a power, that they will not, it
is their goodness. It is recited now in every place at ale houses and tauernes
among dro^kardes this proverb. A proverb of ^oles.
Qui medice viuit misere^^ viuit. He that lives after the rules of phisike
lives wretchedly. As though it were an happynes and felicity, the body to be
swolen and stretched out with surfettyng, to be brasted wit^ the pleasu^e of
the body, to wax foggyshe with drinkyng of good ale, and to be sepulte and
drowned in sleep. But these Sycopha^tes and bakbyters what needs it to refel
with my oration, sith they them selves pay sufficient penalties to our art for
their skoldyng, being ^one after wrested with ye g^ut, amassed with the palsay,
dotynge and lacking their wits before the due time, waxyng blind and
blereyed before age, and tha^ at last being i^ this wretchedness they rechaunt
and sing a new song praising (as Stesichorus did) but al to late phisyke
which before they dyspraysed. And yet to these persons though they be most
unworthy, ye goodness of the art dysdayneth not to lay to, her helpyng hand,
and to socour them as much as in her is. Out of Aristophanes.
There be some maligners also which borowyng a tawnt out of yt old comedy
called phisicia^s, scatophagos, that is to say, deuowrers of turdes. As though
for this very cause they deserved not chyefly to be praised which to the
entente they would secoure and help the miseries and calamitie^ of men, are
contented from their hyghnes and sublimitie to humble themselfes unto these so
vile services, but if the phisicians were as scornful and dysdaynfull as these
be full of skoldyng and raylyng, they might on every side dye a pace without
controllyng. But our art has this one thing common with good kings, that it
does good and has an evil name. And though there were most of al (as there
be) in this sort and kind of men, The leudnes of certain evil phisicia^s
makes not phisike to be e^yl.
which bear them selves for phisicians which be nothing less tha^
phisicians, if there be which for remedies ministre poisons, if therbe which
for gaynes or vain glory do counsel their syck patie^tes amiss, what is
more agayn^t al reason and ^quitie tha^ to wre^t and detort the vices of men to
the slander of the science? There be also among prestes auowterers and evil
lyuers, there be among friars, monks, and other religious persons murderers,
ma^quellers and pyrates^ but what is this to the religion which is of it self
the best thing that can be devised of man? There is no profession so holy but
that nourysheth a sort of naughty packes and ungracious fellows. It is a thing
with all vows to be wyshed^ that al rulers and princes were such as becomes,
them to be which be thought worthy of this name but yet not because of this is
the office of a prince to be damned, that some under that title play the
pyllers, tyrants, an ennemies of the common welthe. I would wyshe also my
self that all the phisicians were, truly phisicians and that the greake
proverb had no place in them. A proverb.
(...). Many dryuers of the ox, but few plowers of the earth. I would wyshe y^
that holiness and pureness were performed of al phisicians which the most
worthy phisician Hippocrates requires o^ his scolers whom he swear with a
sole^pne oath. S^^^^^^ tu^ Hippocrati^
But yet we ought to endeavor our selves unto it, although we se it not
performed of the most part of them that profess this science. The epiloge or
perclos^ of this oration.
But because (O right worthy audience) the cause which I now plede has so
great plenty and copy of matter in it, that it is very hard to find an end
of speaking, lest I should not perform that I promised in the beginning I
think it now due time to gather to gether i^ a gross su^me all the praises
of it. For if so be many things are commendable only by reason of antiquity,
than surely this art or science was found, first of al other, even for very
necessity. If the science be made the noblear by reason of the first authors
and inuentours and inuentours of it, this science was ever thought to be
invented of gods. If honor adds any authority, no other science has
deserved divine honors so universally and so long time. If those things be
of great reputacion which be regarded and allowed of most high men / this
study has not only delyted but also renowned and auanced most high kings
and potestates. Di^sicilia quae pulchra.
If those things that be herd, be also fair and godly / there is nothing
more buysy more laborious than this, which rested i^ so many disciplines and
in the serchyng out and the experience of so many things If we estyme the
thing by the worthynes and dignity thereof / what thing is more excellent
than that, which goes more nyghe to the bounty of god? If by the faculty and
power, what thing is of more might and strength / than to have the power
restore again the hole man to him self which else should certainly have dyed?
If we mesure the thing by necessity / what is so necessary as that, with out
which we can another live nor be borne? ^f by the virtue, what is more honest,
than to save mankind? If by the vtilite and profit, the v^e of nothing is
neither greater nor whyther. If by the gaynes and advantage, other this science
must needs bring in great lucre and riches, or else men be very vnkynde^
wherefore for your causes I greatly rejoice (o most excellent and famous in
this science? A gra^^lation.
whom it has chanced to excel i^ this most goodly kind of profession. An
exhortation.
And you (young men) I exhort this science to love and embrace with all your
breasts, upon this set your studies with all the veins of your bodies, which
shall bring unto you renown, glo^rie, authority, riches / by which ye again
on your part shall bring to your friends, to your native contre, ye and ta al
mankind no small profit and vtilite, I have spoken.

Thus ends the declamation of Erasmus in praise and commendation of Phisike.
(...).
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete by me Robert Redman dwelling at the sign
of the George / next to Saint Dunstones church.


