ADAGIA IN LATIN AND English. CONTAINING FIVE HUNDRED PROVERBS, very
profitable for the use of those who aspire to further perfection in the Latin
tongue.

LONDON, Printed by BERNARD ALSOP, dwelling in Distaffe-Lane, at the Sign of
the Dolphine. 1621.

LECTORI. S.
CVm ante annos non ita mult^s, ludimoderatorem Brechinensem agerem; placuit
haec meis discipulis (ex D. Erasmi nunquam satis, in hac thesi laudati viri
Chiliadibus) tersa and maxim polita Adagia seligere: Semper fuit animus, vt
^ic Londini, ex multis meis Vigilijs and lucubrationibus, doctis and pijs
iampridem innotunt; ^eo, Principi meo, et Reip. Christianae inseruire. Mihi
nihil minus cogitanti, sumpatriota, (nomen lubentor subticco) farraginem hanc
Anonimos exhibuit. Foetum agno^i, et vt paulo ornatius loqueretur Anglice
volui. Si quid pecc^ti art tua candide corrigas. Et -- Carpore vel noli nostra
vel ede tua,
Sivoles -- his vtere mecum.


TO THE READER.
I Know these will come under diverse constructions of Judgments. Some finds no
correspondency, some no application: the one is too large, the other lacks
discretion. The Latin implies more, the English not fitting: he forgets
the Allegory, and the particular resemblance; if it lacks in one, it halteth
in another. Lo, some of thy thoughts. I will not here distinguish betwixt
Paraemia, Adagia, Gnome, Hyperbole, and Chria, which I have indifferently used.
I bring the Modern Proverb that goes now, I affect antiquity as it was then;
and sometime I speak as my mother taught me. Iudiciously perpend my way in
Logical places, and in sense thou shall find not much amiss, and in meaning
an evident conformity.

All ages are not alike, many words fall and dye, and daily other revive; all
is one, if we speak as the now and then time affords. If Chaucer could arise,
he should learn a new phrase, and scarsly could understand, unless he went to
school again. We borrow foreign colors of elegancy to dignifie and season
our speeches. Conquest often makes variety of tongues, but Autochth noi and
Aborigines must needs speak Greek: albeit intermixed with many Dialects. And
that Greek (if God permit) which shall accompany this Latin and English, with
the French, and both the Dutch, I mean the upper and nether, specially that
of the Low Countries, which Nation much delights it self in Laconicke
speeches. Short words, subtle minds, when the understanding is wandering, there
is no congruity. These (I say) with vsus Adagiorum, and a thousand more, which I
have under my pen, when I shall hear of thy good acceptance of these I will
exhibit. And lest any should cavil at this manner of writing, let him remember
that Solomon spoke three thousand Proverbs, 1. King. 4.32. and many Proverbs I
find in the holy Scripture mentioned, which were usually in the Israelites
mouths, as Genesis 10.9. 1. Sam. 12.20 and 19.24. and 24.14. And to be brief,
how great store of Similies and Parables are now, which have great vicinity and
kindred with Proverbs, but differ in form of expressing, liveliness, and
breuity. Which (with Gods assistance) I purpose to explain, and confer with
Poetical and Philosophical wits, both of the Graecians and Romans, in the
mean season, (gentle Reader) make use of these.

B. R. M.

PROVERBS IN LATIN AND English.
CENTVRIA. I.
ARcus tensus rumpitur.

To much of one thing is good for nothing: or, a bo^ long bent, at last waxes
weak.

Naturam expellas furca licet vsque recurrit.

A man will be a man, if he have but an hose on his head: or, a carrion Kite
will never be a good Hawke.

Ipsa dies quandoque, parens quandoque nouerca.

That will be shall be: or, a Dog has a day.

Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur.

A friend will help at a dead lift: or, a friend is never known till a man
have need.

Arctum annulum ne gestato.

Every man knows where his own shoo^ wrings him: or, a pound of care will not
pay an ounce of debt.

Similes habent labra lactucas.

Such lips, such Lettice: or, a scabbed horse is good enough for a scabbed
Squire.

Omnes qui habent citharam non sunt citharedi.

All is not gold that gli^ters.

Nemo ante mortem beatus.

All is well that ends well.

Prestat sero quam nunquam sapere.

Better late then never.

Aquila in nubibus.

One bird in hand is worth two in the wood: or, better one bird in the hand, then
ten in the bush.

Ne suitor vltra crepidam.

Blind men must not judge of colors.

Malo accepto stultus sapit.

Wit is never good till it be bought: or, bought wit is best.

Piscator ictus sapit.

A burnt child will fear the fire: or, a burnt child fire dreads: or, penny
wise, pound fool.

Lupus pilum mutat non mentem.

Cat after kind.

Quod tibi non vis fieri alteri ne feceris.

Do well, and have well.

Difficilia quae pulchra.

Dear bought and far fet, are dainties for Ladies.

Iisdem e literis comaedia and tragedia componitur.

As sore weepeth the child afternoon as forenoone.

Sera in fundo parsimonia.

Better spare at brim then at bottom.

Dormienti rete trahit.

Better to be happy then wise.

Simul and misertum est, and interrijt gratia-

Claw a Churl by the tail, and he will soil thy hand.

Sum egomet mihi proximus, tunica pallio propior.

Close sits my shirt, but closer my skin.

Tuo te pede metire.

Cut your coat after your cloth.

Quod satis est sufficit.

Enough is as good as a feast.

Quo plus sunt potae plus sitiuntur aquae.

Ever drink, ever dry.

Gallus in suo sterquilinio plurimum valet.

Every Cock is proud on his own dunghill.

Quisquis amat Ranam, Ranam putat esse Dianam. Suum cuique pulchrum.

The Crane thinks her own bird fairest: or, every man as he likes, quoth
the goodman when he kissed his Cow: or, he is a kin to the Owl, who thinks her
self fairest.

Dantur opes nullis, nunc nisi diuitibus.

Every man basteth the fat hog.

Non quiuis rem acu tangit.

Every man cannot hit the nail on the head.

Qui non litigat, celebs est.

Every man can tame a Shrew, but he that has her.

Cuique suum commentum placet.

Every man likes his own child best: or, every man after his fashion.

Male partum, male disperit.

Ill got, ill spent: or, evil gotten goods never proves well.

Flagitiorum turpis exitus.

E^ill gotten, evil spent.

Fortes fortuna adiuuat.

Faint heart never won fair Lady.

Testudo intra tegimen tuta est.

Fast bind, fast find.

Verbum sapienti sat est.

Few words to the wise suffice.

Ne panes in frigidum furnum immittas.

Fish is cast away that is cast into dry pooles.

Stultum contra stimulum calcare.

Folly it is to kick against a prick.

Mus non vni fidit antro.

Good riding at two ankers men have told, for if the one fail, the other may
hold.

Canis festinas caecos parit catulos.

Have makes waste, or a hasty man never lacks woe.

Capram portare non possum and imponitis bouem.

He may ill run, that cannot go.

Timidi nunquam statuerunt tropheum.

He that fears every grass, must not piss^ in a meadow.

Quem fortuna nigrum scripserit, hunc non vniuersum aeuum, candidum reddere
potest.

He that is borne to be hanged, shall never be drowned.

Vindicta tarda sed grauis.

He that kills a man when he is drunk, shall be hanged when he is sober.

Caedimus in que vicem praebemus crura sagittis.

He that strikes with the sword, shall be beaten with the scabbard.

Estas non semper fuerit componite nidos.

He that will not when he may, when he would he shall have nay.

Crine ruber niger ore breuis pede lumine iuscus.

Rem magnam prestas zoile si bonus es.

He that winketh with the one eye, and looks with the other, I will not trust
him though he were my brother.

Virtus gloriam parit.

He is proper that has proper conditions.

Accipe quam primum breuis est occasio lucri.

Make hay while the weather shines.

Hold fast when you have it.

Patriae fumus igne alieno luculentior.

Home is homely.

Somnia cuncta canum panes, ego somnio pi^cem.

Hope well and have well.

Si non adsunt carnes taricho contentos esse oportet.

Hunger makes hard bones sweet.

Non est improbior res altera ventre molesto.

Hunger pierces stone walls.

Optimum condimentum fames.

Hunger is the best sauce.

Malum vas non frangitur.

Ill weeds grow fast.

Homo homini lupus.

In trust is treason.

Noli irritare crabrones.

It is evil waking of a sleeping Dog.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.

It is good to beware by other men's harms.

Semper tibi pendeat hamus.

It is good to have a hatch before the door.

Procul a Jove pariter atque a fulmine.

Near the King, near the gallows.

Botrus oppositus Botro maturescit.

One good turn asks another.

Hostimentum est opera pro poecunia.

One shrewd turn follows another.

Vna Hirundo non facit ver.

One Swallow makes not a summer.

Alij sementum faciunt alij metent.

One beats the bush, another catches the Birds.

Pennas nido maiores extendit.

Pride goes before, and shame comes after.

Merx vltronea putet.

Proffered service stinketh.

Multe regum aures atque oculi.

Kings has long ears and hands.

Mandrabuli more res succedit.

It mends like sour ale in summer: or the longer the worse, like to my old
shoes.

Loripidem rectus derideat.

He should have a hail pow, that calls his neighbor nitty now.

Difficilia quae pulchra.

Far fet and dear bought are good for Ladies: far fowls has fair
feathers.

Pluris est occulatus testes vnus quam auriti december.

I will trust my own eyes better then your report.

Multa nouit Lupus verum Echinus vnum magnum*

Honest simplicity is better then subtilty: or, I will do more with my
simplicity, then you with all your craftiness.

Si Leonina pellis non satis, est addenda vulpina.

What might cannot, malice shall: or, he will either do it by slight or might.

Multa noras oportet quibus Deum fallas.

Frost and falsehood will have a foul end: or falsehood will have a foul end.

Dij facientes adiuuant.

What God will no frost can kill: or, help^ thy self, and God will help thee.

Cum minerua manum quoque move.

He that will not when he may, when he would he shall have nay: or, lie not in
the mire and say God help.

Lutum nisi tundatur non fit vrceus.

Win Gold and wear Gold: or, you cannot be a scholar except you take pain in
the s^hoole.

Artem quaeuis alit terra.

A calling no burden: or, a trades man will win his bread in any part: or, a
t^ade is easy carried.

In puteo cum canibus pugnat.

He meets with his match: or he is fallen with such as he is himself.

Aurum habet Tholosanum.

He that washes a Black a moore, or powers water in a sieve, loses his labor:
or, he will never go the way that he speeds in.

Tam perit quam extrema faba.

As good never a whit, as never the better: or, there is no relief for him.

Qui semel scurra nunquam pater-familias.

Once a use and ever a custom: or, he that beggeth five Frydaies will not
work again.

Occasion duntaxat opus improbitati.

It Is an easy matter to find a staff to beat a dog.

Aries alituram rependit.

I knew he would do evil for good: or, save a thief from the gallows, and
he will help to hang thee.

Qui canem alit peregrinum.

To kiss a man's Wife, or wipe his knife, is a thankless^ office: or, it is a
thanklesse thing to feed another man's dog.

Hirundines sub eodem tecto ne habeas.

Like never a Tale teller.

Pro meritis male tractarunt Agamemnon a Grai.

Do the best I can there is no thank for it.

Nemo been merito bouem immolanit nisi Pyrrhias.

A thankful man is far to seek.

Si quid iuues pluuia leuior gratia est.

Si quid offendas plumbeas iras gerunt.

He is neither well full nor fasting:

I know not how to serve them.

In senem ne quod collocaris beneficium.

It is lost that is done to an old man, and a young child.

Cum paruula est, bona videtur spina.

Any young thing is pleasant.

Malum lucrum aequale dispendio

Ill got, ill spent: or, I have lost more then I have gained by it, or evil
gotten goods thrive not to the third heir.

Ipsa senectus morbus est.

No marvel an old man be sick.

Omnibus gallaritis oportet cristam inesse.

There is no man faultlesse.

Men's non est in centauris.

He is big, but has no courage.

Oui^m nulla vtilitas si absit canis.

A good King, a great Jewel.

Phryx plagis emendatur.

Well with awe, makes the carle draw.

Arcadicum germen.

A great Lubbard with little wit.

Septennis cum sit nondum aedidit dentes.

He will never be wise.

CENTVRIA. II.
BIs pueri senes.

Old men are twice babes.

Ouem Lupo commisti.

When the Fox preaches, beware your Geese: or, thou have given the Wolf the
weather to keep: or the Dog has gotten the Butter to keep.

Ne inner^um erumpat.

Better bow then break.

Certamen non accipit excusationes.

Need makes the old wife trot: or, I must either do or dye.

Nihil graculo cum fidibus.

Like to like quoth the Devil to the Collier: or, the like to the like, and a
scabbed horse to an old dike.

Aliter catuli long olent aliter sues.

There are more maids then Maukin: or, they are very like, but not the same.

Feli Crocoton.

He is unworthy of his place.

Alia res sceptrum alia plectrum.

He that has many Irons in the fire, some will co^le.

Induistis me leonis exuuium.

I w^ll never bear out that state.

Canis in presepi.

He will neither do nor let do.

Seruus cum sis comam geris.

You are far above your rank.

Extra olea^ fertur.

The Pri^^^ has forgotten he was ever a Clerk: or, he misknoweth himself.

Quae semelancilla nunquam hera.

Set a beggar on horseback, and he will ride a gallop: or, the poorest is
proudest when she comes to honor.

Dives aut iniquus est aut iniquus here is.

Riches and sin are often married together.

Quantum habet, quisque tanti fit.

I know not how the world wags,

He is best loved that has maniest bags.

Multitudo imperatorum Cariam perdidit.

One Master in a house is enough.

Nemo been imperat nisi qui paruerit imperio.

A good Prentice will be a good Master.

Arbore deiecta quiuis ligna colligit.

A man has many enemies when his back is at the wall: or, let him once fall,
and all men will go over him.

Annus producit segetem non ager.

It is more through hap then good husbandry.

Aquilam noctuae comparas.

An odious comparison, a Docke to a Dazie.

Leo senex vigente potior hinnulo.

An old hound byteth sore.

Crotonitarum postremus reliquorum grecorum primus est.

One man is worth three.

In agro surculario capras.

Choose thy company before thy drink.

Vbi amici ibi opes.

A friend in Court, is worth penny in pursse.

Nihil homini amico est oportuno amicius.

A good man can no more harm then a sheep: or, a man is happy that finds a
good friend.

Non sunt amici qui degunt procul.

A good neighbor, a good morrow.

Nunc been nauigaui postquam naufragium feci.

A hard beginning has a g^^d ending.

Lingua amicus.

A honny t^ngue, a heart of gall.

Non profert senior pannis e vilibus armos.

A broken sleeue holds the arm back.

Camelus vel scabiosus complurium asinorum gestat onera.

A grunting horse and a groaning Wife, never fail their master.

E multis paleis parum fructus collegi.

A long haru^st of a little corn.

Post bellum auxilium.

After meat Mustard.

Turdus ipse sibi malum cacat.

A swine over fat is cause of his own bane.

Mopso Nisa datur quid non speramus amantes.

After a storm comes a calm.

Plus apud campanes vnguenti, quam apud ceteros olei est.

There is more good victuals here, then in seven other kingdoms.

Si tantum vitrum quantum margaritum.

If you care so much for the body, what should you not care for the soul.

Corui lucinijs honoratiores.

Now virtue is contemned.

Inter caecos regnat strabus.

If the blind lead the blind, both fall in the ditch.

Cocta numerabinus exta.

Praise a fair day at euen-night.

Magistratus virum indicat.

A man is best known when he is in authority.

In dolio figularem artem disce.

You must spoil before you spin.

Tentantes ad troiam peruenerunt Greci.

Spaire by chance, you may come speed.

Post malam segetem serendum est.

All is not lost that is in danger.

Domesticum malum.

A misruled Wife.

Nihil grave passus es nisi tibi vindicas.

A good conscience is a continual feast.

Emere malo quam rogare.

I will not both pay and pray.

Cygnea cantio.

A fatal song.

Tunc canunt cygni quum tacebunt graculi.

I shall have my word about.

Fames and mora, bilem in nasum conciunt.

Speak never to a fasting man.

Ventre pleno melior consultatio.

When meat is in, anger is out.

Molestus interpellator venture.

Near is my Pety-Cote but nearer is my Smock.

Matura satio saepe decipit, sera semper mala est.

Take time when time is, for time will a way.

Ante lentem auges ollam.

You hope for that will never come to pass.

Informs hyemes reducit Jupiter, idem submouet.

After a storm comes a calm: or after black clouds clear weather.

Post caenam stabis aut passus mill meabis.

After dinner sit a while, aft^r supper walk^ a mile.

Id puto melius esse vt sint mediocria cuique^

All covet, all loose.

Mature fias senex, si diu velis esse senex.

An old sack asks much patching.

Fricantem frica.

An ill Cook cannot lick his own f^ngers.

Amicus magis necessarius quam ignis aut a qua

As a man is friended, so the Law is ended.

Neoptolemi vindicta.

As deep drinks the Goose as the Gander.

Ad suum quemque questum aequum est esse callidum.

As good to play for naught, as work for naught

Nihil prosuerit bulbus neruis caren^^.

Ask my companion whether I be a Thee^e.

T^te hoc intristi tibi omne est expedendum.

As I brew, so must I needs drink.

Mista senum, ac Iuuenum, densantur funera.

As soon goes the young Lambs skin to the market, as the old ewes.

Si tibi machera est and nobis vrbina est domi.

Batchellors Wives, and maids Children are well taught.

Jupiter emeritur opes mortalibus ipse,

Sic visum vt fuerit, cuicunque bonoue maloue.

Be it better, be it worse, do you after him that bears the pursse.

Mactata veniet lenior hostia*

Beggars should be no choosers.

Edentatus vescentium dentibus inuidet.

Better to be enuyed then pittyed.

Noli mouere Camarinam.

Better children weep then old men.

Est melius multo fortuna saepe morari.

Scandere quam praeceps interitumque pati.

Better sit still then rise and fall.

Iactantia comes inuidiae.

He that shows his goods longs to be rift

Haud malum vulpinandum cum vulpe.

It is better to kiss a knave, then to be troubled with him.

Bonum extra fumum and vndam esse.

It is good sleeping in a whole skin.

Vltra peram sapit.

Poor and proud, fie, fie.

Tibicinis vitam viuis.

You fare well on other men's purses.

Aries cornibus lasciuiens.

He is better fed then taught.

Caprarius in aestu.

Little he can do, and it is out of season.

Complura masculi canis cubilia.

Seldom will a Whoremaster hold himself with an honest Wife.

Rosam quae preterijt ne queris iterum.

Grieve never your self, for that cannot be^ amended.

Quid de pusillis magna prooemia.

You make much ado for nothing.

Cum Leones sint domi, ijdem in art sunt vulpeculi.

When you agree with your enemy, put two bars upon the door.

Furor post omnia perdere naulum.

Better half an Egg then empty shell.

Figulus figulo inuide^.

One beggar is woe, another by the way should go.

Vnicum arbustum haud alit duos Erithacos.

One beggar is enough at one door.

Candidae musarum Ianuae.

A good Scholar is ever liberal.

Optat ephippia bos, piger, optat arare caballus.

There is no man content with his own estate.

Frenum mordet.

He would feign be out of his Prentiship.

Improbe neptunum accusat iterum qui naufragium fecit.

A wit bought, is worth two for naught.

Ad amussim applica lapidem, non ad lapidem amussim.

We should live according to the laws.

Aequalitas haud parit bellum.

Good neighbors will not be hard.

Quae non posuisti ne tollas.

Live on your own.

Dat veniam coruis vexat censura columbas.

They leap over where the dike is lowest.

Non suadebis ne si persuaseris quidem.

I cannot believe it though I saw it my self.

Quod seruos habemus, totidem habemus hosts.

He cannot love me that is afraid of me.

Lidus ostium claudat.

He that comes last make the door fast.

CENTVRIA. III.
QVid distant era lupinis.

There is no comparison.

Valeat amicus cum inimico.

For my part burn the kill boldly.

In occipitio oculos gerit.

He has one eye in his neck.

Homini diligenti semper aliquid super est.

A wise man cannot be idle.

Arator nisi incurnus preuaricatur.

He that goes not skilfully to his work can not speed.

Grues lapidem delgutientes.

They know whose arrand they go^.

Post folia cadunt arbores.

If I suffer this I shall have worse.

De pilo pendet.

His life is on his lip.

Inter sacrum and saxum.

Betwixt sink and si^e.

A front praecipitium, a tergo lupi.

Betwixt the Devil and the dead sea.

Flamma fumo est proxima.

After words comes blows.

Caluus cum sis ne obuersa front obimas parieti.

Meddle with thy match.

Ne bona tu pandis ratibus semel omnia mandes.

Put not all in hazard at once.

Pasce canes qui te lanient catulosque luporum.

Save a thief from the Gallows and he will cut thy throat.

Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.

The beggar may sing before the thief.

Tanquam argiuum clypium abstulerit gloriatur.

The greatest talkers are the least doers.

Celsae grauiore casu, decidunt turres.

The highest tree has the greatest fall.

Oscitante vno deinde oscitat and alter.

The young Cock crow^th after the old.

Qui nimium properat serius absoluit.

The more have the less speed.

Magis sibi placet quam Peleus in machera.

The Parish Priest forgets that ever he has been Clerk.

Lapis obuolutus non obducitur musco.

The rolling ston^ never gathers Moss.

Omnem facultatem indutus est.

We can have no more of the Fox, but his skin.

Nunc tuum ferrum in igni est.

When the Iron is hot strike.

Accipe quam primum breuis est occasio lucri.

When the pig is proffered hold up the poke.

Dum genua virent.

When the sun shines make hay.

Tunc tua res agitur paries dum proximus ardet.

When thy neighbors house does burn, be^ careful of thine own.

Ni purgas and molas non comedes.

Win Gold and wear Gold.

Sero sapiunt phryges.

Wit is never good till it be bought.

Tacitus pasci si posset coruus haberet plus dapis.

You cannot fare well, but you must cry Rosemeate.

Festina lent.

Soft fire makes sweet Malt.

Caput artis est docere quod facias.

I pray you do as you say.

In aere piscatur.

He may gape long ere a Bird fall into his mouth.

Piscem natare doces.

Nature passes nourture.

Eliphantem ex musca facis.

He stumbles at a straw, and leapes over a block.

Exacta via viaticum querit.

The older the worser.

Leonis exunium super crocatum.

A fair hood on a false head.

Vino vendibili non opus est suspensa haeder^.

Good Wine needs no bush.

Totus aechynus asper.

There comes never a merry look from him.

Minutula pluuia imbrem facit.

Many smals makes a great.

Multis ictibus deijcitur quercus.

Hair^ and hair will make the ^arle bald.

Ceram au^ibus addis.

He that will not be counseled, cannot be helped.

Contingit and malis venatio.

Fortune sometimes favors fools.

Tranquillo quilibet guberna^or est.

Misery shaueth the man.

Oculus dexter mihi salit.

I shall have my hearts desire.

Si libeat, seruare procul quoque numina possunt.

H^p and halfe-penny are goods enough.

Noctua volat.

Grace is good for the man.

Recte valere and sapere duo vitae bona.

A man has no more then he has good of.

Neque caecum ducem neque amentem consultorem adhibeas.

When you go to dance take heed whom you take by the hand.

Non est remedium aduersus Sycophantis morsus.

You cannot stay evil hung tongues

^^ustra Herculi calumniam instruis.

Do well, and let men say.

Propria vineta caedis.

You spit upon your own sleeue.

Extra publicam viam ne deflectes.

The high way is the best way.

Mul^ae manus, onus leuius reddunt.

Many hands make light work.

Sub aliena arbore fructum coliigit.

He neu^r sweat for that he has.

In magnis voluisse sat est.

He that does as he can needs no reproof.

Cauda de vulpe testatur.

You may know the man by his manners,

E cantu dignoscitur auis.

You may know the horse by his harness.

Aquila non captat muscas.

He will not look so low.

Asinus compluitur.

He stirs no more then beaten Stockfish.

Ne allij quidem caput dedit.

He had rather part with his life before he will give a penny.

Indus Elephantus non curat culicem.

He neither does m^ good nor evil.

E flamma cibum petit.

He cares not how he has it so he may get it.

Non estoleum in lechito.

You seek grace at a graceless face.

Nihil Inanius quam multa scire.

Lea^ne not that is much, but that is best.

Viro lydo negotium non erat at ipse for as profectus parauit aut, callidum
prandium comoedere.

A hasty man never wants woe.

Ego spem preti^ non emam.

I will not buy a pigge in a poke.

A micitias immortales esse oportet.

Kindness will creep where it cannot go.

Simile gaudet simili.

Like unto like.

Ad mensuram aquam bibunt, citra mensuram offam comedunt.

A Prodigal must want.

Aliorum medicus, ipse hulceribus scates.

Love begins at it self.

Dasipus carnes desiderat.

He will never be contented

Facta iuuenum, consilia meliorum, vota senum.

Choose the man in that he has best skill of.

Non omnis fert omnia tellus.

Every man has his own gift.

Marinam auditionem fluuiali abluit sermon.

He puts a fair face upon an evil favored tale.

Ego de allijs loquor t^ respondes de cepis.

I speak of wheat, and you of Horse-corne.

Stimula equum iuxta lineam.

Speak to the purpose.

Me mortuo terra misceatur incendio.

When I dye, the world dies with me.

Mihi istic nec serit^^^ec metitur.

I have not to do with it.

Non luctu sed remedio opus in malis.

Sorrow never helped man.

Boni viri lachrimabiles.

Little knows the fat Sow what the lean does mean.

Batte tune pedibus nudis perrepere montem,

Quippe rubis tribulisque viret mons vndique densis.

Look before you leap.

Vi^e tibi quantumque potes prelustria vitae.

Tempore prelustri fulmen ab arce venit.

Look not to hye, lest a chip fall in your eye.

Qui nimium emungit fortiter elicet sanguinem.

Better to bow then break.

Duos insequens lepores neutrum capi^.

Between two stools the tail goes to the ground.

Obijcere canibus agnos.

Beware the Geese when the Fox preaches.

Pares cum paribus facillime congregantur.

Birds of a feather will flock together.

Custode and cura natura potentior omni.

Blaeke will take no other hew.

Camelus desiderans cornnua etiam aures perdidit.

All covet, all lose.

Aequalitas non parit be^^um.

Even reckoning makes long friends.

Policrates matrem pascit.

Fair words makes fools fain^.

Acinos sus improba pendes.

F^ost and fraud have always foul ends.

Mihi ipsi Balneum ministrabo.

Give an inch, you would have an ell.

Quod alibi diminutum exaequatur alibi.

God sends cold after clothes.

Est fortunatior quam prudentior and contingit and malis venatio.

God sends fortune to fools.

Canes timidi vehementius latrant.

Great Barkers are no byters.

Bonum e terra spectare naufragium.

Half warned half armed

Obedientia faelicitatis matter.

Happy man, happy dole.

Quid nisi victis dolor.

He laughs that wins.

Ludere qui nescit camp stribus abstinet armis*

He that plays more then he sees forfei^s his eyes to the king.

CENTVRIA. IIII.
NOn statim cum initio apparet finis^

Hot love is soon cold.

Vtere curru, de asinis nihil laboramus.

He that reckons without his host must reckon twice.

Lignum tortum haud vnquam rectum.

How can the fool amble when the mare trots.

Non inter pellendus latran^ venture.

Hungry dogs will eat durty puddings.

Quisquis amatranam, ranam credit esse Dianrm.

In love is no lack.

Malis ter mala.

Ill gotten ill spent.

Multa caduntinter calicem supremaque labra.

In space comes grace.

Cum Deo quisque aut gaudet aut flet.

It chances in an hour which happens not in seven year.

Asini caput ne laues nitro.

It is a bad cloth that will tak^ no color.

Qui sibi nequam cui bonus.

It is a bad bird that fileth his own nest.

Cupidinum crumena porri folio vincta est.

It is hard to win and thrive both in a year.

Bos lassus fortius figit pedem, vel, habet and musea splenem.

An old dog byteth sore.

Stultus qui patre caeso liberis pepercit, vel, mortui non mordent.

Better to go by the enemies grave then his door.

Qui tacitus procedit, via huius ego fuero Dux*

Every man for himself, and God for us all.

Syrus cum sis ne syrissa.

Jack would be a Gentleman, if he could speak French.

Estate penulam detrahis.

You think you will never be old.

Odi puerulos precoci sapientia.

Soon ripe, soon rotten.

Festina lent.

At leisure, as Flax grows.

Legatus non caeditur neque violatur.

It is not mine errand I go.

Attica fides.

As true as steel.

Rhadamanteum iudicium.

Extremity of the Law.

Ignis, mare, mulier, tria mala.

A wicked woman and an evil, is three halfepence worse then the devil.

Mulier pudica ne sola sit vsquam.

It is evil to put powder and flax together.

Nunc pluit and claro nunc Jupiter aethere su^git.

It will not be ill always.

Vbi non sis qui fueris non est cur velis viuere.

I will not borrow on the man that begged at me?

Ad prestina presepia.

Bring a Cow to the hall, and she will to the Byre again.

Quod aliter condiunt coqui aliter condiam.

I will make vp-side down.

Dextera precipue capit indulgentia mentes.

Asperitas odium saeua que bella mouet.

By wisdom peace, by peace plenty, by plenty war.

Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit.

It is a good hors^ that never stumbleth.

Facilis descensus auerni.

It is easier to descend then ascend.

Bonum tragedias in nugis facere.

It is good fishing in troubled water.

Malum contra torrentem niti.

It is hard striving against a stream.

Malum pro perca scorpium vel, si vinum postulet pugnos illi dato.

It is better coming to the end of a feast, then beginning of a ^ray*

Priusquam mactaris excorias, vel capra nondu^ peperit haedus autem ludit in
tectis.

It is ill fishing before the net.

Elleborum frustra cum iam cutis aegra tumebat

Poscentes videas uenienti occurrere morbo.

It is ill healing of an old sore.

Sybaritica mensa*

It is merry in hall when beards wag all.

Insanire facit sanoa quoque copia vini.

It is merry when knaves meet.

Nihil inanius quam multa scire.

It is not good to have an Oar in every man^ Boat.

Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit* odorem ^esta diu.

It will not o^t of the flesh that is bred in the bone.

Iucundissima nauigatio iuxta terram, ambulatio iuxta mare.

Light gains makes a heavy purse.

Omni pede eundem calceum inducit.

He heals all sores with one salve.

In alieno choro pedem ponis.

Meddle with your own business.

Facile cu^ valemus recta consilia egrotis damu^*

We have better counsel to give then to take*

Quarta luna natus.

He was borne to great misery.

De a^ieno ludis corio.

You cut large thongs of other men's leather.

Ama tanquam osurus, odi tanquam amaturus.

Mediocrity is best in all things.

Amici mores noueris non oderis.

Fall not out with thy friend for a trifle.

Salem and mensam ne preterias.

Forsake not thy old friend.

Par odio importuna beneuolentia.

There is time for all things.

Felicium multi cognati.

The fortunate has many friends.

Ne Jupiter quidem omnibus placet.

I cannot follow all men's humors.

Coelum territat armis.

He believes he would beat the Devil.

Tradebat notus hunc Boreae quandoque vehendum.

Nunc rursum Zephyro tractandum tradidit eurus.

Strive not against the stream.

Mala senium accelerant.

Sorrow and an evil life, makes soon an old Wife.

Expectat bos olim herbam, vel, expectat anus meum filium te suaniaturum.

While the grass grows the horse starueth.

Si vulter e^ expecta cadauer.

He lives upon other men's death^.

Haud vnquam arcet ostium.

He keeps a good house.

Semper aliquis in Cydonis domo.

He never wants good cheer.

Fores habent tritas vt pastorum casae.

His gate is as open as the Church style.

Neque compluitur, neque sole aduritur.

He is his Mothers child.

Neque nat^re, neque literas.

He neither knows Goose nor stye.

Barbarus ex triuio.

He is a very sot.

Claudi more tenere pilam*

Be it good or be it bad, he will maintain it.

Equi senecta.

When he can do no more good, then make an old horse of him.

Anus velit equus profundam habebis.

Forsooth what should be done with an old wife but make Gunpowder of her.

Ab asino delapsus.

He has lost that he will never find.

Nullam hodie lineam d^xi.

I have spent this day idely.

Neglectis vrenda fi^ix innascitur agris.

H^ that will not work, will want,

Ignauis semper feriae sunt.

The idle have many holy days.

In alieno foro litigat.

He knows not what he does.

Arrepta candela candelabrum querit.

Ye are wise behind the hand.

Ne verba pro farinis.

Go to the market with your thanks.

Vmbra pro corpore.

He gets by that, as Dickins did by his dishes.

Diomedis and Glauci permutatio.

He has cost for the worse.

Si vinum postulet, pugnos illi dato.

He is evil served.

Multa cadunt, inter calicem supremaque labra.

Chance is perilous.

Nescis quid serus vesper vehat.

No man knows his destiny.

Si crebro Iaceas, aliud, alias Ieceris.

Give not over though thy luck be bad.

Frigidam aquam suffundit.

I can do no more then I may.

Lach^yma nihil citius arescit.

Sorrow is soon forgot.

Prot^o mutabilior.

He is as fickle as the Weather-cocke.

Euripus homo.

As light as the Que^nes groat.

Duabus sedere cellis.

Betwixt two stools the tail goes down.

Duos parietes dealbare eadem fidelia.

He makes two sons in law of one daughter.

Thraces faedera nesciunt.

Neither word nor war can bind him.

Altera manu fert lapidem, altera pane^ ostentat.

He is as false as the Devil.

Refricare cicatricem.

Ye are glad of ^uill tidings.

Tangere hulcus.

To ^o^ch one on the sore toe.

Ignem gladio ne fodito.

I^ ye make it no better, make it no worse.

Temulentus dormiens non est excitandus.

Put not powder among Pitchers.

Sinapi victitat.

He is ever frowning.

CENTVRIA. V.
A Nimus habitat in auribus

I answer you according to your asking.

Hermodij catilena.

To sing mournfully.

Admeri nenia.

A doleful song.

Arctum annulum ne gestato.

Do not that suddenly may cause your sorrow.

Titanicus aspectus.

He looks as he would look through me.

Caepam edit.

He laugheth, and the tear is in his eye.

Ne sis panis mihi.

I will use no more of your counsel then pleases me.

Frontem exporrigere.

To look blythe upon it.

Magis gaudet eo qui senectam exuit.

He is as glad as i^ he had found a tresure.

Manum habet sub pallio.

He is not content with himself.

Helenae cibi.

A costly banquet.

Attica bellaria.

Great delicates.

Optimum condimen^um fames.

Hunger is the best sauce.

Dubia caena.

Sweet meat must have sour sauce.

Accipit and glebam ferro.

He will take any thing before he loses all.

Bis dat, qui cito dat.

I had rather have it now, then twice as much another time.

Promus magis quam condus.

He never labored the thing that he spends.

^ona porcenae.

^t is cheaper sold, then ever it was bought.

De plaustro loqui.

He is not ashamed who hears him scoulding.

Veritas odium parit.

All the truth would not be told.

Et dicebaris erasque.

It is true that men speak of you.

Simplex veritatis oration.

Truth seeks not by ways.

Quod in cord sobrij id est in lingua ebrij.

A full man cannot lie.

In vino veritas.

When the drink is in, the wit is out.

Lingua lapsa verum dicet.

Against his will he does say truth.

Ficus ficus, ligonem ligonem vocat.

He tells plainly how the matter was.

Liberi poetae, and pictores.

Poets and Painters have leave to lie.

Superbat tan quam argiuum clypeum detra^^rit.

He swaggers as if the whole town were (...) own.

Auro loquente nihil pollit quaeuis oration.

The world is come now to, what will (...) give me.

Si caseum haberem non desiderarem abso^^

He is a very Miser.

Salem lingit.

He is not worth the wool of a dog.

Coruum delusit hiantem.

His obligation is not better then his word.

^olus ereptus ex faucibus.

(...) thought never to have seen it.

^urem pro leone ostentat.

^is words are but wind.

^arturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus mus.

^is promises are no performances.

^upus circa puteum chorum agit.

^e has done with his best day.

^uerens obsonium vestem perdidit.

^hunning the smoke, he fell in the fire.

^uos insequens lepores neutrum capit.

^ast and loose is no possession.

^pem pretio non emo.

(...) will not buy a pig in a yoke.

^uuius non semper fert secures.

^uery day is not yesterday.

^emper agricola in nouum annum Dives.

(...) hope to be an honest man yet.

^ucleum amisi reliqui pignori putamina.

(...) believed to have got the Cat with two tails.

(...) caducum parietem inclinare.

^o hope in a broken bow.

^^edum est and mansisse diu vacuumque redisse.

^ou should not come for an errand, and go home with your finger on your
cheek.

Jupiter haud quicquid animo corceperit illud perficit exemplo.

No man can have all his wishes.

Saepe etiam est olitor valde opportuna locutus.

A fool speaks truth at some time.

Nam illi iam non sunt, aut qui sunt, mali.

It is not now as it wont to be, or the case is altered.

Fuere quondam strenui Milesij.

There is many father worse, few father better.

Fuimus Troes.

We were sometime better then we are now.

Arabicus tibicen.

They may ^eare (...) where they cannot see him.

Dodonaeum aes.

He can never hold his lips together.

Non est eius^em and multa, and oportuna dicere.

Where much is spoken, part is spoiled.

Os infrene.

An evil hung tongue.

Sicoruus poscit tacitus pasci.

He that shows his goods longs to be robbed

Citra vinum temulentia.

He is overcome with vices.

Ad vinum desectus.

He can well speak at the Table head.

FINIS.

