Two dyaloges written in laten by the famous clerk D. Erasmus of Roterodame /
one called Polyphemus or the gospeller / the other dysposyng of things and
names / translated in to Englysh by Edmonde Beck.

And prynted at Cantorbury in saint Paul's paryshe by John^ Mychell.

The preface to the Reader.
LVcius Anneus Seneca among many other pratie saienges (gentle reder) has
this also, which in my judgment is as true as it is witty. Roga^do cogit qui
rogat superior. And in effect is thus much to say, if a man's superior or his
better desire any thing, he might as well co^ma^de it by authority as ones to
desire it.

A gentleman a nere cosyn of mine, but much nerer in fryndshyp, eftesones did
instant and move me to translate these two dyaloges following, to whose
ge^tlenes I am so much obliged, indetted and bound, that he might well have
commanded me to this and more pains: to whom I do not only owe service, but
my self also. And in acco^plysshynge of his most honest request (partly
because I would not the most inhumane fawte of Ingratitude should worthily be
imputed to me, and that I might in this thing also (according to my bounden
duty) gratify my friend) I have hassard my self in these dangerous days,
where many are so capcyous, some prone and ready to malygne and deprave, and
few whose ears are not so festidious, tender, and ready to please, that in
very tryfles and things of small importance, yet exact dylygence and
exquisite judgment is looked for and required, of them which at this present
will attempt to translate any book be it that the matter be never so base. But
what diligence I have enployed in the translacio^ hereof I refer it to the
judgment of the learned sort, which co^ferrynge my translacion with the laten
dyaloges, I dowte not will condone and pardone my boldness, in that that I
challenge the semblable liberty which the translatours of this time justly
challenge. For some here tofore submyttyng them self to seruytude, have little
respect to the obseruacyo^ of the thing which in translacyo^ is of all other
most necessary and requisite, that is to say, to render the sense and the very
meaning of the author, not so relygyouslie addicte to translate word for
word, for so the sense of the author is oftentimes corrupted and depraved, and
neither the grace of the one tongue nor yet of the other is truly observed or
aptly expressed. The learned knows yt every tongue has his peculyer
propriety, phrase, manner of locucion, enargies and veheme^cie, which so aptly
in any other to^g can not be expressed. If I shall perceive this my simple
doing to be thankefully taken, and in good part accepted, it shall encorage
me hereafter to attempt the translacio^ of some books dysposing of matters
both delectable, fruitful, and expedient to be known, by the grace of God,
who gyuynge me quyetnes of mind, liberty, and abylytie, shall not desyste to
communicate the fruit of my spare hours, to such as are not learned in the laten
tongue: to whom I dedycat the first fruits of this my simple translacyon.

A declaracion of the names.
POliphemus sygnifieth, valyant or noble, and in an other sygnificacion,
talcatyfe or clybbe of tongue. The name of a Giant called Cyclops, having but
one eye in his forhed, of a huge stature and a myghtie personage. And is aplyed
here to sygnifie a great freke or a lubber, as this Poliphemus was, which
being a man of war or a courtyer, had a new testament in his hand, and
looked buselie for some sentence or text of scripture and that Cannius his
companyo^ espied and said to hi^ as follows.

The parsons names are Cannius and Poliphemus.
CAnnius. what hunt Polipheme for here?


Poliphemus. Ask ye what I hunt for here, and yet ye se me have neither
dogs, dart, Iauelyn, nor huntyng staff.


Cannius. Paraduenture ye hunt after some praty nymphe of the covert.


Poliphemus. By my troth and well coniectured, behold what a goodly pursenet,
or a hay I have here in my hand.


Cannius. Benedicite, what a strange sight is this, me think I se Bachus in a
lions skin, Poliphemus with a book in his hand. This is a dog in a doblet, a
sow with a sadle, of all that ever I se it is a non decet.


Poliphe. I have not only painted and garnysshed my book with saffron, but
also I have lymmed it with Sinople, asapherida, redleed, vermilo^, and byse.


Can. It is a warlyke book, for it is furnisshed with knottes, tassils plates,
claspes, and brazen bullyons.


Poliphe. Take the book in your hand and look within it.


Canni. I se it weary well. Truly it is a praty book, but me thynkes ye have not
yet trymmed it sufficiently for all your cost ye have bestowed upon it.


Poliphe. why what lackes it?


Canni. Thou should have set thine arms upon it.


Poliphemus. what arms I beseech the?


Ca^nius. Mary the heed of Silenus, an old iolthed drunkard totynge out of a
hoggeshed or a tun, but in good ernest, whereof does your book dyspose or
entreat? does it teach the art and craft to drink a duetaunt?


Poli. Take heed in gods name what ye say lest ye bolt out a blasphemy
before ye be ware.


Ca^nius. why bydde ye me take heed what I say? is there any holy matt in the
book?


Poli. what man it is the gospel book, I trow there is nothing can be more
holy.


Cannius. God for thy grace what has Poliphemus to do with the gospel?


Poli. Nay why do ye not ask what a christen man has to do with christ?


Cannius. I can not tell but me thynkes a rousty byll or a halbard would become
such a great lubber or a slouyn as thou art a great deal better, for if it
were my chance to mete such one and knew him not upon seeborde, and he looked
so like a knave and a ruffya^ as thou do I would take him for a pirate or a
rouer upon the sea / and if I met such one in the wood for an arrante thief,
and a man murderer.


Poli. yea good sir but the gospel teach us this same lesson, that we should
not judge any person by his look or by his external and outward apparaunce.
For like wise as many times under a graye freers coote a tyrannous mind lies
secretly hyd, eue^ so apolled heed, a crispe or a twyrled berde, a frowninge, a
ferse, or a dogged look, a cappe, or a hat with an oystrich fether, a soldyers
cassocke, a pair of hoof all to cut and manglyd, may cover an euangelycall
mind.


Cannius. why not, mary God forbid else, yea and many times a simple sheep
lies hyd in a wolfes skin, and if a man may credit and believe the fables
of Aesope, an ass may lie secretly unknown by cause he is in a lions skin.


Poliphe. Nay I know him which bears a sheep upon his heed, and a fox in
his breast, to whom I would wysshe with all my heart that he had as white and as
favorable friends as he has black eyes. And I would wysshe also that he were
as well guylt over and over as he has a color mete to take guyltynge.


Canni. If ye take him to were a sheep upon his heed, that wears a cappe of
woll, how grievously than art thou lodyn, or what an exceeding heavy burden
bear thou then I pray the which bear a hoole sheep and an ostryche to
upon thy heed? But what say ye to hi^ does not he more folyssly which bears
a byrd upon his heed, and an ass in his breast.


Poliphemus. There ye nypped and taunted me in deed.


Cannius. But I would say this geere did wondrous well if this gospel book did
so adourne the with virtue as thou have adourned lymmed, and gorgiously
garnysshed it with many gay goodly glystryng ornaments. Mary sir thou have set
it forth in his right colors in deed, would to god it might so adourne the
with good co^dicio^s that thou myghtest ones learn to be an honest man.


Poli. There shall be no defaute in me, I tell you I will do my diligence.


Can. Nay there is no doubt of that, there shall be no more fault in you now I
dare say then was wont to be.


Poli. Yea but (your tarte tauntes, and your churlysshe checkes, and
raylynges set aside) tell me I pray the this one thing, do you thus disprayse,
condemn, or find fault with them which caryeth about with them the new
testament or the gospel book?


Canni. No by my faith do I not good praty man.


Poliphe. Call ye me but a praty one and I am higher then you by ye length of a
good asses heed.


Can. I think not fully so much if the ass stretch forth his ears, but go
to it skyllis no matter of that, let it pass, he that bare Christ upon his
back was called Christofer, and thou which bear the gospel book about
with the shall for Poliphemus be called the gospeller or the gospel bearer.


Polip. Do not you count it an holy thing to carry about with a man the new
testament?


Ca^ni. why no sir by my troth do I not, except thou grant the very asses to
be holy to.


Poli. How can an ass be holy?


Cannius. For one ass alone is able to bear three hundredth such books, and I
think such a great lubber as thou art were strong inoughe to bear as great
a burden, and if thou had a hansome packesadle set upon thy back.


Poliphe. And yet for all your jesting it is not against good reason to say
that ye ass was holy which bore christ.


Cannius. I do not envy you man for this holiness for I had as lefe you had
that holiness as I, and if it please you to take it I will give you an holy and
a religious relyke of the self same ass which christ rode upon, and when ye
have it ye may kiss it lycke it and cull it as often as ye list.


Poli. Mary sir I thank you, ye can not give me a more thanckefull gift nor
do me a greatter pleasure, for that ass withouten any fail was made as holy
as any ass could be by the touching of christ's body.


Cannius. Undoubted they touched christ's body also which stroke and buffeted
christ.


Poliphe. yea but tell me this one thing I pray the in good ernest. Is it not
a great sign of holiness in a man to carry about the gospel book or the new
testament?


Cannius. It is a token of holiness in deed if it be done without hypocrysie, I
mean if it be done without dissimulacion / and for that end, intent and
purpose, that it should be done for.


Poliphe. What the devil and a morten tellest thou a man of war of
hypocrisy, away with hypocrisy to the monks and the freers.


Cannius. Yea but because ye say so, tell me first I pray you what ye call
hypocrisy.


Po. When a man pretendis another thing outwardly then he meanis secretly in
his mind.


Cannius. But what does the bearing about of the new testament sygnyfie.
Does it not betoken that thy life should be conformable to the gospel which
thou carryest about with the.


Poli. I think well it does.


Cannius. Well then when thy life is not conformable to the book, is not that
plain hypocrisy.


Poliph. Tell me the^ what you call the true carienge of the gospel book
about with a man.


Ca^ni. So^me men bear it about with them in their hands (as the gray freers
were wont to bear the rule of saint Fraunces) and so the porters of London,
Asses and horses may bear it as well as they. And there be some other that
carry the gospel in their mouths only, and such have no other talk but al of
christ and his gospel, and that is a very point of a pharysey. And some other
carrye it in their minds. But in mine opynion he bears the gospel book as he
should do which both bears it in his hand, co^munes of it with his mouth
when occasyon of edyfyenge of his neighbor when conuenyent oportunytie is
mynystred to him, and also bears it in his mind and thynkes upon it with his
heart.


Poli. Yea thou art a merry fellow, where shall a man find such black swa^nes?


Cannius. In every cathedral church, where there be any deacons, for they
bear the gospel book i^ their hand, they sing the gospel aloude, sometime in
a lofte that the people may hear the^, although they do not understand it,
and their minds are upon it when they sing it.


Polphe. And yet for all your saying all such deacons are no saynctes that
bear the gospel so in their minds.


Cannius. But lest ye play the subtyle and capcious sophystryar with me I will
tell you this one thing before. No man can bear the gospel in his mind but
he must needs love it from the bothum of his heart, no man loves it inwardly
and from the bothu^ of his heart but he must needs declare and express the
gospel in his lyuinge, outward manners, and behauour.


Poli. I can not skyll of your subtyle reasonynges, ye are to fine for me.


Can. The^ I will commune with you after a grosser manner, and more plainly. if
thou dyddest bear a tankard of good Reynyshe wine upon thy shulders only,
what other thing were it to the then a burden.


Poliphe. It were none other thing truly, it is no great pleasure to bear
wine.


Cannius. What and if thou drank asmoche as thou coudest well hold in thy
mouth, after the manner of a gargarisme and spyt it out again.


Po. That would do me no good at all, but take me not with such a fault I
trow, for the wine is very bad and if I do so.


Canni. But what and if thou drink thy skin full as thou art wont to do,
when thou come where good wine is.


Poliphe. Mary there is nothing more godly or heuynly.


Cannius. It warmes you at the stomach, it settes your body in a heat, it
makes you look with a ruddy face, and sets your heart upon a merry pynne.


Poliphe. That is suerly so as ye say in deed.


Canni. The gospel is such a like thing of all this world, for after that
it has ones persed and entered in the veins of the mind it alters,
transposeth, and clean changes vpsodowne the whole state of man, and
changes him clean as it were into a another man.


Polip. Ah ha, now I wot wherabout ye be, belyke ye think that I live not
according to the gospel or as a good gospeller should do.


Cannius. There is no man can dyssolue this question better then thy self.


Poli. Call ye it dissoluynge? Nay and if a thing come to dyssoluynge give me
a good sharp axe in my hand and I trow I shall dyssolue it well inoughe.


Canni. What would thou do, I pray the, and if a man should say to thy teth
thou lie falsely, or else call the by thy right name knave in english.


Poli. What would I do quod he, that is a question in deed, mary he should
feel the wayghte of a pair of churlyshe fystes I warrant the.


Canni. And what and if a man gave you a good cuffe upon the ear that should
way a pound?


Poliphe. It were a well given blow that would advantage him.xx. by my
truth and he escaped so he might say he rose upon his right side, but it were
maruayle and I cut not of his head hard by his shulders.


Canni. Yea but good follow thy gospel book teaches the to give gentle
answers, and fair words again for foul, and to him that gives the a blow
upon the right cheke to hold forth the lift.


Poliphe. I do remember I have red such a thing in my book, but ye must
pardone me for I had quyte forgotten it.


Can. Well go to, what say ye to prayer I suppose ye pray very often.


Poli. That is even as very a touch of a pharesey as any can be.


Cannius. I grant it is no less the^ a point of a pharesey to pray long
and faynedly under a color or pretense of holiness, that is to say when a man
prays not from the bothum of his heart but with the lyppes only and from the
tethe outward, and that in opyn places where great resort of people is, because
they would be seen. But thy gospel book teaches the to pray contynually, but
so that thy prayer come from the bothu^ of the heart.


Poli. Yea but yet for all my saying I pray sumtyme.


Can. When I beseech the when you art a sleep?


Poli. When it comes in to my mind, ones or twyse may chance in a weke.


Can. what prayer say thou?


Poliphe. The lords prayer, the Pater noster.


Canni. How many times over?


Poli. Onis, and I trow it is often inoughe, for the gospel forbyddeth often
repetynge of one thing.


Canni. Can ye say your pater noster through to an end and have your mind
runnynge upon nothing else (...) all that while?


Poli. By my truth and ye will believe me I never yet assayed nor proved
whether I could do it or no. But is it not sufficient to say it with my
mouth?


Can. I can not tell whether it be or no. But I am sure god here us not except
we pray from the bothum of our heart. But tell me another thing I will ask
the. Do thou not fast very often?


Poli. No never in all my life time and if it were not for lack of meat.


Can. And yet thy book alowes and commendes hyghly both fasting and prayer.


Polip. So could I allow them to but that my belly can not well affare nor
away with fasting.


Cannius. Yea but Paul says they are not the servants of Jesus Christ
which serve their belly and make it their god. Do you eat flesh every day?


Po. No never when I have none to eat, but I never refuse it when it is set
before me, and I never ask question not for conscience but for my belly sake.


Can. Yea but these strong sturdy sides of such a chuffe and a lobbynge lobye
as thou art would be fed well inoughe with hay and bark of trees.


Poliphe. Yea but christ said, that which enters in at the mouth defyleth
not the man.


Canni. That is to be understand thus if it be measurably taken, and without
the offendinge of our christian brother. But Paul the disciple of christ had
rather peryshe and sterue with hunger then onys to offend his weyke brothren
with his catynge, and he exhorts us to follow his example that in all things
we may please all men.


Poli, What tell ye me of Paul, Paul is Paul and I am I.


Cannius. Do you gladly help to releue the poor and the indygent with your
goods?


Poli. How can I help them which have nothing to give them, and scant
inoughe for my self.


Cannius. ye might spare somthynge to help the^ with if thou would play the
good husband in living more war^^^, in moderatynge thy superfluous expenses,
and in falling to thy work lustely.


Poliphemus. Nay then I were a fool in deed, a penny worth of ease is ever worth
a penny, and now I have found so much pleasure in ease that I can not fall to
no labor.


Canni. Do you keep the commandments of god?


Polip. Now ye appose me, keep the commandments quod he, that is a pain in
deed.


Cannius. Art thou sorry for thy sins and thine offenses, do thou ernestly
repent the for the^.


Poliphemus. Christ has paid the ransom of sin and satisfied for it
already.


Cannius. How prouest thou then that thou love the gospel and fauoris the
word of god as thou bear men in hand thou do.


Poliphemus. I will tell you that by and by, and I dare say you will confess
no less your self then that I am an ernest fauorer of the word when I have
told you ye tale. There was a certain gray friar of the order of saint
Fraunces with us which never ceased to babble and rail against the new
testament of Erasmus, I chaunsed to talk with the ge^tylman pryuatly where no
man was present but he and I, and after I had communed awhyle with him I caught
my friar by the polled pate with my left hand and with my right hand I drew
out my daggar and I pomelled the knave friar welfauardly about his skonce that
I made his face as swollen and as puffed as a puddynge.


Cannius. what a tale is this that thou tellest me.


Poliphemus. How say you is not this a good and a sufficient prove that I fauer
the gospel. I gave him absolucion before he departed out of my hands with this
new testament thryse laid upon his pate as hard as I might drive yt I made
three bunches in his heed as bygge as three eggs in the name of the father, the
sone, and the holy ghost.


Can. Now by my troth this was well done and like a right gospeller of these
days. ^^^^ly this is as they say to dyffende the gospel with the gospel.


Poliphe. I ^^t another graye friar of the same curry she covent, that knave
never had done in raylynge against Erasmus, so sone as I had espied him I was
styrred and moved with the brenninge zele of the gospel that in thretenyng of
him I made him knele down upon his knees and cry Erasmus mercy and desired
me to forgive him, I may say to you it was high time for him to fall down
upon his marybones, and if he had not done it by and by I had my halbarde up
ready to have given him betwyxt the neck and the head, I looked as grymme as
modie Mars when he is in furyous fume, it is true that I tell you, for there
was inoughe saw the friar and me if I would make a lie.


Cannius. I maruayle the friar was not out of his wit. But to return to our
purpose again, do thou live chastely?


Poliphemus. Peradventure I may do here after when I am more stryken in age.
But shall I confess the truth to the?


Canni. I am no priest man, therefore if thou wylt be shryuen thou must seek a
priest to whom thou may be lawfully confessed.


Poliphe. I am wont still to confess my self to god, but I will confess thus
much to the at this time I am not yet become a perfyte gospeller or an
euangelical man, for I am but yet as it were one of ye common people, ye know
well perde we gospellers have iiii. gospels written by the.iiii. euangelystes,
and such gospellers as I am hunt busely, and chefely for.iiii. things that we
may have. Vnde. to provide dayntie fare for the belly, that nothing be
lacking to that part of the body which nature has placed under the belly,
ye wot what I mean, and to obtain and procure such living that we may live
welthely and at pleasure without ^arke and care. And finally that we may do
what we list without check or controlment, if we gospellars lack none of all
these things we cry and sing for joy, among our full cups Io Io we
tryumphe and are wonderful frolycke, we sing and make as merry as cup and can,
and say the gospel is a live again Christ rayneth.


Cannius. This is a life for an Epycure or a god belly and for no evangelical
person that professes the gospel.


Poli. I deny not but that it is so as ye say, but ye know well that god is
omnipotent and can do al things, he can turn us when his will is suddenly in
to other manner of men.


Cannius. So can he transform you in to hogs and swyne, the which may
sooner be done I judge the^ to change you in to good men for ye are half
swynyshe and hoggyshe already, your living is so beastly.


Poliphe. Hold thy peace man would to god there were no men that did more hurt
in the world then swyne, bullockes, asses, and camelles. A man may se many men
now adays more crueller then lions, more rauenynge the^ wolves, more lecherous
then sparous, and that byte worse then mad dogs, more noysom the^ snakes,
vepers and adders.


Cannius. But now good Polipheme remember and look upon thy self for it is
high time for the to lay a side thy beastly living, and to be turned from a
brute and a savage beast in to a man.


Poliphemus. I thank you good neighbor Cannius for by saint Mary I think
your counsel is good / for the prophets of this time says the world is
almost at an end, and we shall have domes day (as they call it) shortly.


Cannius. We have therefore more need to prepare our selves in a redines against
that day, and that with as much speed as may be possible.


Poliphemus. as for my part I look and wait still every day for the mighty
hand and power of christ.


Cannius. Take heed therefore that thou, when christ shall lay his mighty hand
upon the be as tender as wax, that according to his eternal will he may
frame and fashyon the with his hand. But whereby I pray the does these
prophets conjecture and gather that the world is almost at an end.


Poliphe. Because men (they say) do the self same thing now adays that
they did, and were wont to do which were living in the world a little while
before the deluge or Noyes floode. They make solemn feasts, they banquet,
they quaffe, they booll, they bybbe, they riot men mary, women are married, they
go a catterwallynge and horehuntinge, they bye, they sell, they lend to usury,
and borowe upon usury, they build, kings keep war one against another,
priests study how they may get many benefyces and promocio^s to make them
self rich and increase their worldly substance, the diuynes make insolible
sillogismus and imperfect arguments, they gather conclusyons, monks and
freers ru^ne, at rouers over all the world, the common people are in a mase or a
hurl burle ready to make insurrections, and to conclude breuelie there lackes
no evil misery nor myschefe, neither ho^ger, thyrst fellonie, robbery,
war, pestilence, sedicio^, derth, and great scarsytie and lack of all good
things. And how say you do not all these things argue and sufficiently
prove that the world is almost at an end?


Cannius. Yea but tell me I pray the of all these hoole hepe of euyls and
miseries which greueth the most?


Poliphemus. Which thynkes thou, tell me thy fancy and conjecture?


Cannius. That the Devil (god save us) may dance in thy purse for ever a
cross that thou have to keep hi^ forth.


Poliphe. I pray god I dye and if thou have not hit the nail upon the head.
Now as chances I come newly from a knotte of good company where we have
drunk hard every man for his part, and I am not behind with mine, and
therefore my wit is not half so fresh as it will be, I will dyspute of the
gospel with the when I am sobre.


Canni. When shall I se the sobre?


Poli. When I shall be sobre.


Cannius. When will that be?


Poliph. When thou shall seem, in the mean season god be with you gentle
Cannius and well mot you do.


Cannius. And I wyshe to you again for my part that thou ware in deed as
valiant or pusaunt a fellow as thy name sounds.


Poliphe. And because ye shall lose nothing at my hand with wyshynge I pray
god that Cannius may never lack a good can or a stoop of wine or bear,
whereof he had his name.


FINIS
The dialoge of things and names. A declaracion of the names.
BEatus, is he which has abundance of al things that is good, and is
parfyte in all things commendable or praise worthy or to be desired of a good
man. Sometime it is taken for fortunate, rich, or noble. Bonifacius, fair,
full of favor or well favored.

The parsons names are Beatus and Bonifacius.
BEatus. God save you master Boniface.


Bonifacius. God save you and god save you again gentle Beatus. But I would god
both we were such, and so in very deed as we be called by name, that is to say
thou rich and I fair.


Beatus. Why do you think it nothing worth at al to have a goodly glorious
name.


Bonifacius. Truly me think it is of no valor or little good worth, onles a
man have the thing it self which is sygnified by the name.


Beatus. Yea you may well think your pleasure, but I am assured that the most
part of all mortal men be of another mind.


Bonifa. It may well be I do not deny that they are mortal, but suerly I do not
believe that they are me^, which are so beastly minded.


Bea. Yes good sir and they be men to lay your life, unless ye think camels
and asses do walk about under the figure and form of men.


Boni. Mary I can sooner believe that then that they be men which esteem and
pass more upon the name, then the thing.


Bea. I grant in certain kinds of things most men had rather have the
thing then the name, but in many things it is otherwise and clean contrary.


Bo. I can not well tell what ye mean by that


Bea. And yet the example of this matter is apparent or sufficiently declared
in us two. Thou art called Bonifacius and thou have in deed the thing whereby
thou bear thy name. yet if there were no other remedy but either thou must
lack the one or the other, whether had you rather have a foul and deformed
face or else for Boniface be called Maleface or horner?


Boni. Believe me I had rather be called foul Thersites then have a monstrous
or a deformyd face, whether I have a good face or no I can not tell.


Bea. And even so had I for if I were rich and there were no remedy but that I
must either forgoo my richesse, or my name I had rather be called Irus which
was a poor beggars name then lack my riches.


Boni. I agree to you for asmoch as ye speak the troth, and as you think.


Bea. Judge all them to be of the same mind that I am of which are endued
with health or other commodities and qualities appartaynynge to the body.


Boni. That is very true.


Bea. Yea but I pray the consider and mark how many men we se which had
rather have the name of a learned and a holy man, then to be well learned,
virtuous, and holy in deed.


Boni. I know a good sort of such men for my part.


Bea. Tell me thy fa^tasie I pray the do not such men pass more upon the name
then the thing?


Boni. Methynke thy do.


Bea. If we had a logician here which could well and clarkelie defyne what
were a king, what a bishop, what a magistrate, what a philosopher is,
peradventure we should find some among these jolly fellows which had rather have
the name then the thing.


Boni. Surely and so think


I. If he be a king which by law and equity regardes more the commodity of
his people then his own lucre / if he be a bishop which always is careful
for the lords flock committed to his pastoral charge / if he be a magistrate
which frankelie and of good will does make prouysyon, and does all thing for
the common welthes sake / and if he be a philosopher which passing not upon
the goods of this world, only gives him self to attayn to a good mind, and
to lead a virtuous life.


Bea. Lo thus ye may perseyue what a nombre of semblable examples ye may
collecte and gether.


Boni. Undoubted a great sort.


Bea. But I pray the tell me will you say that all these are no men.


Boni. Nay I fear rather lest in so saying it should cost us our lives, and
so might we our selves shortelye be no men.


Bea. If man be a reasonable creature, how far dyffers this from all good
reason, that in commodities apertayning to the body (for so they deserve rather
to be called then goodness) and in outward gifts which dame fortune geues and
takes away at her pleasure, we had rather have the thing then the name, and
in the true and only goodness of the mind we pass more upon the name then the
thing.


Boni. So god help me it is a corrupt and a preposterours judgment, if a man
mark and consider it well.


Bea. The self same reason is in contrary things.


Boni. I would gladly know what ye mean by that.


Bea. We may judge likewise the same of the names of things to be eschued,
and incommodites which was spoken of things to be dissyred and co^modites.


Boni. Now I have considered the things well, it apereth to be even so as ye
say in deed.


Bea. It should be more feared of a good prince to be a tyrant in deed then to
have the name of a tyrant. And if an evil bishop be a thief and a robber,
then we should not so greatly abhor and hate the name as the thing.


Boni. Either so it is or so it should be.


Bea. Now gather you of the rest as I have done of the prince and the bishop.


Boni. Me thynkes I understand this gere wonderouse well.


Bea. Do not all men hate the name of a fool or to be called a moome, a sotte,
or an ass?


Boni. Yeas as much as they do any one thing.


Bea. And how say you were not he a stark fool that would fish with a golden
bayte, that would prefer or esteem glass better then precious stones, or
which loves his horse or dogs better then his wife and his children?


Boni. He were as wise as waltoms calfe, or madder then jack of Redyng.


Bea. And be not they as wise which not assygned, chosen, nor yet ones
appointed by the magistrates, but upon their own heed adventure to run to
the wars for hoope of a little gain, ieoperdynge their bodies and daungerynge
their souls? Or how wise be they which busy the^ self to get, gleyne, and
reepe to gyther, goods and riches when they have a mind destitute and lackyng
all goodness? Are not they also even as wise that go gorgyously apparylled, and
buyldes goodly sumptuous houses, when their minds are not regarded but neglect
filthy and with all kind of vice foul corrupted? And how wise are they
which are careful diligent and busy, about the health of their body
neglecting and not minding at all their soul, in danger of so many deedly
sins? And finally to conclude how wise be they which for a little short
transytorye pleasure of this life deserve everlasting torments and
punyshementes?


Boni. Even reason forseth me to grant that they are more then fra^tyke and
folyshe.


Bea. Yea but although all the whole world be full of such fools, a man can
scaselye find one which can abide the name of a fool, and yet they deserve
to be called so for asmoche as they hate not the thing.


Boni. Suerly it is even so as ye seye.


Bea. Ye know also how the names of a liar and a thief are abhorred and hated
of all men.


Boni. They are spyteful and odious names, and abhorred of all men, and not
with out good cause why.


Bea. I grant that, but although to commyt adultery be a more wicked sin
then theft yet for all that some men rejoice and show them self glad of that
name, which would be ready by and by to draw their swerdes and fight with a
man that would or durst call them thieves.


Boni. It is true there are many would take it evil as you say in deed.


Bea. And now it is commyn to that point that though there are many
unthriftiness and spend als which consume their substance at the wine and upon
harlottes, and yet so willing to continewe openly that all the world wonders
at them, yet they will be offended and take peper in the noose if a man should
call them ruffyans or baudy knaves.


Boni. Such fellows think they deserve praise for the thing, and yet for
all that they can not abide the name dew to the thing which they deserve.


Bea. There is scarslye any name among us more intolerable or worse can be
abydden then to he called a liar or a lyeng fellow.


Boni. I have known some or this which have killed men for such a spytefull
word as that is.


Bea. Yea yea but would god such hasty fellows did as well abhor the thing
and hate lienge as well as to be called liars, was it never thy chance to be
dysceyued of any man which borowinge money of the appoyntynge the a certain
day to repaye the said money and so performyd not his appointment nor kept his
day?


Boni. Ye as many times (god knows) and yet has he sworn many a grievous
oath and that not one time but many times.


Bea. Peradventure he would have been so honest as to have paid it and if he
had had wherewith.


Boni. Nay that is not so for he was able inoughe, but as he thought it better
never to pay his dettes.


Bea. And what call you this in english, is it not plain lyenge?


Boni. Yes as plain as Dunstable way, there can not be a louder lie then this
is.


Bea. Durst you be so bold to pulle one of these good detters of yours by the
sleue and say thus to him, why have thou dysceyued me so many times and broken
promise with me, or to talk to him in plain english, why do thou make me
so many lies?


Boni. Why no sir by my truth durst I not, except I were minded before to
change half a dosen dry blows with him.


Bea. Does not masons, Brekelayers, Carpenters, Smythes, Goldsmithes,
Taylours, disceyue and disapoynt us after the like manner daily promising to
do your work such a day and such a day without any fail, or further
delay, and yet for all that they parforme not their promise although it
stand the never somoche upon hand, or that thou should take never so much
profit by it.


Boni. This is a wondrous and strange unshamefast knauerye of all that ever I
hard of. But and ye speak of breakers of promise then ye may reken amongst
them lawyers and atturneys at the law, which will not stycke to promise or
bear you in hand that they will be diligent and ernest in the furtherau^ce
and spedie expedicion of your suit.


Bea. Reken quod he, nay ye may reken six hundredth men's names beside these
of sundry faculties and occupacions which will promise more by an ynche of a
candle then they will perform by a whole pound.


Boni. Why and ye call this lyenge all the world is full of such lyenge.


Bea. Ye se also likewise that no man can abide to be called thief, and yet all
men do not abhor the thing so greatly.


Boni. I would gladly have you to declare your mind in this more plainly and
at large


Bea. What difference is there between him which steals thy money forth of
thy cofer, and him which forsweareth and falsely denies that which thou
committed to his custody to be reserved and safely kept for thy use only, or
to such time as thou art minded to call for it again.


Boni. There is as they say neither barrel better hearing, but that in my
judgment he is the falser knave of the twain which robbes a man that puttes
his confidence and trust in him.


Bea. yea but how few men are there now adays living which are content
to restore again that which they were put in trust to keep, or if they
deliver it again it is so dymynysshed, gelded, nypped, and pynched, that it is
not delivered whollye, but some thing cleues in their fyngers, that the
proverb may have place where the horse walloweth there lies some hears.


Boni. I think but a few that does otherwise.


Bea. And yet for all that there is none of al these that ca^ abide it ones to
be called thief, and yet forsothe they hate not the thing so greatly.


Boni. That is as true as the gospel.


Bea. Consider me now and mark I beseech the how the goods of orphans,
pupylls, wards, and fatherless children be co^munely ordered and used, how
wylles and testamentes be executed and performed, how legacyes and bequethes be
communelye paid, Nay how much cleueth and hangs fast in the fyngers of
the executors or with them that mynyster and in termedle with the goods of the
testatours.


Boni. Many times they retain and keep in their hands all together.


Bea. Yea they love to play the thief well inoughe, but they love nothing
worse then to here of it.


Boni. That is very true.


Bea. How little dyffers he from a thief which boroweth money of one and other
and so runs in debt, with this intent and purpose that if he may escape so
or find such a crafty color or a subtyle shyft, he intends never to pay
that he owes.


Boni. Paraduenture he may be called warer or more craftier the^ a thief is in
deed but no point better, for it is hard chosyng of a better where there is
never a good of them both.


Bea. yea but although there be in every place a great nombre of such
makeshyftes and slypper merchants yet the starkest knave of the^ all can not
abide to be called thief.


Boni. God only knows every man's heart and mind, and therefore they are
called of us men that are run in debt or fer behind the hand, but not
thieves for that sounds vnswetely and like a plain song note.


Bea. What skyllys it how they be called among men if they be thieves before
god. And where you say that god only knows every man's heart and mind, even
so every man knows his own mind, whether in his words and doings he
entende fraud, couyn, dysceyte, and theft or no. But what say ye by him
which when he owes more then he is worth, will not stycke to lashe
prodygallye and set the cock upon the hoope, and yet if he have any money at
all left to spend that away vnthryftely, and when he has played the part
of a knauyshe spendall in one city deludinge and disceyuyng his creditours,
ronnes out of this country and gets him to some other good town, and there
seeking for strangers and now acquayntau^ce whom he may likewise begyle, yea
and plays many such like parts and shameful shifts. I pray the tell me
does not such a greek declare euydentlye by his crafty dealing and false
demeanor, what mind is he of?


Boni. yes suerly as euydentlye as can be possible. But yet such fellows are
wont to color and cloak their doings under a crafty pretense.


Bea. With what I beseech the?


Boni. They say to owe much and to diverse persons is communely used of great
men, yea and of kings also as well as of them, and therefore they that intend
to be of that disposycyon will bear out to the hard hedge the port of a
gentylman and so they will be taken and esteemed for gentilmen of the commune
people.


Bea. A gentylman and why or to what intent and purpose a gentylman?


Boni. It is a strange thing to be spoken how much they think it is mete
for a gentylnan or a horseman to take upon him.


Bea. By what equytie, authority, or laws.


Boni. By none other but by the self same laws that the Admiralles of the
sees challenge a propriety in all such things as are cast upon the shoore by
wrack, although the right owner come forth and challenge his own goods.
And also by the same laws that some other men say all is theyrs whatsoever is
found about a thief or a robber when he is taken.


Boni Such laws as these are the arrantest thieves that are might make
themselves.


Bea. yea and ye may be sure they would gladly with al their hearts i^ their bodies
make such laws if they could maintain them or were of power to se them
executed, and they might have some thing to lay for their excuse if they
could proclayme opyn war before they fell to robbynge.


Boni. But who gave that pryuylege rather to a horseman then to a foteman, or
more to a gentylman the^ to a good yeman.


Bea. The favor that is showed to men of war, for by such shyftes and thus
they practyse before to be good men of war that they may be more ready and
hansome to spoil their enemies when they shall encounter with the^.


Boni. I think Pyrhus did so exercise and break his young souldyers to the
wars.


Bea. No not Pyrrhus but the Lacedaemonians did.


Boni. Mary sir hang up such practysers or soldyers and their practisyng to.
But how come they by the name of horsemen or gentylmen that they usurp such
a great prerogatyue?


Bea. Some of them are gentylme^ borne and it comes to them by auncestrie,
some bye it by the means of maystrys money, and other some get it by
certain shyftes.


Boni. But may every man that will and list come by it by shyftes?


Bea. Yea why not, every man may be a gentylman now adays very well and if
their conditions and manners be according.


Boni. What manners or conditions must such one have I beseech the?


Bea. If he be occupied about no goodness, if he can ruffle it and swashe in
his satens and his silks and go gorgiously apparelled, if he can ratle in his
rings upon the fyngers ends, if he can play the ruffyan and the horemonger
and keep a gaye hoore gallantlye, if he be never well at ease but when he is
playenge at the dyse, if he be able to match as much an vnthryfte as him
self with a new pair ^^^rdes, if he spend his time like an ^^^cure upon
bankettinge, sumptuous fare, and all kind of pleasures, if he talk of no
rascalles nor beggars, but brag, bost, face, brace, and crake of castelles,
towers, and skyrmysshes, and if all his talk be of the wars and blody
battles, and play the part of crackinge Thraso thoroughly, such gaye greeks,
lusty brutes and ionkers may take upon them to be at defyaunce with whom they
will and list, though the gentylman have never a foot of land to live upon.


Boni. Call ye them horsemen. Mary sir such horsemen are well worthy to ride
upon the gallows, these are gentylmen of the Iebet of all that ever I have
hard of.


Bea. But yet there be not afewe such in that part of Germany called Nassen
or Hessen.


FINIS
Translated by Edmonde Berke And prynted at Cantorbury in saint Paul's parish
by John^ Mychell.


