A merry Dialogue, declaringe the propertyes of shrowde shrewes, and honest
wives, not only very pleasant, but also not a little profitable: made by ye
famous clerk D. Erasmus Roterodamus. Translated in to English.

Anno. M.CCCCC. IVII.

EUlalia. God speed, and a thousand mine old acqueinta^ce. xantippa.


xan. As many again, my dear heart.


Eulali. me seem is ye ar waxe^ much fair now of late.


Eula. Say you so? give you me a mock at the first dash.


xan. Nay verily but I take you so.


Eula. Happily mi new gown makes me to look fayrer then I should do.


xan. Sothe you say, I have not seen a mynioner this many days, I reken it
English cloth.


Eu. It is english stuff and dyed in Uenis.


xan. It is softer then sylke what an orient purpel color here is who gave
you so rich a gift.


Eu. How should honest women come by their gere? but by their husbands.


xa^. Happy art thou that has such an husband, but I would to god for his
passion, that I had married an husband of clowts, when I had married col my good
man.


Eula. Why say, ye so. I pray you, are you at odds now.


xa^. I shall never be at one with him ye se how beggarly I go. I have not an hole
smock to put on my back, and he is well content with all: I pray god I never
come in heaven and I be not ashamed oftimes to show my head, when I se other
wives how ner and trim they go that are matched with far porer me^ then he is.


Eula. The apparel of honest wives is not in the array of the body, nor in the
tirementes of their head as saint Peter the apostle teaches us (and that I
learned a late at a sermon) but in good living and honest conversation and in
the ornaments of the soul, the common buenes ar painted up, to please many
men's eyes we are tri^me enough if we please our husbands only.


xan. But yet my good man so evil wylling to bestow ought upon his wife,
makes good chere, and lassheth out the dowrye that he had with me no small
pot of wine.


Eulaly, Were upon?


xantipha, whereon him like the best, at the tavern, at the stews, and at the
dyce.


Eulalia Peace say not so.


xan. Well yet thus it is, then when he comes home to me at midnight, long
watched for, he lies row^yng like a sloyne all the leave long night, yea and
now and the^ he all bespeweth his bed, and worse then I will say at this time,


Eulali. Peace thou dyshonesteth thy self, when thou do dishonesteth thy
husband.


xantip. The devil take me body and bones but I had lever lie by a sow with
pigges, then with such a bedfelowe.


Eulali. Do thou not then take him up, well fauoredly for stu^bling.


xantip. As he deserves I spare no tongue.


Eulalia. what does he the^.


xantip. At the first break he took me up vengea^ly, trusting that he should
have shaken me of and put me to scilence with his crabid words.


Eula Came never your hot words unto ha^dstrokes.


xantip. On a time we fell so far at words yt we were almost by y^ ears
together.


Eula what say you woman?


xan. He took up a staff wandryng at me, as the devil had been on him ready
to lay me on the bones.


Eula. Were thou not redye to ron in at the b^ch hole.


xanti. Nay mary I warrant the. I gat me a three foted stole in hand, and he had
but ones laid his littell finger on me, he should not have found me lame. I
would have holden his nose to the grindsto^e


Eulalia. A new found shield, ye wanted but your dystaffe to have made you a
spear.


xantip. And he should not greatly a laughed at his part.


Eulali. Ah my frynde. xantyppa. that way is neither good nor godli,


xantippa what is neither good nor godly. if he will not use me, as his wife: I
will not take him for my husband.


Eulalya. But Paul says that wives should be boner and buxume unto their
husbands with all humylytye, and Peter also bryngethe us an example of Sara,
that called her husband Abrahame, Lord.


xantippa. I know that as well as you the^ ye same paul say that men should
love their wives, as Christ loved his spouse the church let him do his duete I
will do mine.


Eula. But for all that, when the matter is so far that the one must forber
the other it is reason that the woman give place unto the man,


xan. Is he meet to be called my husband that makes me his vnderlynge and
his dry^el?


Eula. But tell me dame xa^tip. Would he never offer the stripes after that


xa^tip. Not a stripe, and there in he was the wyser man for and he had he
should have repented every vain in his heart


Eulali. But thou offered him foul words plenty,


xantip. And will do.


Eula. What does he ye mean season.


xantip. What does he sometime he cowcheth an hogeshed, sometime he does nothing
but stand and laughe at me, other while takethe his Lute whereon is scarslie
three strings layenge on that as fast as he may drive because he would not
here me.


Eula. Does that grieve thee?


xantippa. To beyond home, many a time I have much a do to hold my hands.


Eula. Neighbor.


xantip. Wylt thou give me leave to be plain with the.


xantippa. Good leave have you.


Eula. Be as bold on me again our old acquayntaunce and amite, even from our
chyldhode, would it should be so.


xantippa. Truth you say, there was never woman kind that I favored more
Elaly Whatsoever thy husband be, mark well this, change thou can not, In
the old law, where the devil had cast aboone between the man and the wife,
at the worste way they might be deuorsed, but now that remedy is past, eue^
till death depart you he must needs be thy husband, and thou his wife, xan. Il
mote they thryue and they that taken away that liberty from us


Eulalia. Beware what thou say, it was christ's act.


Xa^. I can evil believe that


Eula. It is none otherwise, now it is best that either of you one being with
an other, ye labor to live at rest and peace.


xantyppa. Why? can I forgive him a new.


Eu. It lies great part in the women, for the orderinge of their husbands.


xan. Leadest thou a merry life with thine.


Eula Now all is well.


xan. Ergo there was somewhat to do at your first metyng


Eula. Never no great busynes, but yet as it, happens now and than between
man and woman, there was foul clouds a loft, that might have made a storm
but that they were over blown with good humanity and wise handlynge. Every
man has his manner and every man has his several aptite or mind, and thinks
his own way best, and if we list not to lie there lives no man without
fault, which if any were else, ywis in wedlock they ought to know and not
utterly hated


xan, you say well.


Eulalya. It happens many times that love days breketh between man and wife,
before ye one be perfitly known unto the other beware of that in any wise, for
when mali^e is ones begone, love is but barely redressed again, namelye, if the
matter grow furthe unto bitter checkes, and shamfull raylinges such things as
are fastened with glue, if a man will all to shake them straight way while
the glue is warm, they soon fall in pieces, but after ye glewe is ones dried up
they cleue together fo fast as any thing, wherefore at the beginning a means
must be made, that love may increase and be made sure between ye man and the
wife, and that is best brought about by gentilnesse and fair condycions, for
the love that beauty only causes, is in a manner but a cherifaire


Xan. But I pray you hartelye tell me, by what pollycy ye brought your good
man to follow your dance.


Eula. I will tell you on this condicyon, that ye will follow me.


xan. I can.


Eula, It is as easy as water if ye ca^ find in your heart to do it, nor yet no
good time past for he is a young man, and you ar but a girl of age, and I trow
it is not a year full sins ye were married.


Xa^. All this is true Eulalia. I will show you then. But you must keep it
secret xantip. with a right good will.


Eula. This was my chyefe care, to keep me always in my housbandes favor,
that there should nothing anger him I observed his appetite and pleasure I
marked the times both when he would be pleased and when he would be all by
shrwed, as they tameth the Elephantes and Lions or such beasts that can not
be won by strength


xantyppa. Such a beast have I at home.


Eula. They that goth unto the Elephantes wear no white garments, nor they
that tame wild bulls, wear no blasynge reeds, for experience teaches, that
such beasts be mad with those colors, like as the Tigers by the sound of
tumbrels be made so wode, that they pluck them self in pieces. Also they yt
break horses have their terms and their soundes their hadlynges, and other
knackes to break their wyldnes, with all. How much more then is it our
duetyes that ye wives to use such crafts toward our husbands with who^ all
our life time will we, nyl we is one house, and one bed.


xantip. Furthwith your tale.


Eula, when I had ones marked there things. I applied my self unto him, well
ware not to displease him.


xantip. How could thou do that.


Eulalya. First in the ouerseynge my householde, which is the very charge and
cure of wives, I waited ever, not only gyuynge head that nothing should be
forgotten or undone, but that althynges should as he would have it, were it
ever so small a trifle.


xa^ wherein.


Eulalia. As thus. If mi good man had a fantasye to this thing, or to that
thing, or if he would have his meat dressed on this fashion, or that fasshion.


xan. But how could thou fasshyon thye self after his will and mind, that
either would not be at home or else be as fresshe as a saulte heryng.


Elali. Abide a while. I come not at that yet, if my husband were very sad at
any time, no time to speak to him. I laughed not nor tryfled him as many a
woman does but I looked rufully and heauyly, for as a glass (if it be a true
stone) represents ever ye physnamy of him that ^oketh in it, so likewise it
becomes a wedded woman always to agree unto the appetite of her husband, that
she be not merry when he murneth nor dysposed to play when he is sad. And if
that at any time he be waiward shrewshaken, either I pacyfye him with fair
words, or I let him alone, until the wind be ouerblowen gyuing him never a
word at al, until the time come that I may either excuse my fault, or tell him
of his. In likewise when he comes home well whitled, I give him gentle and
fair words, so with fair entreatynge I get him to bed.


xantyppa, O careful state of wives, when they must be glad and feign to
follow their husbands minds, be they eluyshe dronken, or doing what
myschiefe they list.


Eula. As who says this gentill dealing serves not for both parties, for
they spyte of their berdes must suffer many things in our demeanor, yet a
time there is, when in a weighty matter it is laufull that the wife tell the
good man his fault, if that it be matter of substance, for at light trifles,
it is best to play byll under wynge.


xantyp. what time is that


Eula. when he is idle, neither angry, pensife, nor ouersen, then betwixt you
two secretly he must be told his fault ge^tly, or rather entreated, that in
this thing or that he play the better husband, to look better to his good
name and fame and to his health and this tellyng must be myxt with merry
conceits and pleasant words many times I make a mean to tell my tale after
this fashyon, that he shall promise me, he shall take no displeasure with my
thing, that I a foolyshe woman shall break unto him, that pertayneth either
to his health worship or wealth. When I have said that I would, I chop
clean from that communication and fall into some other pastime, for this is
all our fautes, neighbor Xantippa, that when we begin ones to chat our
tounges never lie.


Xantip. So men say


Eulalia. Thus was I well ware on, that I never tell my husband his fautes
before company, nor I never carried any co^playnte furthe a doors: the mendes
is sooner made when none knows it but two, and there were any such fault
that might not be well borne nor amended by ye wives tellige, it is more
laudable that the wife make complaynte unto the Parents and kynsfolke of her
husband, then unto her own, and so to moderate her complaynte that she seem not
to hate him but his vice nor let her play all the blabbe, that in some point
vnutered, he may know and love his wives curteysy.


Xantip. She had need be as well learned woman, that should do all this.


Eu. Mary through such demeanoure, we shall sterre our husbands unto like
gentylnesse.


Xan: There be some that cannot be amended with all the gentle handlynge in
the world.


Eula: In faith I thyncke nay, but case there be, mark this well the good man
must be for borne, how soever the game goes, then is it better to have him
always at one point or else more kind and loving throw our gentill
handlinge, then to have him worse and worse throw our cursednesse, what will
you say and I tell you of husbands that has won their wives by such
courtesy, how much more are we bound to use the same toward our husbands.


Xantip. Than shall you tell of one far unlyke unto thine husband.


Eula. I am aquented with a certain gentelman well learned and a very honest
man, he married a young wife, a maiden of.xvii. year old bread and brought up
of a child in the country under her fathers and mother wing (as gentilmen
delight to dwell in the country) to hunt and hawke This young ge^tilman would have
one that were vnbroke^, because he might the sooner break her after his own
mind, he began to enter her in learning singing, and playinge, and by little
and little to use here to repete such things as she hard at sermons, and to
instruct her with other things that might have done her more good in time to
come. This gere, because it was strange unto this young woman which at home
was brought up in all ydelnesse, and with the light communication of her
Fathers servants, and other pastimes, began to wax greuouse and paynfull,
unto her. She with drew her good mind and dylygence and when her husband
called upon her she put y^ finger in the eye, and wept and many times she
would fall down on the ground, beatynge her head against the flower, as one
that would be out of this world. When there was no healpe for this gere, the
good man as though he had been well asked his wife if she would ride into the
country with him a sporting unto her fathers house, so that she granted anon.
When they were co^me^ thither, the gentilman left his wife with her mother and
her sisters he went forth an hunting with his father in law, there between
them two, he showed al together, how that he had hoped to have had a loving
companion to lead his life withal, now he has one that is always blubberynge
and pyninge her self away without any remedy, he prays him to lay to his
hand in amendinge his daughters fautes her father answered yt he had ones
given him his daughter, and if that she would not be rewled by words (a
gods name take Stafforde law) she was his own. Then the ge^tylman said
again, I know that I may do but I had lever have her amended either by your
good counsel or commandment, then to come unto that extreme ways, her
father promised that he would find a remedy. After a dai or two, he espied
time and place when be might be alone with his daughter. Then he looked soureli
upon his daughter, as though he had been horn wood with her, he began to
rehearse how foul a beast she was, how he feared many times that she never
have bestowed her. And yet said he much a do, unto my great cost and charg,
I have gotten the one that moughte lie by any Ladies side, and she were a queen
and yet thou not perseiuynge what I have done for the nor knowing that thou
have such a man which but of his goodness might thyncke thee to evil to be
stoye in his kytchen, thou contrariest al his mind to make a short tale he
spoke so sharply to her, that she feared that he would have beaten her. It is a
man of a subtle and wylye wit, which without a vysa^de is ready to play
any manner of part. The^ this young wife what for fear, and for truth of
the matter, clean stryken out of countenance, fell down at her fathers fete
desyryng him that he would forgette and forgive her all that was past and ever
after she would do her duetye Her father forgave her, and promised that she
should find him a kind and a loving father, if so be that she performed her
promise.


xantippa. How did she afterward?


Eulalya, when she was departed from her father she came back into a chaumber,
and there by chance found her husband alone she fell on her knees to him and
said. Man in times paste, I neither knew you nor my self, from this day
froward ye shall se me clean changed, only pardon that is past, with that
her husband took her in his arms and kyssed her saying she should lack
nothing if she would hold her in that mind.


xantip. Why did she continue so.


Eulalya. Even till her ending day, nor there was none so vile a thing but
that she would lay hands on it redely with all her heart, if her husband
would let her, so great love was be go^ and assured between them and many a
day after, she thanked god y^ ever she met with such a man. For if she had
not she said she had been clean cast a way.


xan. We have as great plenty of such housbandes, as of white crows.


Eulalya. Now, but for werieng you? I could tell you a thing that chaunsed a
late in this same city.


xantyppa. I have litell to do, and I like your communicacyon very well.


Eulalia. There was a certain gentilma^ he as such sort of men do, used much
huntyng in the cuntre, where he happened on a young damoysell, a very pore
womans child on who^ he doted a man well stryken in age, and for her sake he
lay often out of his own house his excuse was hu^ti^g. This ma^s wife an
exceeding honest woman, half deal suspecte the matter, tried out her husbands
falshed, on a time when he had taken his journey fourth of the town unto some
other ways, she went unto that poor cotage and boulted out all the hoole
matter, where he lay on nights, whereon he dra^ke, what thing they had to
welco^ him withal. There was neither one thing nor other, but bare walls.
This good woman returned home, and sone after came again brynginge with her a
good soft bed, and al thereto belongyng and certain plate besides that she gave
them money, chargynge them that if the Gentilma^ came again, they should
entreat him better not being known all this while that she was his wife, but
fayued her to be her sister. Not long after her husband stale thither again,
he saw the house otherwise decked, and better fare then he was wounte to have.
He asked, from whence comes all this goodly gere? They said that an honest
matrone, a kynsewoman of his had brought it thither and commanded them that
he should be well cherished when so ever he came, by and by his heart gave him
that it was his wives deed, when he came home he demanded of her if she had
been there or nay, she said yea. Then he asked her for what purpose she sent
all that household stuff thither. Man (said she) ye have be^ tenderly brought
up I perceived that ye were but corslie handled there, me thought that it was
my part, seeing it was your will and pleasure to be there ye should be better
looked to.


Xantippa. She was one of gods fools. I would rather for a bed have laid
under him a bundel of nettels: or a burden of thistels.


Eula. But here the end her husband perceyuyng the honest of her great
patience never after lay from her, but made good cheer at home with his own.
I am sure ye know Gilberte the hola^der.


xan. Uery well.


Eu. He (as it is not unknown married an old wife in his florishi^g youth.


Xa^. adventure he married the good and not the woman.


Eulalia. There said ye well, setting little stoore by his old wife, hunted a
callette, with whom he kept much company abroad, he dined or supped litell at
home. What would thou have said to ye gere.


Xantip. What would I a said? I would have flowe^ to the hores top and I
would have crowned mine husband at his out goinge to her with a pysbowle,
that he so e^bawlmed might have gone unto his sovereign lady.


Eula. But how much wiselier did this woman? she desired that young woman home
unto her, and made her good chere, so by that means she brought home also her
husband without any witchraft or sorserie, and if that at any season he supped
abroad with her she would send unto them some good dayntie morsel, and bid him
make good chere


Xantippa. I had lever be slain then I would be bawd unto mine own husband.


Eulalia. Yea, but consider all things well, was not that much better, then
she should be her shrewyshnesse, have put her husbands mind clean of from
her, and so have led all her life in trouble and heaviness.


Xantippa. I grant you well, that it was better so but I could not abide it.


Eulalya. I will tell you a pretty story more, and so make an end One of our
neighbors, a well disposed and a gods man, but that he is some what testie,
on a day pomeld his wife well and thriftely about the pate and so good a woman
as ever was borne, she picked her into a inner parler, and there weepynge and
sobbing, eased her heuye heart, anon after, by chance her husband came into
the same place, and found his wife weeping. What sitest thou hear says he
seighing and sobbi^g like a child The^ she like a wise woman said. Is it not
more honesty for me to lamente my dolours here in a secret place, the^ to make
wondering and on out cry in the street, as other women do. At so wisely and
womanly a saing his heart melted, promising her faythfullye and truly that he
would never lay stroke on her afterward, nor never did.


Xantippa. No more will mine god thank my self.


Eulalya. But then ye are always one at a another, agreinge like dogs and
cattes.


Xan. What would thou that I should do?


Eu. First and formest, whatsoever thy husband does said thou nothing, for
his heart must be won by little and litel by fair means, gentilnesse and
forbearing, at the last thou shalt either win him or at the least way thou
shall lead a better life the^ thou do now.


Xantippa. He his beyond gods forbode, he will never amend


Eulalia. Eye say not so, there is no be so wild but by fair handling be
tamed, never mistrust man the^. Assay a month or two, blame me and thou
find not that my counsel does ease. There be some fautes with you though
thou se them, be wise of this especyall that thou never give him foul words
in the chamber, or inbed but be sure that all things there be full of pastyme
and pleasure. For if that place which is ordained to make ame^des for all
fautes and so to renew love, be polluted, either with strife or grugynges, then
fair well al hope of love days, or atonementes, yet there be some beasts so
wayward and mischeuous, that when their husbands has them in their arms a
bed, they scholde and chyde making ye same plesur their lewd conditions (that
expelseth all displeasures out of their husbands mind unpleasant and little
set by corrupting the medecin that should have cured al deadly greifes, and
odible offenses.


xantip. That is no news to me.


Eula. Though the woman should be well ware and wise that she should never be
disobedient unto her husband yet she ought to be most circu^spect yt at that at
meting she show her self ready and pleasant unto him.


xantyppa. Yea unto a man, hold well withal but I am combred with a beast.


Eula. No more of those words, most commonly our husbands ar evil through
our own fault, but to return again unto our tail they that are seen in the
old fables of Poets sai that Uenus whom they make chief lady of wedlock
(has a girdle made by the handy work of Uulcan her Lord, and in that is
thrust all that enforces love and with that she girdeth her when so ever she
lies with her housbande


xantippa. A tale of a ^ubbe.


Eulalya. A tail it is, but herke^ what the tail means.


xantippa. Tell me.


Eulalia That techeth us that the wife ought to dyspose her self all that she
may that lieng by her husband she show him all the pleasure that she ca^. Whereby
the honest love of matrimony may revive and be renewed, and that there with be
clean dispatched al grudges and malice


xant. But how shall we come by this gyrdle?


Eula. We need neither wytchraft nor enchauntment, there is non of them al, so
sure as honest condicio^s accompayned with good feloshyp.


xan I can not favor such an husband as mine is.


Eula, It is most thy profyt that he be no longer such. If thou could by
thy Circes craft change thin husband into an hog, or a bore would thou do
it?


xantip. God knows.


Eu. Art thou in dout? had thou leauer marye an hog than a man.


xantip. Mary I had leauer have a man.


Eulalia. well, what and thou could by sorcery make him of a dro^karde a
soober man, of a unthrift a good housbande of an ydell losell a toward body,
would thou not do it?


xantip. yes, hardely, would I do it. But where should I learn the cunnyng?


Eula. For soth that co^ning have thou in the if thou would utter it, thyn
must he be, mauger thy head, the toward y^ make him, the better it is for
the, thou lokest on nothing but on his leude co^dicions, and they make the half
mad, thou would amend him and thou put him farther out of frame, look
rather on his good conditions, and so shall thou make him better. It is to late
call again yesterdaie before thou were married unto him. It was time to consider
what his fautes were for a woman should not only take her husband by the eyes
but by the ears. Now it is more time to redress fautes the^ to find fautes.


xanti. What woman ever took her gusband by the ears.


Eulali. She takes her husband by the eyes that looks on nothing, but on the
beautye and pulcritude of the body. She takes him by the ears, that harkeneth
diligently what the common voice says by him


xantip. Thy counsel is good, but it comes a day after the fair.


Eula. Yet it comes time enough to bring thine husband to a great
furtheraunce to that shall be if God send you any fruit together.


xantippa. We are speed already of that.


Eulaly. How long ago.


Xantip. A good while ago


Eulalia. How many months old is it.


Xantip. It lacks little of.vii.


Eula What a tale is this, ye reken the months by nights and days double.


xantippa. Not so.


Eula. It can not be none otherwise, if ye reken from the marriage day.


xantippa. yea, but what the^, I spoke with him before we were married.


Eulalia. Be children gotten by speakinge.


xantip. It befell so that he met me alone and begone to ticke at me, and
tickled me under the arm holes and sides to make me laugh. I might not away
with ticklynge, but fell down backewarde upon a bed and he a lofte, never
leuinge kissing on me, what he did else I can not say, but by sayncte Marie
within a while after my belly be ganne to swell.


Eula. Go now and disprayse thine husband which if he get children by
play, what will he do when he goes to it in good ernest.


xantippa, I fere me I am paid agayin.


Eula. Good lock God has sent a fruitful ground, a good tylma^.


xantip. In that thing he might have less labor and more thank.


Eula. Few wives find at their husbands in that behalf but were ye the^ sure
together.


xanti. yea that we were


Eula. The offense is the less. Is it a man child.


xantip. yea.


Eula. He shall make you at one so that ye will bow and forbere. What says
other me^ by thin husband, they that be his companions, they delight with him
abroad


xa^. They say that he is marvelous gentyl, ready to do every man pleasure,
liberal and sure to his friend.


Eula. And that puts me in good comfort that he will be ruled after our
counsayll.


xantip. But I find him not so.


Eula. Order thy self to him as I have told thee, and call me no more true
sayer but a lier, if he be not so good unto the as to any creature living
Again consider this he is yet but a child, I think he passethe not.xxiiij.
the black ox never trod on his foot, now it is but lost labor to reckon
upon any deuorse.


xantippa. Yet many a time and often I have troubled my brains with all


Eulalia. As for that fantasye whenever it comes into your mind first of
all count how naked a thing woman is, deuorsed from man. It is the highest
dignity that longethe to the wife to obsequyous unto her spouse. So has
nature ordained so god has appointed, that the woman should be ruled al by the
man look only upon this which is troth, thine husband he is, other canste
thou none have. Again forgette not that sweet babe be gotten of both your
bodies what thinkeste thou to do with that, will thou take it away with thee?
Thou sha^te berene thine husband his right wylt thou leave it with him? thou
shall spoil thy self of thy chefeste Jewel thou haste. Beside all this tell
me truth have thou none evil wyllers. Beside all this tell me truth, have
thou none evil wyllers.


xan. I have a stepdame I warrant you, and mine husbands mother even such
another.


Eula. Do they hate the so deadly.


xantip. They would se me hanged.


Eula. The^ forget not the^ what greater pleasure could thou show them then
to se the deuorsed from thine husband and to led a wydowes life. Yea and worse
the^ a wydow, for wydowes be at their choice.


xantippa. I hold well with your counsel, but I can not away with the
pains,


Eulalia. yet reckon what pains ye took or ye cold teach your paret to
speak.


xantippa. Exceadynge much.


Eu. And think you much to labor a little in reforming your husband with who^
you may live merely all the days of your life? What business do me^ put the^
self to be well and easly horsed and shall we think our selves to good to take
pains that we may have our husbands ge^til and curteise unto us.


xantip What shall I do.


Eu. I have told you al ready, se that al thing be clean and trim at home, that
no sluttysh or vnclenlye syghtes drive him out a doors. Be your self always
ready at a beck, be ring continual in mind what reverence the wife owes
unto her husband. Be neither in your du^pes, nor always on your merry pinnes go
nether to homely nor to nycely. Let your meat be clean dressed, you know your
husbands diet. What he loves best that dress. Moreover show your self
louinge and fair spoken unto the^ where he loves, call them now and the^ unto
your table. At meat, se that al things be well favored, and make good chere,
And when that he is top heavy playing on his lute, sytte thou by and singe to
him so shalt thou make him keep home, and lessen his expenses This shall he
think at length, in faith I am a fond fellow that makes such chere with a
strumpet abroode with great lossee both of substance and name, seeing that I
have a wife at home both much fayrer, and one that loves me ten times
better, with whom I may be both clenlyer received and dayntelier cherisshed.


xantip. Beleuest thou that it will take and I put it into a proof.


Eulali. Look on me. I warrante it or ought long I will in hand with thine
husband, and I will tell him his part.


xantippa. ye marie that is well said. But be wise that he epsy not our
cast, he would play his fages, all the house should be to little for him.


Eulalia. Take no thought. I shall so convey my matters, that he shall
dysclose all together him self, what business is between you, that done I
will handell him pretelie as I think best, and I trust to make him a new man
for the and when I se my time I will make a lie for thee, how louinge thou have
spoken of him.


xantippa. Christ speed us and bring our pupose well about.


Eulalia. He will not fail the so thou do thy good will


THere was a man that married a woman which had great riches and beawtye.
How be it she had such an impedyment of nature that she was domme and
could not speak, which thing made him right pensyfe, and said, wherefore
upon a day as he walked alone right heuye in heart thinking upon his wife.
There came one to him and asked him what was the cause of his heaviness which
answered that it was only because his wife was borne do^me. To whom this
other said I shall show the soon a remedy and a medicyne (therefore that is
thus) go tak an aspen leaf and lay it under her tongue this night she being a
steape, and I warrant the that she shall speak on the morrow which man being
glad of this medycyne prepared therefore and gathered aspen leaves, wherefore he
laid three of them under her tongue when she was a sleep. And on the morrow when
he him self awaked he desirous to know how his medicine wrought being in bed
with her, he demanded of her how she did, and suddenly she answered and said, I
beshrewe thy heart for waking me so early, and so by the virtue of that
medycyne she was restored to her speech. But in conclusion her spech encresed
day by day and she was so cursed of co^dycyon that every day she brauled and
chyd with her husband, so much at the last he was more vexed, and had much
more trouble and disease with her shrewed words then he had before when she
was dumme, wherefore as he walked another time alone he happened to mete again
with the same person that taught him the said medycine and said to him this
wise. Sir ye taught me a medicin but late to make my domme wife to speak,
bidding me lay an Aspen leaf under her tou^g when she sleapte, and I laid
three Aspen leaves there. Wherefore now she speaks. But yet she speaks so
much and so shrewdlye that I am more werier of her now, then I was when she was
do^me: Wherefore I pray you teach me a medycine to modyfye her that she speak
not so much. This other answered and said thus. Sir I am a devil of hell but I
am one of the^ that have least power there. Al be yet I have power to make a
woman to speak, but and if a woman begin ones to speak, I nor all the deuyls in
hell that have the most power be not able to make a woman to be still, nor to
cause her to leave her speaking.

The end of this pleasant dialogue declaryng the several properties of ye two
contrary disposers of the wives aforesaid.
Imprynted at London in Paul's church yearde, at the sign of the Sun, by
Antony Kytson.


