Epulario, Or, The Italian Banquet: Wherein is showed the manner how to dress
and prepare all kind of Flesh, Fowls or Fishes.

As also how to make Sauces, Tartes, Pies, etc. After the manner of all
Countries.

With an addition of many other profitable and necessary things.

Translated out of Italian into English.

LONDON, Printed by A.I. for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Gracious street, near Leaden Hall. 1598.

The Banquet, called in Italian, Epulario: wherein is handled the manner of
dressing all kinds of meats, birds, and all sort of fishes. Also showing how
to make Sauces, Pies, Tarts, etc. According to the use of all nations.
The first book, showing what meat is best roasted, and what best boiled.
THe flesh of Beef is best boiled, and of Veale the breast is good sodden, the
loine roasted, and the legs made in Olives. All parts of the sheep are good
boiled, only the shoulder, which is best roasted, as also the leg. Porke is
altogether wholesome being fresh, yet ye chine is good roasted, the rest is
salted as you think good. Kid is all good to be roasted or boiled as you think
good, but the hinder quarter is better roasted, the like of Lamb. Goats flesh
is good from the Month of January with sauce made of Garlike. The side of a
Bucke is good in Bacon broth. The Loine may be roasted, and the legs baked, the
like may be done with a young Kid. Wild Bore should be peppered and larded. The
Hare is good roasted, but the hinder part is better boild. Connies are better
roasted then any other way, and the best part of them is the hinder legs.

To dress Capon, Peacocke, Feisant, and other foul.
Shoueler, Puet, Ducke, Crane, wild Goose, Heron and Storke, are all good and
would be stuffed with Garlike, onions, or such like things. Peacocke, Feisant,
Partrish, wild Hen, Quails, Thrush, black Bird, and all other good Birds
are to be roasted. Pigeons are good both roasted and sodden, yet best roasted.
Ring-doues and wild Pigeons are good roasted, but better boiled with Pepper,
Sage, Parsely, and Margerum. Capon is good both boiled and roasted, and likewise
the Hen.

How to sees all kind of flesh that it may show fair.
You having cut it in as many pieces and parts as you think good, then lay it
to soke in fair water for the space of an hour, which done wash it again in
fresh water, and then with hot water, then set it over the fire in the Kettell
or pot wherein it may have room enough, that it may be the whiter: then put as
much salt to it as shall be needful, and be careful to skim it: if your salt be
not clean, put it in whot water, and let it continue therein till it be
melted, and converted into water or pickle, which being settled, you may put
into the pot or Kettell of meat, always taking care not to put in the dregs of
the pickle, because it is foul. But if your flesh be old and tough especially
Capon or Hen, then shift them out of the boiling water, and put them into fresh
water, and so they will be fair, and sooner boiled.

To make all kind of meat to roast fair and white.
To make all kind of foul, Capons, Kid, or any other flesh to roast fair and
white, specially Beef, Mutton, Veale, or Lamb. First parboile it, and then
larde it, if it be Capon, feisant, or any other foul: first wash it clean,
that done, dip it in hot water, but take it presently out again and lay it in
cold water, and it will be the fairer and roast better: then lard it and stick
it with cloves or other things as you think good, or as he that owes it does
most fancy it: if you will you may stuff them with sweet herbs, dry proines,
sour grapes, cherries, and such like things, and so spit it, and first make a
soft fire that it may roast sokingly and not be scorched or burnt, and when you
think it almost roasted, grate white bread, and cast salt into it, wherewith you
shall crumme it, then make a hot fire, and turn it round, so it will be fair
and white, which done, send it presently to the table.

To make a good devised meat, or sauce.
To make good devised meat of Goat, Hare, wild Boar, or any other wild beast.
Take of clarret wine and water, of each a like quantity, and wash the flesh in
them, then strain that water and wine through a cloth, putting thereto as much
salt as is requisite, which done, boil the flesh therein, and when it is
boiled, take it out; and if you desire to make two dishes of it, take a pound
and a half of Currants, and bruise them well with as much bread, which you shall
cut in pieces, tossed, grate, and being in crumbs, soke in good vinegar, which
done, beat the Currants and the bread together: and if you can get of the blood
or entrails of the wild beast, it will be very good to mix with them, which
being well beaten together, it must be tempered with bastard wine, that is
wine sod with new wine, called Must, and with the vinegar wherewith the bread
was soked, let it pass through a strainer into a pipkin, wherein you shall put
cloves and Sinamon, as much as you think good, and as it is necessary, and make
it strong or sweet of vinegar and spice, according to the manner, or as ye owner
will have it. Then let it boil half an hour upon a chafingdish, with a soft
fire, on the one side then upon the other turning it often with a spoone: then
fry the flesh with good lard and cut it in pieces, and lay it in dishes, and
cover it with this devised meat, and the blacker it shows, the fairer it is.

To make broth of the flesh of wild beasts.
First wash the flesh well with good white wine mingled with as much water, and
strain the washing, and sees the flesh therein, putting to it a good quantity
of lard cut in square pieces as great as dice: which done, put thereto a good
quantity of sage, being pulled in three or four pieces with your hands, and
when it is almost ready, put spice into it, as I said before. And to make the
broth somewhat thick, take two or three yolks of eggs, according to the
quantity thereof, and as much bread well tosted at the fire, but not overmuch,
only to dry it, which you shall make into small crummes, then take a little of
the broth, and strain the bread and eggs into the pot of broth: and if thou
can get some of the blood or the entrails of the beast, you shall beat it
well and sees it with the same broth, and it will be the better. But if thou will make any dishes of this broth, the flesh is to be cut in pieces of half a
pound or of a pound: and if you will make pottage, it must be cut very small:
you must also remember that the flesh whereof this meat is made of, or else
broth, must be boiled in the water wherein it was washed, because you may not
loose that blood which comes out of it in the washing.

To make sauce for Veneson.
To make sauce for veneson, first boil the flesh in a quantity of water
mingled with as much vinegar, and when it is boiled take thy flesh out of the
broth, that it may shrink and dry: and being dried, fry it in good lard: and
if you desire to make two dishes thereof, take a pound of Almonds vnpilled, and
beat them together with the meat, then take a pound of bread cut in pieces, and
tossed it at the fire, but not much. Which done, lay it to steep in a little red
wine, and being steeped, beat it together with the foresaid things, then
temper it with the broth of the said flesh, and strain it into a pipkin, and
set it on a soft fire, to boil for the space of half an hour. Then put
therein some Pepper and Sinamon, that it may have the ordinary taste, or that it
may be strong or sweet as the master of the house will have it. Then take an
onion and sees it with larde cut in small pieces, and when the onyon is
sodden, stamp it and mix it with the larde wherewith it was sodden, and put
them into the pipkin with the other things aforesaid, and let them boil
together, then dish the meat and lay this sauce upon it, and send it to the
table.

To make small pasties of Veneson or Goats flesh.
To make Pasties of Veneson or Goats flesh, first cut the flesh into diverse
pieces as big as your fist, then parboile them in water, vinegar, and salt, as
much as is requisite, then take it forth and dry it, which done, larde it,
first rouling the pieces of cut lard, and this flesh in pepper and Sinamon with
some salt all beaten together, then take cloves and stick them on all sides of
thy pieces of meat, then take good flower and make the crust thicker then a
pancake, and of every piece of flesh you shall make a small pasty, then bake
them sokingly and well, and these pasties may be kept fifteen days or a
month.

To make pies of Veale, Capon, or any other flesh.
To make Pies of Veale, Capon, Birds, or any other flesh. Take as much of the
leanest part thereof as you think good, and mince it small, then take the suet
or fat of a Calfe, and mix it with the meat, and spice it according unto the
common manner, that done, make your pass as you did for the pasties, and bake
them in an oven. And when they are baked, take the yolks of two Eggs,
Vergiuice, a little Saffron, and mix them with butter and water, which pour
into the Pies. And if you cannot make the crust, then boil the meat so dressed
as aforesaid in a pan like a Whitepot, in such Pies you may put one or two
Hens, Capons, Pigeons, or any other fowls either whole or minced.

To make a Pie in a possenet or pipkin.
To make a Pie in a pipkin, First take the flesh and good Beef suet, and mince
it small, and put it in a pipkin, and if you will, you may put therein Capon,
Hen, or Pigeon, then set it on the coals, and when it begins to boil,
skim it. Then take a few small Reasons and an Onion, and mince them small, and
fry them with good suet, and put them suet and all into the pipkin, and when it
is ready, put spice and vergiuice into it. And if thou think good put therein
likewise yolks of two or three eggs beaten, which done, you may dish it and
send it to the table.

To make Pies of the Combs of Cocks and Hens, with their stones, and livers.
Cut each comb in three pieces, and the livers in four, but leave the stones
whole, then take a little larde, and cut it small, but beat it not, and take
three or four eggs with beef suet well beaten, and it will be better with
the marrow of an ox. Then take thirty or forty cherries although they be dry,
Sinamon, Ginger, and a good quantity of Sugar, and some cloves, mingle them
together, and thereof make a Pie, which done, bake it in an oven or a frying
pan, and being half baked, take the yolk of an Egg, Saffron, and Vergiuice,
and beat them together, and put them into the Pie. And so let it bake, then
send it to the table.

To make fish Pies.
Take the fish and wash it clean, and cut it with slashes on both sides, then
take Pepper and salt and cast it into the cuts, and also into the belly of the
fish, then make the past somewhat thick, and putting the fish into it, sow up
the belly thereof, which done, let it bake sokingly in the oven till it be
thoroughly baked.

To make Pies that the Birds may be alive in them, and fly out when it is cut
up.
Make the coffin of a great Pie or pasty, in the bottom whereof make a hole as
big as your fist, or bigger if you will, let the sides of the coffin be
somewhat higher then ordinary Pies, which done, put it full of flower and bake
it, and being baked, open the hole in the bottom, and take out the flower.
Then having a Pie of the bigness of the hole in the bottom of the coffin
aforesaid, you shall put it into the coffin, withal put into the said coffin
round about the aforesaid Pie as many small live birds as the empty coffin will
hold, besides the Pie aforesaid. And this is to be done at such time as you
send the Pie to the table, and set before the guests: where uncovering or
cutting up the lid of the great Pie, all the Birds will fly out, which is to
delight and pleasure show to the company. And because they shall not be
altogether mocked, you shall cut open the small Pie, and in this sort you may
make many others, the like you may do with a Tart.

To make the crust of Pie or Tart of Pigeons, Pullets, or Kid.
To make the crust of Pigeons, Pullets, or Kid flesh. First boil your meat a
little till it be almost enough, then cut it into small pieces, and fry it in
good suet. Then in a pan make a crust of thick past like a Pie crust, and put
the meat in it, covering it with dry Pruines or Cherries, then take Vergice
with a little whote water and butter, and ten Eggs with parsely and
Margerum, and beat them altogether with a knife, and then put them in an
e^rthen pot, and set it upon a fire of coals, stirring it always with a
spoone. Then pour this broth upon the crust, and set it on the fire, as if it
were a Tart, and when you think it to be baked, send it to the Table, and
make the crust sweet or sharp as your master fancieth.

To make a double fried meat of any flesh, Pigeons or Pullets.
First take thy meat and make it very clean, then cut it in quarters or in
small pieces, and put it into a pan and fry it with sweet suet, stirring it
with a spoone, and when it is almost boiled, take out the greatest part of the
suet, then take Vergice, three or four yolks of eggs, a little broth, and
good spice, and put them into the meat, and let it boil until it be almost
ready. Then take a little parsely shred or beaten small and put it in a
platter, and send it to the Table, sweet or sharp according to your masters
desire.

To make Miraus of Spain.
First take Pigeons, Pullets, or Capons, and dress them as if they were to be
roasted, and so spit them, and when they are half roasted, take them off the
spit, cut them in pieces, which done, put the^ into an earthen pot. Then take
almonds scorched on whote embers, and wipe them clean, and without more wiping
of them stamp them in a mortar: then take tosted bread with three or four
yolks of eggs, and stamp them with the almonds, and temper them with a little
vinegar and broth strained through a cloth, and the^ put them into the pipkin
with the meat, and set them on the coals with good store of spice, especially
Sinamon and Saffron, and Sugar enough, and let it boil for the space of an
hour, s^^ring it with a spoone, and when it is boiled, send it to the table in
a flat dish or platter, or else in pottage which is most convenient.

To dress a Peacocke with all his feathers.
To dress a Peacocke with all his feathers, in such sort that when it is
enough it shall seem to be alive and cast fire out of the mouth. You must
kill the Peacocke with a feather or quill pricked into her head, or else make
her bleed under the throat like a ^^d, then clean the skin under the breast,
that is from the neck unto the tail, and flea it off, and being fleaed turn
the skin of the neck outward near to his head, and cut the neck, so that his
head be fast to the skin, and likewise let his legs hang to the skin, then
stuff it full of some dainty pudding, with spices, and take whole cloves, and
stick them in his breast, and so spit him and roast him by a soft fire, and
about his neck wrap a wet cloth, that the fire may not dry it overmuch, still
wetting the cloth: and when it is roasted, take it off the spit, and put it into
the skin, then you must have a certain iron cunningly made fast to a
trencher, which shall go through the Peacockes feet and not be seen, that so
the Peacocke may stand upon his feet, with his head upright, as though he were
alive, and dress his tail in such manner, that it may be round. If you will
have the Peacocke cast fire at the mouth, take an ounce of Camphora wrapped
about with Cotton, and put it in the Peacockes bill with a little Aquanity, or
very strong wine, and when you will send it to the table, set fire to the
Cotton, and he will cast fire a good while after. And to make the greater
show, when the Peacocke is roasted, you may gild it with leaf gold, and put the
skin upon the said gold, which may be spiced very sweet. The like may be done
with a Feisant, or any other birds.

To roast a Kid with Garlike.
Take the Kid and larde it with Garlike very well, and stuff it full of corns
of Garlike well pilled, then take Veriuice, the yolks of two Eggs, and two
corns of Garlike well beaten in a Mortar, with a little Pepper, and some fat
broth, mix them all together, and set it under the Kid while it rosteth, and
bast it therewith, and when it is roasted, put it in a dish with that sauce: the
Kid would be well roasted, and eaten whote.

To roast a Kid otherwise without Garlike.
Take the Kid and larde it well, then take the Liver and lights and beat them
well together with suet, that done, take seven or eight Eggs sodden, and beat
them with Parsely, Mint, and a little Sage, and mingle them together, putting
thereto Pepper, Saffron, and a few cloves, wherewith you shall stuff the Kid,
and so lay it to the fire, and let it roast sokingly, basting it often with the
foresaid sauce, without garlike.

To roast a Pig.
First let him be scalded white and clean, then cut him in the belly and take
out the guts and entrails, and wash it clean, then shred Garlike very small
with larde, grated Cheese, Eggs, Pepper, and a little Saffron, mix them
together and put them into the Pig, then sow it up and spit it, but let him
cost sokingly, and let him be well roasted both outwardly and inwardly, then
make a little liquor with vinegar, Saffron, and two branches of Rosemary or
Sage, and bast the Pig therewith. The like may be done with Geese, Duckes,
Crane, Capon, Pullet, and other Birds.

To roast a Pullet.
When thou have roasted him well, take the juice of an Oringe, or else Vergice,
with Rosewater, Sugar, and Sinamon, and lay the Pullet in a dish with this
sauce, and send it to the Table.

To roast small birds.
Take the Birds and wash them well, not taking out the guts, then take Vine
leaves, and put them in Salt, Fennel, and a little lard, and lap the Birds
with that mixture in those vine leaves, and set them to roast (half an hour or
less, for they are soon roasted) under whote embers. If you will roast them on
a spit, tie them four and four by the legs and the backs together, that
the breasts may not be bruised.

To roast Thrushes and make sauce for them.
Roast the Thrushes as the manner is, then take fair white Almonds well beaten
in a mortar, thereto put Saunders, that the sauce may be red, temper them with
a little Veriuice, and some broth, with good store of Ginger and Sinamon, then
strain it into a pipkin, and let it boil about a quarter of an hour, and
when it is boiled and put in a dish with the Thrushes. You may make another
kind of sauce with juice of Orenges and Lemmons, Salt, and other sweet Spices.

To roast Partridges after the Castilian manner.
Take the Partridges and roast them, and when they are roasted, take them from
the spit, and cut off the wings, and all the meat of the breast, and body of
the Partridge, which pieces lay in salt with a little sweet spice and Cloves
mixed together with ye juice of Orenges, Lemmons, or Vergice. Which must be
done when the Partridges are whote.

To make Olives of Veale or other flesh.
To make Olives of Veale or any other flesh that is lean, take the leg and
cut it in long thin pieces, and beat it well upon a table with the flat side
of a knife, then take Salt, Fennel, and Coriander seed, and lay them upon the
slices or pieces of flesh, then take Parsely, Margerum and lard, and bruise them
together with some spice, and straw it upon the pieces of flesh, then roll
them up together and press them for the space of an hour, which done, spit
them and roast them, not suffering them to dry overmuch.

To make Collopes of Veale.
Take the lean of a leg of Veale, and cut it in small pieces, and beat it
with the flat side of the knife, then take Salt, and Fennel, or Coriander
seed, and straw it on the meat, and if time will serve, press it for the
space of half an hour, then broile them upon a gredyron, turning it often,
basting it with Butter or sweet Suet to keep it moist: you must not broile
them dry.

To make Liuerings of Veale or any other young flesh.
Take the leanest of the leg, and mince it with a little larde and the fat of
Veale like Pie meat, then take Parsely and Margerum minced small together with
the yolke of an egg, and a little grated cheese, according to the quantity you
will make, with Spice and Saffron, and mingle all these things together with
the flesh: then take the Kell of a Hog, Sheep, or other beast, so it be good,
and bind these things in the Kell, making every piece as big as an egg, then
roast them on the spit with a soft fire, and not overmuch.

To make a new dish called Tomascella.
Take the Liver of a Hog or other beast, and boil them a little, then grate
them as you do cheese, and sake the panch of a Hog according to the quantity
of the Liver, and beat it well, then take a little new fatty cheese, Margerum.
Parsely, Currants, Spice, and Eggs, and beat all their together with the
Livers, then make them in round b^^^ o^ the bigness of a Walnut or an Egg, and
bind or wrape^^ ba^ima piece of the Hogs maw or panch, the^ fry them in a
trying pan with sweet butter or suet, but not too dry.

To make Puddings of Hogs or Calves flesh.
Take lean flesh without sinnewes of the leg, and Hogs suet, with the fat of
Veale, and mince them as small as you can, then take old Cheese, and a little
new Cheese, Spice, Eggs, and Salt as much as is requisite, mingle them well
together with some Saffron, then take Hogs guts as many as you will, and make
them very clean, that there be no fat nor filth in them, and fill them with
this mixture, which done, tie them up and make them long or short as you think
good, they are used to be sodden, but they will not last good above two days.
Yet as time and necessity requires, they may be kept fifteen days or more,
if they be well used.

To make good Sausseges.
To make good Sausseges of Pork or other flesh, take both of the leave and fat
together without sinnew, and mince it very small, if you have ten pound of
flesh, put thereto a pound of Salt, two ounces of Fennel seed, and two ounces
of Pepper gross beaten, and mingle the^ together, and so let it stand the
space of one day, the^ take guts well washed and made clean, and fill them with
the meat, then dry them in the smoke.

To dress a Calves or Ox head.
Take the head and scald it with whote water like a Pig, and make it very
clean, then sees it, and for sauce take garlike, and if you will roast it, you
must bake it in an oven like a Pigge.

To fry a Calves or Hogs brain.
Take the brains and wash them very well, then cast out the water, and break
the brains well, then take Eggs, Pepper beaten, and a little Salt, and mix
them with the brain, and so fry it with a little Suet or Butter: and when it
begins to conieale together, put it into a dish, and cast spice upon it: and
this would be eaten presently.

To make a Pudding in a Calves maw.
Take the maw and make a hole in the side thereof, and fill it with a mixture
made of old Cheese, Eggs, a little Saffaron, Currants, Parsely, Margerum, and
Mint, well beaten and mingled together, and being in the maw sow it up, and
sees it very well.

To know if a Gammon of Bacon be good.
If you will know when a Gammon is good, thrust a knife in the midst of it,
and if the knife being pulled out smells, it is good: if to ye contrary, it
is not good. And if you will have it to keep long, take White wine or Vinegar,
and as much water, but better without water, and therein boil the gammon of
Bacon till it be half sod, then take it off the fire, and set it soke in the
liquor till it be cold, then take it out, and in this manner it willbe good,
and continue long.

To sees Tongues.
They would not be ouerfat, but red, and sod like the Gammon of bacon, but the
tongue, the fatter it is the better it will be, and should be better sod then
the Gammon of Bacon, and all salt meat would be boiled in this sort.

To make a broth for a boiled Pullet.
To make broth of Grapes for a boiled Pullet, the Pullet would be boiled with a
little salt flesh, and when it is half boiled, take sour grapes and cut them
in the midst, and take the kernels out of them, and boil them, and when they
are boiled, take Parsely, Mint, Pepper and Saffron, beaten and minced together,
and put them in the dish with the Pullet and the broth and send it to the table.

To make a new dish after the manner of Rome.
Cut your meat in pieces as big as an egg, then take a little salt, and
Fennel, or Coriander seed, which you shall straw upon the said pieces of meat,
which done, press them a little and put them on a spit to roast, and between
every piece spit a thin piece of larde to keep the meat moist.

To roast or sees a Pigeon without bones.
Dress your Pigeons well, and make them very clean, then let them lie in
strong Vinegar for the space of four and twenty hours, which done, wash them
very well, and roast or boil them as you think good, and stuff them full of
spice and other things, and by this means you shall find them without bones.

The second Book: Teaching to make all kind of meats, and first to make a
white meat of the flesh of Capons or Kids, of twelve sorts.
TAke two pounds of almonds, and blanch them very white, and that they may be
the whiter, let them stand a day and a night in fresh water, then stamp them
very well, and when they are stamped, put a little water to them, that they be
not oil, the^ take the flesh of the breast of a Capon and stamp it with the
Almonds, and take crummes of a white loaf, and soke it in the Capon broth, and
beat it with the aforesaid things, then take a little Veriuice, half an ounce
of Ginger, and half a pound of Sugar, and temper them altogether with the
Capon broth, and strain it through a cloth into a pipkin, and set it on the
embers, far from the fire, still stirring it with a spoone, and let it boil
for the space of half an hour and when it is boiled put to it three ounces of
Rosewater, then make your messes, or cover the flesh of the Capon or other bird
therewith, and send it to the table: and for the better grace or show, when you
send it to the table, straw it full of the kernels of a Pomgranet. And if you
will have this meat of two colors, take the yolke of an egg and a little
Saffron, and mingle them together with a part of the meat, and make it somewhat
sharper of Veriuice, then the rest of the meat that is feast white, and in
that sort it is called brom flowers: and if you have two Capons cover the one
with the white, and the other with yellow.

To make twelve kinds of white meat after the Catalonian manner.
Take a pot full of Goats milk, and eight ounces of flower of fine Rice, and
boil it in the milk, then take the flesh of the breast of a Capon new killed,
and let him be half boiled, then pull it in small pieces as big as threads, and
put it into a mortar to beat, but give it but two stampes, and when the milk
has boiled half an hour, put the said Capons flesh into it with a pound of
Sugar, and let them boil for the space of half an hour or there abouts, and
stir it well as long as it stands on the fire: and to know when this is
boiled, take out thy spoone and it will seem fresh, then put Rose Water into
it as aforesaid, and dish it, strawing Sugar upon the^, and so send them to the
table.

To make white meats after the manner of Catalonia.
Take a pound and a half of Almonds well blanched and stamped, which being
tempered with the broth of a Pullet and strained, set them to boil in an
earthen pipkin, then put into it two ounces of Rice flower first tempered with
the Almond milk, which you shall boil for the space of half an hour,
stirring it with a spoone, then put to it a pound and a half of Sugar, and a
little of the flesh of a Capons breast well beaten, which Capons flesh should be
sodde^ with the almond milk as soon as it is set set upon the fire, and when
this composition is well sodden, you shall add thereto a little rosewater,
the^ dish it, and strawing a little fine sugar upon it, send it to the Table.

To sees Rice in flesh or Capons broth.
To make ten dishes of brothes, take a pound of Almonds well blanched, and a
pound of rice, which you shall wash twice or thrice in warm water, then set it
on the fire in boiling water and let it sees, and being boiled, let it stand
in the water that it may swell, then stamp the Almonds, wetting them with
fresh water, because they shall not be oily, tempering them with Capons or
other broth, then strain them, and set the milk to sees in an earthen pipkin,
putting thereto a pound of Sugar, and when they begin to boil put the Rice into
them, and set them in a pipkin upon the coals, not to near the fire, stirring
it with a spoone that it smell not of the smoke. In like manner you may sees
Rice in Goats milk or in other milk: and note that such kind of brothes do
easily smell of the smoke: Which if it happen, the remedy, first to take the
broth out of the pipkin, but look you touch not the bottom thereof, and put
it in another clean pipkin, then take a piece of linen cloth folded in three
or four folds, and wet it in fresh water, then wring out the water and lay the
said piece of linen so doubled upon the pipkin of broth, and let it stand so
for a quarter of an hour, then wet the cloth again, and put it on if need be,
and by this means the savor of the smoke will be taken away: I never found a
better way then this to take it away, and it is very good.

To make broth of lean flesh.
Take the lean flesh of a Calfe sodden in water and salt, beat it well and let
it boil in fat broth, putting unto it crumbs of Whitebread, and a little Pepper
and Saffaron, and let it boil half an hour, then let it cool a little, that
done, take Eggs, grated Cheese, Persely, Margerum, Mints, well stamped
together with a little Veriuice, then beat them all together with the foresaid
flesh, and stir them with a spoon: this kind of broth would be thick, and
in this manner you make liuerings.

To make a kind meat of guts.
The Guts would be well washed and made very clean, and then sodden with a
bone of Bacon, to give them a good taste, and without salt because they may be
the whiter, when they are boiled cut them into small pieces, and mix the^ with
Parsely, Mint, Sage, salt and Pepper, then again give them a boiling, and so
dish them, and straw the^ with a little Cheese or spice which you think good.

To make meat of wheat sodden with broth of flesh, Capon, Hate, or Pigeons.
First take a pound and a half of Wheat and wash it clean, then sees it in
broth of Capon, fat Pullet, or other good flesh, and let it boil well, stirring
it with a spoone, and when it is sodden put to it Pepper and yolks of Eggs,
and mingle them together, you must make it yellow with Saffron.

To make meat of Turnips.
Make the Turnips clean and cut them in pieces, then sees them in fat flesh
broth, that done, stamp them and strain them, and so let them sees again in
fat broth, with a little Beef or Bacon, with Pepper and Saffron.

To make broth of a Gourd.
Make them clean as they ought to be, then sees them in flesh broth, or else
with water alone, adding thereto certain Onions as you think good, and when
it is boiled take it out, then either bruise it small or stamp it, and strain
it through a Cullander, and then again set it to sees in a pipkin with fat
broth, and a little Veriuice, and let them be somewhat yellow with Saffron,
and when they are sod take them off the fire, and set them to cool, then take
yolks of Eggs according to the quantity, and beat them with a little old
cheese, and put them to the said meat, stirring it with a spoone least it smell
of the smoke, then dish it and cast spice upon it.

To make yellow broth.
Take a pound and a half of Almonds vnblanched, and stamp them well, then take
the flesh of the breast of a Capon, or other birds roasted or sodden whether you
will, with the yolk of Eggs, beat them all with the said Almonds, adding unto
them a pound of Sugar, Sinamon, Ginger, and a little Saffron, and temper them
with the broth of a Pullet, or other fat broth, and a little Veriuice, and
strain them and set them to boil on the coals with a soft fire, that they
smell not of the smoke, and stir it with a spoone, and let it boil for the
spare of half an hour, and when it is half boiled, put into it three or
four ounces of good sweet Butter, and so serve it, with casting spice upon it.

To make a kind of Leach.
Take the yolks of four eggs, half an ounce of Sinamon, four ounces of
Sugar, two ounces of Rosewater, and four ounces of the juice of Orenges, beat
all these things together, and boil them and make it somewhat yellow, this is
common in summer time.

To make a kind of made meat in flesh time.
Take a pound of old cheese, and a little new cheese, and a pound of the belly
or panch of a fat Hog, or a Cowes Vdder sod, then take good herbs well
beaten, Pepper, Cloves, and Ginger, adding thereto the flesh of the breast of a
Capon well beaten, and all these things being well tempered and mixed together,
then make good past, and lap all this in the past, and make them no bigger then
half a Chestnut, then fry them in Capons grease or other fat broth, and make
the^ yellow with Saffron, let them not boil above the space of three Pater
nosters, then dish them, and straw them over with grated Cheese, mixed with
other spices. The like may be made of Feisants, Partridges, and other Foul.

To make a past or meat of flower.
Temper thy past as aforesaid, and break it into diverse pieces, then set it to
dry in the sun, and it will continue two or three year: when you will sees
it, it must be sodden in flesh broth or broth of a fat Hen for the space of an
hour. But if it be not flesh time, sees them in almond milk or Goats milk
with Sugar, and because this milk will not boil as much as this past
requires, boil them first in clean water as Rice is boiled: your past also
should be baked. These past meats would likewise be yellow with Saffron,
except when they are boiled in milk.

To make meat of young Beans with flesh or otherwise.
Take Beans and blanch them with whot water like almonds, then set them to
boil, and when they are boiled, put to them a little Parsely, and Mints well
beaten, and sees them with salt Beef or Bacon, let it be somewhat green and
it is the better. The like may be done with pease and other fruits when they
are green.

To fry pease with Bacon.
Take the Pease cod and all as they are and boil them, and take a little Bacon
larded with fat, and cut it into Collopes, then fry it a little with the
aforesaid pease, adding thereto a little Veriuice, Sugar, or sirope of
Mulberies, and a little Sinamon. In this sort also are white pease fried.

To make meat of Melts with broth of Pullets or other flesh.
Sees the melt with flesh broth, let it boil softly, stirring it, and let it
not smell of the smoke, and make it yellow with Saffron, but it would first be
well washed with whote water like Rise.

To make a certain kind of meat of Capers with flesh.
Take a pound and a half of Caper, and boil them until they begin to open,
then take a pound and a half of blanched Almonds well beaten, and put them to
the said Capers, beat them well again with the crumbs of a white loaf, and
temper them with the broth of some good meat, then strain it and set it to
boil upon a soft fire, stirring it with a spoon, then put into it a pound of
Sugar, half an ounce of Ginger, Saffron, and Rosewater with good spice.

To make meat of flower, and how it is sodden or dressed.
The flower is to be boiled in good Caponbroth or other flesh, and it must be
put into the broth by little and by little, stirring it always with a spoone,
and boil it the space of half an hour upon the coals with a soft fire, that
it smell not of the smoke, then dish it and cast cheese and spice upon it. In
Lent boil it in Almond milk, Sugar, and Rosewater.

To make meat of grated bread.
Boil the grated bread in good broth, then take grated cheese and beat it with
Eggs, and the bread being boiled, let it cool, then put the said Eggs and
cheese in the bread, and mingle it well together, and make it yellow with
saffron.

To make a meat of young Roses.
Boil them in broth, and when they are almost sodden, put to them a little
Parsely and Mint small shred, and if the broth be ouerthinne, strain it with a
few crummes of bread, and when it is sodden put spice upon it.

To make meat of Parsely.
Take Parsely roots, and pull out the string or pith which is within them, and
make them very clean, and boil them very well in flesh broth with Pepper and
saffaron, this may likewise be done with oil.

To make meat of Fennel.
The Fennel is sod like Coleworts, but it would be cut smaller and shorter,
with a little Pepper, Bacon, or oil.

To make meat of Quinces.
Sees thy Quinces in broth of lean flesh, then stamp them and temper them
with Almond milk, made with broth of Pullets or flesh, and if time serve
strain them, and put them into a pipkin with sugar, ginger, sinamon, and a
little saffron, and set them to boil on a soft fire, because it should not
smell of the smoke, and stir them with a spoone. And it shall be the better
if you put a little fresh butter into it, and when they are boiled cast spice
upon them.

To make broth of Bettonie.
Take a few Bettonie leaves, and a little burrage, and put them to boil in
clean seething water, then take them out and beat them with your knife, then
take a little Parsely and Mint, and beat them with the said herbs, then stamp
them all in a mortar, and put them in a pipkin of fat broth, and let them
boil, and if you will you may put a little Pepper to it, this may also be
sodden in oil.

To sees Gourdes after the Catalonian fashion.
Take the juice of the Gourd and make it very clean, then put it into a pipkin
with good larde or oil, and set the pipkin on the coals upon a soft fire, and
make it to boil, stirring it with a spoone: it should sees for the space of
four hours, then take fat broth colored with saffron, and put into the
Gourdes, adding thereto sugar, spice, and a little Veriuice according to the
taste. You may also put to it a few yolks of eggs beaten together with a
little old cheese.

To make a Cullesse of Capon, Feisant, Partridge, Kid, or wild Pigeon.
Take of these Birds and make them very clean, and if you would sees a Capon
til it consume, and make two dishes thereof, take a pipkin that holds four
pints of water, and breaking all the capons bones, put it therein and set it on
the fire, and withal sees a piece of lean Bacon with thirty or forty grains
of bruised Pepper, a little sinamon gross beaten, a few cloves, three, five or
six sage leaves broken in three pieces, and some bayleaues, let it boil in a
pipkin, until it consume to the quantity of two or three dishes of broth, and
less if you will have it good, but put no salt into it, and if it be for a
sick man, you must put no Bacon to, only a little spice, and this is good
both for the sick and whole.

To make ten dishes of broth.
Take twenty yolks of Eggs, good veriuice, flesh broth, or Capon broth which
is better, a little Saffron, and some Spice, mingle them together and strain
them, then put the^ into a pipkin, and set it on a soft fire, stirring it with
a spoone, and when you see it stick to the spoone, take it from the fire, and
forget not to stir it, then dish it, and straw it with spice. It should be
sweet with sugar, or sharp with veriuice, as you think good.

To make white broth.
Take a pound of Almonds blanch them and stamp them in a mortar, wherein you
shall put a little fair water, that they be not oily, then take the white of
twenty Eggs, a few crummes of white bread, a little veriuice, some broth of
flesh or of a Capon, with a little white Ginger, and beat them altogether, and
strain them with the Almonds, then sees it well as I said in the other broth.

To make green broth.
Take all the things set down in the first broth, Saffron excepted and add to
them Bettonie, Parsely, and green corn if it be to be had, beat all this
together, and strain them and then sees them as aforesaid.

To make a devised broth.
Take twelve Eggs, and a pound of good cheese well grated, and mingle them
together then take a pipkin full of broth of lean meat, colored with saffron,
and set it on the fire, and when it begins to boil, put these things into
it, and stir it with a spoone, and when it begins to be thick take it
from the fire, and put spice upon it.

To make white pottage.
Take Almonds stamped in a mortar, and strain them with broth, then take
grated white bread, and the white of Eggs, and put it into a pipkin, stirring
it often, and then dress it as I said before.

To make green meat.
Do as I said before, Saffron excepted, adding that which is aforesaid of the
green broth.

To make green, yellow, or other colored meat in little pieces or morsels.
To make meat in small pieces or morsels, of green or yellow, make them as
aforesaid according to the color you will have, but somewhat harder, then take
a little spoon, and with it make the meat into morsels as big as a Bean, and
when the broth begins to sees, put one by one into the broth, and being
dished, straw spice or sugar on the^ which you will.

To make a devised meat after the Roman manner.
Take white flower, and make paste of it somewhat thicker then a pancake, and
roll it about a staff, then take out the staff, then cut the past in pieces
of the length of thy little finger, whereby they will be hollow like a pudding
and round or close, then sees them in fat broth or in water as time serves,
but the broth or water must boil when you put them in. And if you sees them
in water put a little sweet Butter and salt in it, and when they are sod, dish
them with Cheese, Butter, and spices.

The same another way.
Make the past as before, and sees them with the broth or water aforesaid, but
make the paste somewhat thicker and cut it small, and then they are called
Trite, you may cut them also into greater pieces, and sees them in the same
manner.

To make golden sops.
Cut slices of white bread without crust, and make them square, and tossed them a
little before the fire, then take Eggs very well beaten with a spoone and a
little Rose Water, and then put the said slices to soke therein, then take them
out and fry them in a fryingpan with a little Butter, turning them very often for
fear of burning, th^n put them in a dish, and cast a little rosewater on them
colored yellow with saffron and sugar, and so send them to the Table.

To make a fried meat of Turnips.
Roast the Turnops in the embers, or else sees them whole, then cut or slice
them in pieces as thick as half the haft of a knife, which done, take cheese
and cut it in the same form and quantity, but some what thinner, then take
Sugar, Pepper, and other spices mingled together, and put them in a pan under
the pieces of cheese, as if you would make a crust under the cheese, and on the
top of them likewise, and over it you shall lay the pieces of Turnips, covering
them over with the spices aforesaid, and plenty of good Butter, and so you
shall do with the said cheese and Turnips till the pan be full, letting them
fry the space of a quarter of an hour, or more, like a Tart, and this would be
one of your last dishes.

The third Book: Showing how to dress fish, herbs, and many other things in
Lent time.
To make ten mess of white meat in Lent.
TAke a pound and a half of blanched Almonds and stamp them, and the crumbs of
a white loaf steeped in broth of white pease. If you have no pease broth, you
may sees ye breadin water for the space of half an hour, making it soft,
the^ take some good sea fish or Pike (taken out of the river) sodden, then take
half a pound of the white meat of the fish, and stamp it with the Almonds,
sodden bread, a little broth, and the juice of Orenges, if you have no Orenges
take Veriuice, with some Rosewater, and half a pound of clean white Ginger,
and half a pound of sugar, all these tempered together and strained, you shall
set them to sees in a pipkin with a soft fire for the space of half a quarter
of an hour, and let it not smell of the smoke, but stir it often.

To sees Rice pottage in Lent.
Take a pound of blanched Almonds, and a pound of rice washed twice or thrice
in luke warm water, and set them on the fire in clear water, make it sees as
is aforesaid in the second chapter of meat made of Rice, but you shall not sees
it with flesh broth.

To make eight messes of Almond broth.
Take two pound of blanched Almonds, and stamp them well and temper them with
cold water, because they shall not be oily, put to them the crummes of a white
loaf, then strain them and set them to boil in a pipkin upon the coals, and
let it boil for half a quarter of an hour, putting into them a pound of fine
sugar. This Almond broth would be somewhat liquid by adding a little Rosewater
to it, and it will be so much the better, and so send it to the Table.

To make broth of Hempe-seed.
You shall follow the order aforesaid, only that you shall not use flesh broth,
but fish or pease broth.

To make broth of pease.
You may sees pease likewise with Almond milk in Lent time as aforesaid.

To fry pease.
Take Pease in the husks and boil them, then take good oil, and fry it a
little, wherein you shall put the pease and fry them in it, adding veriuice, new
wine, or sugar.

To make pottage of Beans.
Take Beans a little broken, make them very clean and set them on the fire,
and when the water boileth cast it away, and put more water that it may be
higher then the Beans by two fingers, then casting in some salt, set them to
sees upon the coals on a soft fire, covering them, and let them boil well:
that done, dry them, and stamp them in a mortar, then boil them again in a
pipkin with good oil, and let them sees well, but burn them not, then take a
little sage and sigges, or apples cut small, and put it into the Oil with
Onyons, and softy them, then dish them and put some of the oil and other
mixtures upon them with good spices.

To fry Beans in a pan.
Take Beans, Sage, Onions, and Figs as aforesaied, with other good herbs,
and mingle them together, then fry them in a frying pan with oil, and make it
like a pancake, and when it is baked take it out, and cast spice upon it.

To make ten messes of good broth made of red Pease or Cicers.
Take two pound of pease and wash them in whote water, and put them into a
pipkin, first drying them put to them an ounce of flower, oil, salt, Pepper,
and a little Sinamon well beaten, stir all with a spoone. Then put to them
three quarts of water or more, with a little S^ge, Rosemary, and Parsely
roots, and let them boil together till it be consumed to the quantity of
ten messes, and when it is almost boiled, add to it a little more oil, but
if you make it for a sick person, you shall put neither oil nor spice into it.

To make a devised meat of Almonds.
Take two pound of Almonds and stamp them well, tempering them with cold water
least they be oily, then take crummes of white bread and soke it in veriuice,
then take the Almonds, crummes of Bread, juice of Orenges, and Rosewater, and
temper all together, adding an ounce of sinamon and a pound of fine sugar, and
strain all this together, making it yellow with saffron. And set it to boil
in a pipkin upon coals with a soft fire, and let it not take smoke, stirring
it often with a spoone, and so let it boil for the space of half a quarter of
an hour.

To make ten mess of a compound broth.
First take two pound of Almonds stamped with a few elder flowers, and temper
them with fresh water, then strain them, and when they are strained, put them
in a pipkin to sees: then take a quart of raw milk, and put into it three
ounces of Dill, and crummes of white bread, this you shall beat together with
a pound of sugar, and set it to sees, and when it begins to boil, you
shall mingle them with the other compound, but stir it not, and when it is
mixed and waxes thick, then dish it, strawing spice upon it.

To make twelve messes of pottage of elder flowers.
Take two pound of Almonds and stamp them as aforesaid, then take four ounces
of dry elder flowers, and let them soke in clean water for the space of an
hour, then wring the^ out of the water, and stamp them with the Almonds,
adding to it the crummes of a white loaf, and a pound of sugar. And if you
will have them yellow cast saffron in them, then strain it and set it to sees
as aforesaid, and being on the fire, cast some of the said flowers whole upon
it, and when it is boiled, spice it well. If you will make this broth in flesh
time, you must add yolks of eggs with fat broth of a Pullet or other good
broth, and strain it with sugar and other spices, and the flowers of elders as
aforesaid, and being half boiled, put into it three ounces of sweet butter.

To make meat of Eggs beaten, which shall show like pease.
Sees your Eggs a little, then take them out of the broth and to make the
broth somewhat thick, take the crummes of a white loaf and strain it through
the water, or else take the broth of Pease it self if you can get it, for it
is better, and in any of these two brothes you shall sees your eggs again,
with some spice, saffron, parsely and Mint minced very small.

To make a devised dish of meat or broth, of herbs and Almonds.
Take herbs and boil them, but let the water boil before you put them in,
then take them out and lay them on a Table or a trencher, and cut them small
with a knife, then beat them in a mortar, and then boil them in almond milk,
adding sugar unto it.

To make a dish of herbs without milk.
Boil your herbs as aforesaid, and with some fat or lean broth as time
serves, make your dishes as you think good.

To dress Gourds with Almond milk or with other milk.
Sees the Gourdes in water, then press the water out of them and strain
them, then sees them with almond milk or other milk, with sugar, and a
little veriuice as you think good.

To fry Gourdes or Pompeons.
Take Gourdes and make them very clean, then cut the^ in thin pieces, and
let them boil one waume, then take them out and dry them and salt them,
rouling them in flower, that done, fry them in good oil, the^ take them off
the fire, and take a little Garlike and crummes of bread and stamp them
together with a little Veriuice, then strain it, and put this sauce upon the
Gourds, it will be good if you put nothing but Veriuice, Fennel seed, and a
little bafill: and if you will have it yellow, cast saffron into it.

To make pottage of Lettuce which shall seem to be Gourd.
Take the white and inward part of Lettuce, which is in the middle of them, and
sees them with onyons, Veriuice, pepper, and saffron, if you will make it in
flesh time boil them in flesh broth as is aforesaid with eggs and veriuice.

To make pottage of Coleworts after the manner of Rome.
Open the Coleworts, and cut the leaves as it is usually done, and boil them
in water, and when they are half boiled, take them out and cast that water
away, and put the Coleworts into a quantity of oil, first letting them dry,
and being in the oil stir them with a spoone: then take fish broth and boil
them in it as much as you think good, but if you will sees them in flesh time,
boil them in flesh broth with salt flesh or bacon, for they would be fat.

To dress mushromes.
Make the Mushromes very clean, and sees them with two or three heads of
Garlike, and crummes of bread, and this is done because naturally they are
venomous, the^ take them up, and let the water run out of them until they be
dry, the^ fry them in oil, and when they are fried, cast pepper and other
spices on them, in flesh time fry them as aforesaied. You may dress them
another way, make them very clean, then set them on the fire, putting to them
larde and Garlike beaten together, with pepper, you may likewise dress the^
with oil, you may fry them also in a frying pan like a pancake.

To make a kind of boiled meat or sauce to eat with fish.
Take Almonds and Currants according to the quantity of the fish, with nuts, and
stamp them together, and strain them if you think good, then take pepper and
other spices, a few cloves, Veriuice, and saffron, and boil them together,
then fry your fish with good oil, and then put the foresaid things upon it,
and when it is fried cast a good quantity of Sinamon upon it, this meat is best
cold: you may take fat broth without veriuice, and it will be good.

To make all kind of sauce, and first of white sauce.
Take what quantity of almonds you think good blanched, and stamp them, and
because they shall be oily, temper the^ with cold water, the^ take crumbs of
white bread, according to the quantity you will make, and let it soke in
veriuice, then stamp it with the Almonds, with some white Ginger, then strain
it with Veriuice, or the juice of Orenges or Lemmonds, and make it sweet or
sour as you think good, this sauce will serve for all boiled meat in flesh
time, and likewise to fish.

Another sauce.
Take Currants and stamp them in a mortar, then take tosted bread steeped in
Red wine, according to the quantity you will have, and stamp them together,
then take a little Red wine, Veriuice, with other bastard wine, or with Vinegar
if you will not have veriuice, and strain it, making it sweet or sower as you
think good, and put to it sinamon, cloves, and Nutmegs.

Another sauce.
Take the yolke of Eggs almost hard, Chickins or Hens livers, sodden and
scorched, Almonds according to the quantity you will have, beat them in a
mortar, and temper the^ with veriuice or vinegar, then strain them, adding
Sinamon, Ginger and Sugar: this sauce would be a little boiled, and colored
with saffron.

To make sauce of dry proins.
Take Proines and steep them in Clarret wine, then take out the stones, and
stamp them with a few blanched Almonds, and a toste of bread soked in the wine
wherein the Proines were steeped, stamp all this together, tempering them with
a little veriuice and other bastard wine, or Sugar which is better, then
strain them, and put spice unto them, specially Sinamon.

If you will make green sauce look in the chapter before, where it is set
down, follovv the order therein prescribed.
Take Parsely, wild Time, and Mint, with other good herbs, adding to them
Salt, Pepper, and Ginger, beat them together, and temper it with strong
Vinegar, then strain them: and if you will have it taste of Garlike, beat some
heads of Garlike with it, as much as you think good.

To make a sauce called Persico.
Take blanched Almonds well stamped with crummes of White bread, and a little
Ginger, Sinamon, Veriuice, Clarret wine, the juice of Pomgranets, and a little
Sanders, temper them together and strain them with a little Red wine, and then
make it sweet or sour as you will.

To make sauce called the flowers of broom.
Take Almonds, Saffron, and yolks of Eggs, and let the Almonds be blanched
and beaten as they should be, then temper them with veriuice, adding Ginger
well beaten.

To make sauce of grapes.
Take black grapes and bruise the^ in a mortar with some bread, according to
the quantity you will have, then temper them with a little Veriuice or Vinegar,
because the grapes should not be too sweet, then sees them for the space of
half an hour with Sinamon, Ginger, and other spice,

To make sauce of mulberies.
Take blanched Almonds well beaten with crummes of bread, then take the
Mulberies and mix them together, but not in a mortar least you break the
small grain or seed within the Mulbery, then put to it Sinamon and Nutmeg, and
strain them all.

To make sauce of red or black Cherries.
Use them as you did the grapes, but you may make it differ by seething it more
or less according to the quantity.

To make sauce of Barberies.
To make this sauce, follow the order proscribed in ye sauce made of Cherries
and grapes.

To make juice of Barberies to keep all the Winter.
Take ripe Barbaries, and with thy hand bruise them into a pipkin or other
vessel and to them put new veriuice, Pepper and salt plenty, and boil them
for the space of two hours or more, and then strain it, and keep it in a
vessel, it would be well salted, and this will be good juice to color any
other sauce that you will make.

To make mustard.
Take mustard seed and let it soke for the space of two days, and change the
water often, that it may be the whiter, then take blanched Almonds stamped in a
mortar, and when they are stamped put the mustard seed to them and stamp them
together, adding veriuice or vinegar, with crummes of white bread, and being
tempered together, strain them and make it sharp as you think good.

To make mustard after the manner of Padoa.
Take mustard seed and beat it very small, then take Grapes well stamped,
adding to it a tossed of white bread, a little Sanders, Sinamon, veriuice or
vinegar, and bastard wine, temper this together and strain it. Made by master
Antonie Trombone.

To make mustard which may be carried in Bals.
Beat the mustard seed as aforesaid, then take grapes well stamped, adding
thereto Sinamon and Cloves, then make what fashion bals you will round or
square, and set them on a table to dry, and being dry, you may carry them
whether you will. And when you will use them, temper them with a little
veriuice, vinegar, sodden wine, or Bastard wine.

To make a sky color sauce in summer.
Take wild mulberies which grow in the Hedges, and a few stamped Almonds with a
little Ginger, temper all this with Veriuice and strain it.

To make yellow sauce.
Take bread cut in slices and tossed it, then take red Wine, a little vinegar and
sodden wine, put the bread into it, and let it sees, then strain it and put
spice into it, and color it with saffron.

To make good garlike sauce.
Take blanched Almonds well stamped, and being half beaten, put as much
Garlike to them as you think good, and stamp them together, tempering them
with water least it be oiley, then take crummes of white bread what quantity
you will, and soke it either in lean broth of flesh or fish as time serves:
this sauce you may keep and use with all meats, fat or lean as you think
good.

To make garlike sauce in grape or Cherry time.
You must follow the order prescribed in the chapter before, only that you must
add no broth, but take black grapes, and bruise them well with thy hand into a
pipkin or other vessel, then let them boil for half an hour, and strain
them, and mix this juice with your garlike: it may be used in flesh time.

To make green Veriuice.
Take grapes and Sorrel, or Veriuice, and stamp them with a little Salt, you
must have a little old Veriuice, wherewith you may temper and strain it.

To make veriuice of Fennel-seed.
Take Garlike if you will, and Fennel-seed the best you can get, beat and boil
them together, adding thereto annis seed, with new Veriuice, and with this
veriuice you shall temper and strain it, and let it be somewhat salt.

To make sauce of young Roses.
The Roses would be somewhat green and not over ripe, and when you have
stamped them very well by themselves, stamp them once again with a head of
Garlike if you think good.

The fourth Book: Showing how to dress all kind of Fish.
IN this Treatise it is generally to be noted, that all fish either to be
sodden or fried, must first have the scales taken off and cut on the outside,
then opened and the guts taken out and clean washed: but the fish which you will
roast would not be scaled, scraped, opened, nor the guts taken out, but well
washed and opened, salt fish excepted, which would be opened and the inwards
taken out, likewise you must take out the guts of maids or Thornebackes by the
gils with a forke or string, the which is fastened unto a gut within, which
must be taken out either seething or broiling it.

To dress a Carpe.
First make good pickle, such as commonly is made for salt fish or soused fish,
then take the Carpe and put it into the pickle, and let it stand two days,
then fry him in oil, and so you may keep it twenty days or a month, and then
fry him again and again as you think good, and the more and the oftener it is
fried, the more it loses of his substance, and are the worse: And therefore
this way is only to make him continue long, and if they be great sees them,
if small fry them, but take heed there be none of the bone left in the head,
for it is venomous.

To dress Sturgion.
If you will have it good and in perfection, let it not be too new, but let it
mortify for a time, then take white Wine or Vinegar mixed with water, as much
of the one as of ye other, and salt as much as suffices, wherein you shall
sees it as long as you use to sees veale or Mutton, according to the
quantity, and cut it into great pieces such as may not easily break but sees
whole, for all fish is better whole then in pieces. The sauce would be white,
mixed with Ginger, very white Garlike or Mustard as time serves, or men's
appetites require, which you shall make as aforesaid in ye instruction for
sauces.

To dress a Latus or shadovv fish.
It is dressed like Sturgion, only it requires not so long seething, and
shall have the like sauce.

To dress a Sangris or tooth fish.
It is best sodden, but it must be fresh, you need not put so much wine to it,
but vinegar, because it binds and makes fish continue the longer, giving it
a better taste.

To dress a Base.
Sees this fish as aforesaid, but if it waieth less then four or five pound
fry it in good oil, or broile it on a gredyron, but remember as aforesaid that
when you fry it, it must neither be scraped nor opened, and you must make a
kind of liquor with vinegar, oil, and Salt, and with a Rosemary branch, bast
it there with upon the gredyron, turning it often and let it broile very well
and leisurely, for all fish would be well broiled or sodden, otherwise it is
unwholesome.

To dress a glaucus or corbo grosso fish.
Sees it as aforesaid, but if it it way but four or five pounds fry it in oil
or broyle it on a gredyron with scraping or opening it: for sauce take green
sauce savoring of Garlike, and Ginger, if you will you may eat it with mustard.

To dress a Gilthead or gilden pole.
If it be great boil it, and season it well, if it be little fry it or roast
it.

To dress a Burt or Turbut.
Sees it because it is very loose and brittle, and will easily fall in pieces,
but if you will keep it from breaking put it in a small basket, or lay it on a
trencher, that you may take it out whole, it must be sodden with great leisure,
and all fish would be sodden with discretion, for some fishes are hard and
more solid then others, and therefore they must be sod according to their
quality, but generally all fish would be very well sodden and with leisure.

To make sauce of vine branches.
Take vine branches and stamp them, and if you will you may add a few Garlike
leaves, with crummes of white bread, according to the quantity you will make,
and salt: this done, temper them together with Vinegar or Veriuice, and then
strain it.

To dress a Dab.
It must be fried, then cast over it a little Salt and juice of Orenges or
Veriuice, with Parsely chopped very small.

To dress a Palmita, which is a kind of Tonny.
Sees it like a Sturgion, and give it the like sauce, being little it would be
fried, for it cannot be roasted because it has no scales, and if you will fry
it cut it in round slices half a finger thick, and fry it well, putting to it
good store of the juice of Orenges, with spices and a little Parsely if you
think good.

To dress a Treglie a kind of Barble.
It would be well roasted and not opened, but washed and often basted with the
liquor aforesaid, and if you will keep it eight or ten days, lay two or
three one upon the other in a platter, with as much liquor on them as may cover
them, and so you may keep them long.

To dress a Goldstrike.
It is good both sodden and roasted or fried if it be great or little as you
think good: the sauce is green sauce.

To dress a Sapony another kind of Goldstrike.
It would of nature be fried, all the guts first being taken out, for it has
many, and when you will roast it take out his entrails and make as little a
hole as you can.

To dress Smelts.
Boil them, for of themselves they are better that way then any other.

To dress a scorpion of the sea.
If it be great it would be sodden: if little, fried.

To dress a sea Breame.
They are better fried or roasted then sodden.

To dress a sea Trout.
It is good roasted or sodden as you will.

To dress a kind of Sturgion called Moreca, or a sea serpent.
First flea it with whote water, and cast away the head and tail, and fry it
well: and for sauce use green sauce with Garlike.

To dress Macarell.
They will be fried, and yet they are good sodden with Pepper and Parsely.

To dress a Muler.
This fish of nature would be roasted, but if he be very great sees it, and the
sauce to the roasted is the liquor aforesaid, and Fennell-seed, and to the
boiled white sauce.

To dress a Plaice.
It would be boiled with a little parsely, and it is also good fried, putting
on it the juice of Orenges.

To dress a Besano an Italian fish.
Boil it in wine, or Vinegar and water, of each a like, and for sauce take
Garlike, but this course fish is fitter for laboring men then men of any
quality.

To dress a Dogfish.
It would be sodden as aforesaid, and then with strong garlike and a little
mustard, fry it in a pan, but dress it in what sort you will, it will never
be good as being naturally of no good taste.

To dress Eeles.
A great Eele would be roasted, being first flead and made clean, and then cut
in great pieces of a handful long or less, and when you spit it, between each
piece put a sage or a Bay leaf, and turn the spit very softly, and bast it
with the pirkle spoken of before, and when it is almost roasted, crum it with
bread mixed with a little Sinamon and Salt, which will make it have a little
crust, that gives them a good taste: you may sees small Eeles in Water, Wine,
Herbs, and Spices as aforesaid.

To dress a Mochie, an Italian fish.
It would be sodden like a Creuish of the river, and should be eaten with
vinegar.

To dress a Sea Creuish.
Sees it likewise with Fennel, and eat it with Vinegar.

To dress Oysters.
They are to be roasted on the coals, and when they open they are enough, you
may take them also out of the shell, and fry them in oil, and eat them with
vinegar and Pepper.

To dress Lampernes.
It will be fried with the juice of an Orange.

To dress a shad or Pilchare.
It is good roasted, but first pull out entrails and guts, and eat it with
green sauce, it is also good sodden, but then it must have white sauce.

To dress Muskels or Cockles.
Take a frying pan and set them over the fire, and when they open they are
ready, and as you see them open, put in a little Veriuice, Pepper and Parsely
shred small, and turn them in the pan. You may roast them on a hot iron upon
the coals, and when they open they are roasted. But they would be kept a day
and a night in salt water before you dress them, that the sand within them may
be gotten out.

To dress a Whiting.
Sees them and eat them with white mustard.

To dress a Pike.
Take out the guts and if it be great sees it, but scrape him not until he be
sodden, the sauce is white sauce, Garlike, and mustard, but if he be a little
one, fry it, it may be broyled on the gredyron, and stuffed with good herbs
and Currants.

To dress a Barble.
Use it as you will, but it is not thought to be fish, and the Spawne is
dangerous to be eaten, and chiefly in May.

To dress a Grayling.
This is excellent good fish, dress it as you will, for it is good every way,
but it is best boiled.

To dress Corario marino, a kind of sea Breame.
Roast it as you do an Eele, with sage or bay leaves betwixt every piece.

To dress a Creuisse.
Boil them in water and vinegar with much salt, because they themselves yield
much water, therefore put not too much liquor to them, and let them sees well
until they yield a great skim. And when they are boiled in that manner twice or
thrice they are enough, but prove them first least you be deceived.

To make Creuisses full of compound meat.
Dress them as aforesaid, and open their belly cunningly with a knife betwixt
their legs, and take out all the meat out of their bellies, tails and feet,
which done, stamp it with Almonds, Currants, and yolks of Eggs, according to
the quantity you will make with some cheese, Persely, and Margerum, stamped
small together, and with this compound fill the Creuishes again, and sees them
again in good oil, as softly as you may: if it be Lent add no Eggs nor
Chief. And if you will fill them with variety, take Almonds stamped with Sugar
and rosewater, and fill the feet with one kind, and the other parts with
another kind of meat.

To dress the fish called the Lion of the sea.
Stop their mouths and the hole which they have under their tails wih cotton,
because their sweetness may not run out, and put them dry in an oven to bake
leisurely, or lay them upon the hearth well heated and swept, making a fire of
coals round about them, but not too near because they may be the better
roasted and the sooner, and turn them ott least they turn. And if you will you
may sees them in water and vinegar like Creuisses, but let them sees somewhat
more as you see cause, for they are harder and bigger then other creuisses, and
for sauce take vinegar.

To sees the Horne-becke or Pipe fish.
Stop their holes and dress them likewise as aforesaid.

To dress a Breame.
Dress it as you will, but it is little esteemed.

To dress a Carpe.
If they be great boil them, you may also take them and fry them being small.

To dress Salmon.
Salmon is an excellent fish, and should ordinarily be sodden, yet it is good
any other way.

To dress Mugilis, in Italian Lasche.
They should be softly fried least they burn, and eat them with green sauce
or Veriuice.

To dress a kind of Hering, in Italian Lattacini.
You must fry the^, and eat them with green sauce or veriuice.

To dress Ruvoglioni, an Italian fish.
Fry them also, and give them the same sauce.

To dress Bachie Cosalze, an Italian fish.
His nature is to be fried or sodden, it is also good roasted.

To dress a Turdus.
If it be great boil it, if little fry it, and for sauce take mustard.

To dress Agoni diverse ways, an Italian fish.
They are good sodden with Parsely, Butter, Spice, they are good also fried
with the juice of Orenges and Veriuice mingled with oil.

To dress a Cuttle fish.
This fish is of no account, and therefore dress it as you will.

To dress Crabs.
Do as I have said of creuisse, and eat them with vinegar.

To dress a Perch.
If it be great take out the guts and sees it, but scrape it not, if it be
fresh sees it in clean water and Vinegar, and when it is sodden take off the
scales, but if it be little scrape it and dress it in oil, it is good fried
being basted with liquor as aforesaid.

To dress a Tench three ways.
Tenches are good three manner of ways, first sodden if they be well grown,
and for sauce you may make a little broth with Veriuice, Spice, and Parsely
chopped very small with the broth of the same Tench. The second is to cut and
cleave it in the back foom the head to the tail, and if it be great you
shall first scrape it, and when he is cloven cut the rige bone on both sides
and sees the Spawne, fat, and liver thereof, and if the Tench have none, the
Spawne, fat or liver of another fish will serve, then take Parsely and
margerum, and other sweet herbs, and beat them all together with the liver,
Spawne and fat, putting to it a little Garlike chopped small with some Pepper,
Saffron, Salt, and a little oil, as also Proines, Cherries, Currants, or the
kernels of a Pine Apple, and yolks of Eggs as time serves, all this tempered
together you shall put upon the Tench on the outside, then sow it up with a
needle and thread, or else tie and bind about with a packtbred, so that the
compositions may not run forth, then lay it on the gredyron with soft fire
under it that it may roast at leisure, and make a liquor with Vinegar, Oil,
Salt, Saffron and Pepper, and a little broken wine, and as you turn it, bast
it well with this liquor. The third way is, that if the Tench be small, scrape
it well and cut it open at the back, and cast salt upon him, then throw flower
upon all sides, and fry it in oil, and for sauce take the juice of orenges or
veriuice.

To dress a great Trout.
Make it very clean and cut it overthwart in round pieces of the bigness of
your hand, and lay every piece flat by itself in the Chaldren or pan wherein
you will sees them, putting good store of salt into the pan upon them, this
done, pour water so easily unto them that it washes not away the salt lying
upon them, with as much vinegar, as that the liquor may be three fingers above
the fish, and so let it boil, skimming it very well: and when it has left
skimming, abate the fire under it, that it may boil softly til it be enough,
then take it out and lay it upon a dry clean table, casting spice upon it. To
this Trout you may use white sauce with Ginger. When it is little make it
clean, and cut slices on both sides, and into the cuts put salt, then press
it betwixt two trenchers, laying some weight upon it, and so let it rest for
the space of two or three hours, then cast flower on it and fry it leisurely
in good oil, and so you may keep it three or four days if you will.

To dress a Lamprey.
Lay it to soke in hot water, and scrape off the slime, but break not the
skin, and take out the tongue and teeth, and in the bottom of his belly you
must make a little hole, wherein put the end of your finger, and with a knife
or prick of wood, you shall take out the gut or string, and pull it out with a
cloth softly that it be not broken: For the Lamprey has no evil thing in it,
but only his string. For sauce you must keep the blood, for it is the right
sauce, in the mouth you shall put half a nutmeg, and in each hole which he has
about his head you shall stick a Cloue, and so roll it in a ring and put it
in an earthen vessel, wherein you must put half an ounce of good Oil, a
little Veriuice, a little White wine the best you can get, making as much of
the liquor as will cover more then half the Lamprey, then cast a little salt
upon it, and so bake it leisurely upon the coals like a Tarte. When it
begins to bake, open the holes with a knife, and with a trencher press it
down so hard, that the blood may come forth, which you must mingle with the
other things. And if you think good you may easily take out the blood before
you set it on the fire. And for sauce take Almonds or Nuts, vnblanched but put
them under the whote embers, then pill them and stamp them with a few Currants
and a piece of tosted bread tempered with Veriuice and broken wine, with a
little of the wine or liquor aforesaid, wherein the Lamprey is sodden, and when
all this is strained put to it some Ginger, Cloves, and Sinamon. Also if you
take out the blood before it is sodden, you must mingle it with those forsaid
things, which you shall sees with the Lamprey until it be well sodden, and
then you shall roll it with the sauce, and laying it in a dish send it to the
table.

You may dress it another way upon a spit.
When it is rosting set a dish under it to receive the blood, fat, and liquor
that comes out of it, which is the best of the substance, then you may make
ye sauce aforesaid for it, wherewith you may fry it in.

When they be little they should be broiled.
They should be broiled upon a gredyron at leisure, with sauce of the juice of
Orenges and broken wine, if you will have no Orenges take Veriuice, Salt, Oil,
and Spice. And when they are broyling bast them with the said sauce, and when
they are broiled, put of the same sauce upon them, and send them to the Table.

To dress an Ink horn fish, in Latin Lolligo.
The less they be the better they are, wash them very clean and stuff them
as you do the Tench being turned out, and if you can devise a better stuffing
you may, then fry them in oil, and put the juice of Orenges upon them with
spices. You may sees the great fishes, cutting them in pieces like slices of
Veale or Beef, and boil them in broth with Parsely shred small and Spices. If
they be great, you may dress them another way. First wash him in white Wine
and a little veriuice, with this kind of washing you may get out the black
juice whereof the sauce is made, then take Almonds roasted under the embers
according to the quantity, and stamp them in a mortar with tosted bread, and so
temper it with the matter aforesaid, then strain it and boil it, putting
thereto Sinamon, Ginger, and a few Cloves. And when it is fried you shall put
this sauce upon it.

To sees, fry, and broile a Pike or any other fish all at one time.
Take a great fish and pull out the guts, and make it very clean, then bind a
third part of it toward the head with a wet cloth, for that part that should
be sodden must be covered, then go to the tail and scrape it to the
quantity of a third part and cut it on both sides like a fried fish, and then
begin to fry this part of the tail in such sort that you spoil or touch not
the rest of this fish, this being done, you must have a thin board of the
bigness of the middle of the fish, upon the which you shall bind the said fish
so softly that it breaks not, then sees that part of the fish which is bound
with the cloth that is the head, and let not the broth touch any more of the
fish then that which is wrapped in the cloth, and when this part is well
boiled, take it out and loose it softly from the board that it break not. Then
lay it on a gredyron upon the coals with fire only under the middle part which
is not sodden nor fried, and let it touch no part else, and that the fire may
not hurt the fried and boiled part of the fish, you must take two square stones
made for the purpose, and put them under the gredyron, and lay the coals
betwixt them, and in broyling the fish bast it with the liquor aforesaid, which
is fit for broyled fish, and when it is ready take it from the fire, and untie
the cloth that is wrapped about the head, and making it clean you shall send
it to the Table. If you will you may make three kind of sauces, for it is fit
for sodden, fried, and broyled fish.

To dress Schinale an Italian fish.
Cut it crossewaies of the bigness of half a finger or therabout, and make it
very clean round about, then broile it on a gredyron and turn it often, and
bast it continually with oil and vinegar mingled together, as much of the one
as of the other, but it would not be much roasted nor very dry. And when you
think that the fire has perched it and changed the color thereof round about
it is roasted, then send it to the Table. To know when it is broiled cut it, and
if it be red within it is enough, but look it be not ouerstale.

To dress a kind of meat of the spawne of Sturgions, called Chauiale.
Take bread and tossed it until it begin to change color, and cut some of the
spawne in pieces as great as the quantity of the bread, but somewhat thinner,
and lay it upon the bread, then stick the tosts upon a knifes point or some
other thing, and hold them to the fire until the spawne wax hard and somewhat
change color. You may do it another way by washing the spawne of the Sturgion
in warm water, that it be not too salt, then take herbs chopped with ye crumbs
of white bread grated, and Onyons minced small, and fried with a little pepper
and a dish of water, then mingle all these things together with the Spawne, and
it will be like a Pancake, and so fry it like a Tansie of Eggs. And to
prepare this Chauiale you must take the Spawnes of Sturgions when the Sturgion
is best in season, and take out the sinews that are in them, then wash them
with white Vinegar, and let them dry upon a Table, then put them into some
vessel, and salt them with discretion, and stir them with your hand but very
warily that you break them not, that done, take a linen bag somewhat thin,
and put the Chauiale into it for a day and a night, that the salt water may run
out, then put them into some vessel or other, and press them very well with
thy hands, making three or four little holes in the bottom of the vessel, by
the which the moisture may issue out, and being well strained, keep the
vessel very close. And so you may eat of them at your pleasure.

To dress Trouts in manner of Carpes.
Make the Trout very clean, taking out the guts, pricking it in many places
with the point of a knife. Then make a pickle with water and Vinegar of equal
quantity, with good store of salt, wherein you shall put the Trout for the
space of almost half a day, then take it out and press it two or three times
on a Table for the space of half an hour, then fry it very well in good
oil, but burn it not. In this sort you may keep it for the space of a month,
and then fry it again if you will.

To make Botarge, a kind of Italian meat.
Take the Spawnes of Cefano or Mugno that are fresh and in season, and break
not the skin that is about them, and salt them with fine dry salt with
discretion, and so let them lie for a day and a night covered in Salt, then
take them out and dry them in the smoke, but let them hang so far from the
fire that the color be not hurt. And being thus dried for to keep, you must
put them in a wodden barrel filled with bran: they are commonly eaten raw, but
if you will have them otherwise, you must roast them in the embers, or upon the
whote hearth, turning them till they be whote.

To dress a Tonny.
Take Water and Vinegar, and let the Tonny lie in it for two or three hours to
take out the Salt, then set it to boil softly, which done, take it out and
make it clean, and souce it in vinegar, the fatter it is, the better: and the
softer, the worse.

To dress a Tonny another way, changing your water.
Lay it to soke in warm water twice or thrice, then boil it two or three
waumes, and being boiled take it up and souce it in vinegar, being well washed
it may be eaten raw, if a man will.

To dress a salt Eele.
Flay it and cut it in pieces of a handful long, and sees it for the space of
half an hour, then cast out that water, and put it in other clean cold
water, and let it boil again till it be well boiled, so take it out and eat it
with Vinegar and Parsely.

To dress a Trout and all freshwater fish, that has been salted.
Let them stand in warm water for the space of four or five hours as they
are in quantity, the like must you do with all other fish. And note that of
all fishes the greatest are best, as the Proverb says, Old fish, young flesh.

To make Tarts in Lent and first of Creuisses.
Take Creuisses and sees them, then take out all their meat and stamp it in a
mortar, and take good Almond milk strained with Rosewater, and if you have it
not, take good pease broth, and stamp these things with a few small Reasons and
Figs, adding a few more small Reasons, Parsely, Margerum, and Bettonie, first
fried in oil, and stirred with a knife, then put to it Ginger, Sinamon, and
Sugar. This composition would be stamped in a mortar, and to make it thicken
like milk, put a little flower into it, stirring them together, or the Spawnes
of a Pike stamped and strayned, which bind, and make a crust like other Tarts,
and being baked, straw it with Sugar and Rosewater.

To make Tarts of Eeles.
Flay the Eeles, and cut them in pieces of two fingers long, and sees them,
but not too much, then make Almond milk very white and fair, and strain it
with Veriuice and Rosewater, and let the milk be thick, and stamp also a
few Currants and dry Figs, then take Spinach broken in pieces and fry it in
oil, with a little parsely, broken and beaten small, and an ounce of small
Reasons, an ounce of the Kernels of Pine Apples, with Ginger, Sinamon, Pepper,
and a little Saffron, according to the quantity you will make, temper and mix
all this composition well together. Then put the crust into a frying pan, and
in it put your composition and then the Eeles, and so cover them again with
the composition till all the stuff be wasted, then cover it with paste and
bake it leisurely with fire both over and under it, and when it is half baked
take a little Veriuice, Rosewater, and Sugar, and pricking holes in the lid put
it into the Tart, and so let it stand until it be baked.

To make Tartes of Dates, Almonds, and other things.
Take two pounds of blanched Almonds, and stamp them with fish broth and a
little Rose water, then strain it and let it be somewhat thick, then take half
a pound of clean Dates, a few Currants, and dried Figs, and beat all in a
mortar, then take a little Spinach, Parsely and Margerum, and fry them all in
oil and stir it with a knife, adding to these herbs certain fat livers and
good fish beaten therewith, then take two ounces of the kernels of Pine apples
very clean, which you shall keep to straw and stick upon the Tart when it is
made, and put it in the crust, then take Reasons of the sun, and a pound of
Sugar, Sinamon, Ginger, and a little Saffron, and mingling all this together,
you must temper it with one ounce of fine flower and a few Spawnes of a Pike,
and mix it with the other composition aforesaid, and make the crust or paste
as aforesaid, and so let it bake at leisure, strawing Sugar and Rosewater upon
it, you must not make it too thick.

To make a Tart of Rice.
Take two pounds of blanched Almonds well stamped with a little Rosewater and
Rice broth when it is almost sodden, and temper Almonds therewith and strain
it, then take a pound of Rice and beat and temper it well with the Almonds,
then put to it two ounces of white leauened dow, a little flower or else a few
Spawnes of a Pike, and strain it as aforesaid with a pound of Sugar, and an
ounce of the kernels of Pine apples broken in a mortar but not stamped, and
when it is half baked put a fine thin cover or lid upon it, and being full
baked, straw it with Sugar and Rosewater, but let it not be too dry baked.

To make a Tart of red garden pease.
Sees red Garden Pease, and being sodden, stamp them and temper them with
their broth and a little Rosewater, then strain them, and take blanched
Almonds according to the quantity you will make, and stamp them, but they must
not be strained, and with them stamp three ounces of Currants and some dry
Figs, and two ounces of Pine kernels not too much beaten, adding thereunto
Sugar, Rosewater, Sinamon and Ginger, mingle all this together and thicken it
with flower and the spawne of a Pike, and so bake him with a crust, and when it
is almost baked, straw it with Sugar and Rosewater, and let it dry upon it.
This Tart would not be thick.

To make a Tart of the liver of fishes, and of the fish it self.
Sees the fish with the Livers, then take sodden Pease and stamp and strain
them, and likewise stamp the fish, and the livers, taking out all the bones,
and if you can get the Spawne of a Trout or Tench, it will be good to stamp
with them, then take Parsely and Margerum, and choppe it very small, and stamp
it in a mortar with Sugar, Sinamon and Ginger as much as suffices, mingle all
these together with Rosewater, and let it bake softly, and when it is baked,
observe the order aforesaid. You may make all these kind of Tarts of diverse
colors and several meats in one pan as time serves, dividing them into
quarters, or otherwise as you think good.

To make Marchpanes.
Blanch thy Almonds and stamp them very small, but strain them not, and to
make the Almonds whiter, of better taste, and sweeter, you must lay them for the
space of a day and a night in fair water, that they may blanch of themselves
between your fingers, and stamping them you shall put in Rosewater that they
be not oiley, and if you make a very good Marchpane, put as much fine Sugar in
it as there are Almonds in equal weight, with an ounce or two of Rosewater,
the^ temper them together, then take Wafers or dow mixed with sugar and temper
it with Rosewater, then knead it and lay the composition upon it, and in
spreading it on sprinckle it with Rosewater, then straw it with fine Sugar
small beaten, and disperce it with a spoone, so bake him in an oven very
softly, and let it not burn neither be ouerdrie, and it would not be thick.

To make an Italian meat called Caliscioni.
Take Marchpane stuff or such as is spoken of in other places, prepare the
paste, Sugar, and Rosewater, then fill it with the stuff, and if you have a
mould print it therewith to make it the fairer, the^ bake it in a pan or oven
like a Marchpane, but burn it not.

To make Curds of Almonds in Lent.
Take blanched Almonds and stamp them with Rosewater, then with two ounces of
Sugar, ten ounces of Rosewater, and half a pint of Pike or Tench broth, (for
the broth of other sea or fresh water fish is not good, and let not the broth
be very salt but somewhat thick) temper them together, and strain it so hard
that there remain no part of the substance of the Almonds in the strayner, let
this Curd stand for the space of one night, and put it in a dish or other
vessel, and in the morning you shall find it curdy like curds of Milk. And if
you will you may put them into green leaves or other herbs like Cheese
curds, or let it stand in the dish, strawing it with Sugar or Annyseed Comfigs,
you may add thereto a little flower because it binds.

To counterfeit Lenten Cheese Curds.
Take a pound of blanched Almonds and stamp them as aforesaid, then take four
ounces of Sugar, an ounce of Rosewater, and a glass full of fish broth as
aforesaid, and of the same fishes broth: then temper them together and strain
them thick, then form them and send them to the Table in a dish or upon a
plate, strawing it with Sugar and Annyseed comfets.

To counterfeit Butter.
Take a pound of blanched Almonds as aforesaid, and stamp them and strain them
with half a glass of Rosewater, and to make them curdy put a little flower or
half a glass of Pike or Tench broth, with four ounces of Sugar and a little
Saffron to make it yellow, straining it thick, then make it in fashion of a
dish of butter, and set it all night to thicken against morning in a cold place.

To counterfeit Eggs.
Take Almonds and blanch them well and stamp them, tempering them with
Rosewater that they be not oiley, adding some Pike broth that is fat, and
strain them like milk, then take half a pound of clean Rice according to the
quantity you will make, which sees in half the milk made of the Almonds:
take also three ounces of the best and whitest flower that may be gotten, and
dissolve it in the other half of the milk, then let it boil for the space of
half a quarter of an hour, stirring it with a spoon, and let it not taste of
the smoke: this done, take the Rice aforesaid and all the milk, and strain it
hard with your hand, for the thicker the better, and forget not to add good
store of Sugar, then take a quantity or part of the said composition as much as
you think good, which you shall make yellow with Saffron, and thereof make
round Bals like the yolks of Eggs, then take two wooden moulds in form of
Eggs, and if you have no moulds in stead thereof take the made yolks of
Eggs, compassing them about with the white composition, making them round like
eggs, and so lay them in the dish, and they will show like hard Eggs without
shells, and tempering a little of that white stuff with Rosewater and Sugar,
whote or cold as you think good, they will show like curds. And if you will use
them dry cast none of that liquor upon them, but in stead thereof cast Sugar
beaten small.

To make Tartes of Chestnuts.
Sees the Chestnuts and stamp and strain them with milk, adding all the
other compositions for the Tarts aforesaid, and make it yellow with Saffron.

To make Tarts in flesh time, and first to make a white Tarte.
Take two pounds of good new Chief and cut it small, and then stamp it, then
take fifteen or sixteen whites of eggs, and temper and mix them with the
Chief, putting thereto a pound of Sugar, half a pound of fair white Ginger,
half a pound of sweet Butter, and some milk as much as will suffice, then make
your paste and let it be somewhat thin, and let it bake with a soft fire both
under and over it, and let him be somewhat brown, and when he is baked straw
Sugar and Rosewater upon it.

To make a green Tarte after the manner of Bolognia.
Take as much Chief as aforesaid, and grate it somewhat great, then take
Parsely, Margerum, and other good herbs chopped very small and mix them with
the Cheese, and stamp them in a mortar adding thereto Eggs, Pepper, and a
little Saffron with sweet butter, then make a crust for it and bake it. And
when it is half baked, color it over with the yolke of an Egg and a little
Saffron, and when the upper crust rises it is baked, then take him from the
fire.

To make a Herboletta of herbs in the month of May.
Take as much new chief as aforesaid and stamp it, then take fifteen or
sixteen Eggs and some milk, good store of Bettonie, Margerum, Sage, Mint,
and a little Parsely, stamp these herbs very well and wring out the juice
and straining it, you must put it into the Chief and other things aforesaid,
with half a pound of Butter, half a pound of Ginger, and ten ounces of Sugar,
and mix all these together and set them on the fire in a pipkin not ouerwhote,
and stir it with a spoone until it begin to thicken like pottage: that done,
having made paste you shall put the composition into it, and set it to bake in
a pan with a soft fire, both under and over it. And when it is well baked, take
it out and straw fine Sugar and Rosewater upon it. This kind of Tarte is best
when it is greenest.

To make Tart of Pompeons.
Take Pompeons and make them clean and grafe them as you do Cheese, and boil
them a little in broth or in milk, then take as much new Cheese as aforesaid,
add to it also a little old Cheese, take also a pound of the panch of a Hog,
or a Cowes Vdder well sodden and chopped small, and if you will you may use
Butter instead of those two things aforesaid, or Suet, adding unto it half a
pound of Sugar, a little Saffron and Sinamon with a quart of milk, and Eggs,
as need requires. And when you think the Pompeons are sodden take them up and
strain them, and color it with a little Saffron, then making a crust of past
under it, put it in a pan, and make a soft fire both under and over it, and
being half baked, cover it with Wafers or such like stuff instead of an upper
crust, and being through baked, straw it with Sugar and Rosewater.

To make Tartes of Pears, Turnips, and Quinces.
You may also as time serves, make Tartes of Turnips and Pears, first rosting
them in the embers, or with broken or sweet wine, so you may do with Quinces,
cutting them in quarters or pieces, making them clean, and boiling them: and if
you will you may roast them in the embers, for so they will be better, then
strain them, and add such things to them as are aforesaid.

To make a kind of meat called Migliacio.
If you will make Migliacio, for four or five persons, you shall stamp two
pounds of new Cheese so new as in a manner it shall be ready to turn to milk
again, then take four ounces of fine flower, eight or ten whites of Eggs, and
half a pound of Sugar, mingling all this together, and if you have not flower
take crummes of white Bread grated very small, and use it instead of flower,
and take a pan without past, and put Butter into it about two fingers thick,
and let it stand on the coals until the Butter be melted, then put the
composition into it with a reasonable fire both under and over it, and when it
is baked take it out and straw Sugar and Rosewater upon it.

To make Tartes of Elder flowers.
Take the flowers without kernels, and wash them clean with some of their
branches, mix them with the substance spoken of before for a white Tarte, but
it would be somewhat thicker because the flowers would be well separated,
whereby they may lie both above and below, and in the middle of the Tart.

To make Tartes of the small green thrids that wind about vine branches.
Take these Thrids about the vines and boil and choppe them with a knife, and
the like may be done with the red, then take good new Cheese and a Cowes vdder
well sodden, and stamp them together, and if you will in stead of ye Cowes
Vdder you may use Suet or Butter, adding thereto Ginger, Sinamon, and a good
quantity of Sugar, put this into a frying or baking pan, with paste both under
and above, and when it is almost baked, prick the upper crust full of holes:
being baked, straw Sugar and Rosewater upon it.

To make Tartes of red Cherries.
Take the reddest Cherries that may be gotten, take out the stones and stamp
them in a mortar, then take red Roses chopped with a knife with a little new
Cheese and some old Cheese well stamped with Sinamon, Ginger, Pepper, and
Sugar, and all this mixed together, add thereunto some eggs according to the
quantity you will make, and with a crust of paste bake it in a pan, and being
baked straw it with Sugar and Rosewater.

To make a fat Tarte with Rice.
Wash the Rice well and make it clean and boil it in fat broth, and being
boiled, take it out and dry it, then take a little new Cheese stamped with
Eggs, Sugar, and Rosewater according to the quantity you will make, and if you
will you may add a little milk, and this being mixed together bake it in a
pan, and observe the order prescribed for white Tarts, but it must have less
Cheese then the other aforesaid.

To make a Tarte of Wheat flower.
Make clean the wheat and sees it in fat broth, then take it out as you did
the Rice, and take a pound of new Cheese, and half a pound of old Cheese
grated and stamped together with a Cowes Vdder or Swines Panch, sodden almost
to Suet and minced with a knife, with Spice, Sugar, and eggs, according unto the
quantity you will make, with a little Saffron, mingle all this together, and
then make an under crust of paste and bake it, and when he is almost baked,
cover him with the like cover yt you use for the Pompeons or Gourds.

To make a Tarte of meal.
Take stamped meal very white and clean, and sees it in Goats milk or Cowes
milk, and sees it thick, then take a little fine flower and the whites of two
Eggs according to the quantity you will make, and temper them with the meal
stirring it with a spoon, then let it boil a little more, putting in Sugar and
stirring it, and when this composition is made spread it upon a trencher or
other thing, and let it cool, and when you think good cut it in small or
great pieces as you will, then fry them in a pan with Butter, turning them
until they be brown, and then dish them, and put Sugar and Rosewater upon
them. The like you may do in Lent by putting Almond milk in stead of other
milk, and fry them in oil.

To make a Tarte of Veale, Kid, or Capon.
Take which of these meats you will both lean and fat, and boil them, taking
out all the sinews, then mince it and stamp it in a mortar, then take a
little new and old Cheese, Parsely, and Margerum, chopping them small, and
twelve or fifteen Eggs, with a Cowes Vdder well sodden, or a Hogs panch well
stamped, with Pepper, Saffron, Sinamon and Ginger, and bake it like other
Tartes.

To make a common Tarte.
Take good Cheese, Eggs, Butter, Currants, Ginger, Sinamon and Pepper, with a
little grated bread, with fat broth, colored with Saffron, then use it as other
Tarts.

To make Tartes or Pies with broth.
Make a thick crust of what bigness you will, then take Pullets and Pigeons
parboyled, cut them in quarters, and each quarter into two or three pieces, then
take blanched Almonds stamped, yolks of Eggs, Saffron, fat broth, and a
little Veriuice, and dry that crust or paste like unto other Pies, and make the
sides high, then fill it full of flower and cover it with a lid, and let it
bake till it be stiff, then cut open the lid and take out the flower, and
then fill the Pie with the broth and meat aforesaid, let it fast well of Ginger
and Pepper, and bake it in an oven like other Pies.

To make Gealies of flesh or fish, and of diverse colors in one platter.
If you will have white Gealy, take good white Vinegar or old Veriuice, and
twice as much water, then take Sheeps feet or Kids feet flaien and made very
clean, especially about the houses, and cut them and take out the hairs in the
middle, and wash them well in cold water, the^ boil them in the mixture of
Vinegar and water, boiling them as softly as you can, and with it boil Ginger
cut into small pieces, and whole grains of Paradise, and when the feet are
indifferently boiled take them up, and let the broth sees a little when they
are out: then take the whites of ten Eggs more or less according to the
quantity you will make, observing the order in straining, clearing, and doing
all other things else, which I will hereafter set down in Gealy made of
flesh: and make ready the dishes with Capons, Pullets, or other things upon
which you will put this Gealie, and lay it finely on them, setting the dishes
in a cold fresh place because it may thicken the better, then take out a good
piece or a quarter of that gealie in the pot and set it on the fire in a pipkin
until it be well melted, and that you see it return to the form again, then
take a little Saffron and make it yellow: and when it is cold, take of the
foresaid broth or some other thing made for the purpose, but let it not be
whote when you put it in again, this being well ordered and hardened, take out
another piece, and make it red with Carnels as I said of Saffron, and so take
out another piece to make green with wheat, or barley blades when they are
young, and Parsely well stamped and strayned, and use it as the other two
colors. Also you may make a sanguine color with Carriots roasted in the
embers, and being roasted, make clean the outside with a knife which is
sanguine, and put in the bottom of the bag or strainer, out of the which the
compound or decoction is strained, and as often as you receive it out, you
shall put it upon the white broth well heated, observing the like order in all
the other colors aforesaid, and place it in order with the other colors, you
may make more colors if you will in the same manner.

To make a Gealie of Creuisses which shall seem alive.
Take Creuisses in their shells, and lay them to soke in Vinegar, then take of
the substance aforesaid, and put it to them.

To make another fair Gealie.
Take forty Sheep feet, and flea them, and take out the bones and hair, then
lay them to soke in fresh water for the space of three or four hours, then
wash them, and then take somewhat more then a quart of Vinegar, as much White
wine, and twice as much water, and sees the feet therein, with salt to it as
much as is convenient, and skim them well, and when they are half boiled, take
a quarter of a pound of whole Pepper, as much long Pepper, and the like
quantity of grains of Paradise, with a quarter of a pound of whole Sinamon,
half a quarter of a pound of Spiknard and Cloves, beat them all very grossly
all together, but not too much, and boil them with the feet, and let them
boil till they be consumed to a third part, and when the feet are well
boiled, take them out and let the broth sees on the fire, and putting into it
the whites of ten Eggs beaten together till they turn to a froth, and
stir it in the broth with a spoon, and then letting it boil one waume,
strain it twice or thrice through a woollen cloth with all the composition: let
it be well strayned, and let the mixture remain in the cloth, and the oftener
it is strained the better and clearer it is: then prepare your flesh of
Pullets, Capon, Rid, or Veale very well sodden, pulling off the skins that it
may be fair and white, and so dry it between two linen clothes, then dish
it and lay the Gealie upon it, and set them in a cold place that it may harden
and congeale.

To make Gealy of fish.
Take Water, Wine, and Vinegar, and that it may continue long, take but a
little water, and good store of Spice as aforesaid, the best fish for this
purpose is Tench and Pike, and the greater the better, these fishes should be
opened but not scraped, very fresh, and sodden in a little broth, only as much
as will cover them because the broth may be the stronger, and when you think
the fish is well sodden, take it out and flay it and then lay it aside, but
sees the skin a little in the broth, and when it is well sod strain it,
observing the order aforesaid in Gealie of flesh, as well in making it yellow as
in all other things. And you may in like sort put any sea fish sodden and cut
in quarters into this Gealie.

To make Gealie in a little basket.
Prepare the decoction in good order, then take a new basket and put the Capon,
Pullet, or other flesh into it, that you would put in Gealie as in a platter,
you must likewise have another vessel ready wherein you may put the basket,
putting the foresaid decoction upon it, and set it in a cold place to congeale,
and when it is well congealed take a whote knife, and raise the Gealie round
about within the basket that it may easily come out, and make clean the vessel
with a cloth in every place, and so you may carry this Gealy whether you will.
The like you may do in Lent, putting whole fish into it, which shall seem
alive, and it will be very fair.

To make Fritters of Cheese, Eggs, and Elder flowers.
Take new and a little old Cheese and stamp them well, putting to it a little
fine flower, and White of Eggs according to the quantity you will make, with a
little Milk and good store of Sugar, stamp them all together, then take it out
of the mortar, and put Elder flowers as your discretion serves, neither beaten
nor stamped. This composition would not be too soft nor liquid, that it may
be wrought with the hand in any form you will, then fry them in good Suet,
butter, or Oil, and send them whote to the Table.

To make Fritters of the white of Eggs, and of flower and Cheese.
Observe the order aforesaid, only not putting thereto milk nor Elder flowers.

To make fritters of Cream and Curds.
Take the Curds and having cut them, strain out the water or whay, and that
which remains in the strainer mingle it with fine flower, white of Eggs,
Sugar and Rosewater, according to the quantity you will make, it would not be
too much congealed, and make them great or little with a spoone as you think
good, and fry them in suet or good Butter.

To make fritters of Sage and Bay-leaues.
Take a little fine flower and temper it with Eggs, Sugar, Sinamon, Pepper,
and a little Saffron to make it yellow, and take whole sage leaves and roll
them in this composition one by one, and fry them in Butter or Suet. Do the
like with Bayleaues, and in Lent fry them in oil without Eggs and Suet.

To make fritters of Apples.
Part them and sees them, or roast them, and take out the coats and stamp
them, putting to them a little fine flower and a little leaven and fry them in
good Oil, you may cut them also into small pieces, and take out the coare, and
make the composition aforesaid in the last chapter of Sage and Bayleaues.

To make fritters of Almonds, with the brawne or flesh of a Hen.
Take Almonds and stamp them with Rosewater and a little milk and strain
them, then take the brawne or flesh of the breast of a Pullet, boil it and
stamp it apart from the Almonds, then take a little flower and whites of Eggs
according to the quantity you will make, and a little Sugar, mingle all this
together, and make your fritters in what quantity you will, and fry them in
Suet or Butter, and set them not be overmuch baked.

To fry Cheese in a pan.
Take Cheese which is not too old nor too salt, and cut it into small square
pieces or in what sort you will, and take a pan, in the bottom whereof put
some Butter or Suet, and holding it over the fire, put the said pieces of
Cheese into it, and when it is soft, turn it, and cast Sugar and Sinamon upon
it and send it presently to the Table: it is to be eaten whote after meat.
You may dress it another way, that is, make tosts of bread, and when they are
tosted lay them in the pan, and on every tossed a piece of Cheese of the same
greatness, but somewhat thinner, then cover the pan and heat it until the
Cheese curd, then cast Sugar, Sinamon and Ginger upon them.

To make Pancakes in Lent, and first of Elder flowers.
Take Almonds and stamp them, or else Pine apple kernels, and strain them
with Rosewater and Pease broth, then take a little leaven, flowers of Elders,
and some flower, and temper them together, and this would be made over night
against morning, and so they will be the lighter: in the morning put good store
of Sugar on them, and make them in in what form you will, and fry them in Oil.

To make fritters of bitter herbs.
Take fine flower and a little leaven, and temper it with the herbs chopped
small, and Currants, and then fry them, this composition would not be too
tender, fry the^ in Oil, and cast Sugar and Honny on them.

To make fritters of Rice.
Sees the Rice well, and when it is sed dry it upon a Table, and if you will
not have it whole you may stamp it, then take Almonds and stamp and strain
them, with a little of the same Rice broth, and let this Almond milk be very
thick, then take a little fine flower and Sugar, and mingling it all together,
fry them in good Oil in what fashion you will.

To make fritters of Figs.
Take a few Almonds and pine kernels, as many as you will and stamp them, let
them be very white, adding thereunto two dry Figs and Currants with Spice,
and if this stuff be too thick put a little Rose water to it, then take Figs
and make a hole in each Fig hard by the stalk, and fill them with this stuff,
then fry them in oil and cast Sugar on the^.

To make fritters of Fish.
Sees the fish and stamp the whitest part thereof, then take Almonds well
stamped and strained, and a little fine flower with Sugar and Sinamon, and
temper all this with a little common water, then fry it in oil in what form
you will.

To make fritters like fishes.
Blanch thy Almonds and take meat of fish without bones and stamp them
together with Currants, Sugar, Parsely and Margerum chopped small with good
Spice and Saffron, then have in a readiness a fine paste, and making it in
what form you will you may fill them with this composition, then fry them in
oil: they make likewise be baked dry in a frying pan, and when they are baked,
they will show like fishes.

To make them another way.
Stamp Almonds and temper them with Rosewater and Sugar, then take flower
tempered with common water and good store of Sugar, this being made in past,
make what form of fish you will devise: also you may bake them dry in a pan
like a Tarte.

To make fritters in another sort.
You shall make a composition like the aforesaid Almonds, flower, and Sugar,
and thereof make thy fritters.

To make another sort.
Take Almonds blanched, Pine kernels, or Nuts, or any of them, stamp them well
with Currants or Figs, putting to them the meat or livers of fishes, with
Parsely, Margerum, and good Spices, and make it yellow with Saffron, then form
them and fry them with oil.

To make fritters of Rice like little Pies.
Sees the Rice and stamp your Almonds and strain them as thick as you can,
with a little Rosewater, and mix the Rice well with the Almonds, and with
Sugar, Sinamon, and a little flower, and make it in form of Pies and fry them
in oil.

To make fritters full of wind, or pust fritters.
Take fine flower, water, Salt, and Sugar, and make a fine soft past and roll
it on a Table very thin, and cut it into small pieces and fry it in oil,
and take heed they be not knotty, and they will puff up and seem to be full,
and yet there is nothing in them, and cast Honny upon them.

To make them in another manner.
Make your paste like that I spoke of before, to make fritters of curds and
Cream, then take Fennel when it is blown, and if you will, mix it and all
the stuff together: or break every branch by it self one by one, and roll
them in the said stuff, and fry them in oil.

To fry Pistinachie Nuts.
Make them very clean and take out the hard matter within them, then sees
them, and when they are sod roll them in flower, and fry them in oil.

To dress Eggs all manner of ways, and first to make a Pancake.
First you shall beat the Eggs together with a little milk and water to make
them tender, and a little grated Cheese, and then fry them in good Butter that
they may be the fatter, and to make them good, they would not be turned nor
much baked, and so send it to the Table.

To make a green Pancake.
Take the things aforesaid, and add thereto the juice of Bettonie, Parsely,
good store of burrage, Mints, Margerum, Sage a little, and strain this juice
through a cloth, and so make the Pancake.

To make another Pancake of herbs.
Take the foresaid herbs, and cutting them small, fry them in Butter or
Oil, mingling them with Eggs and other things aforesaid, then make the
Pancake and fry it well, and let it be thick but not ouerbaked.

To dress Eggs another way.
Put oil in the pan, and break new laid Eggs in it, and fry them softly,
and as they fry stir them, and when they congeale and wax thick and white,
they are fried, but fry them not too dry.

To poche Eggs.
Let the water be whote, and break new laid Eggs into it, and when they are
thick, take them out because they may be tender, then put Sugar, Rosewater,
and a little juice of Orenges or Veriuice on them, or if you will, throw grated
Cheese and spice upon them.

To poche them in milk or wine.
Do as aforesaid, only that you shall straw no Cheese on them.

To dress and fill Eggs.
Sees new Eggs in water until they be hard, then peele them and cut them in
the middle, and take out the yolks, and do not break the white, and stamp
some part of those yolks with a few Currants, Parsely, Margerum and Mint,
chopped very small, with two or three whites of Eggs, with what spice you think
good. And when they are mixed together color it with Saffron, and fill the
Eggs therewith, and fry them in oil: and for sauce take a few of those
yolks which remain vnstamped with a few Currants, and stamp them well
together, and temper them with a little Veriuice, and strain them, putting
thereto Sugar, Cloves, and good store of Sinamon, let this sauce boil a
little, and when you will send the Eggs to the Table, put this sauce upon them.

To roast Eggs upon a gredyron.
Beat two or three new laid Eggs together, and heat an empty frying pan very
well, and put these beaten Eggs into it, and let them spread about the frying
pan as thin as paper, and when they are baked, cut them in four pieces and
lay them on the gredyron, and break over them as many new Eggs as will lie
upon them, and make a soft fire both under and over them like a Tart, and straw
them with Sugar and Sinamon, and when the Eggs are thick, take them off the
gredyron in that manner, and send them to the Table.

To roast Eggs on a spit.
Heat your spit very whote, and tie the Eggs longwaies or otherwise upon it,
and roast them like meat, and when they are roasted take out the meat and send
them to the Table.

To fry Eggs.
Put good Butter in the Pan and heat it a little, then take the yolks of Eggs
and fry them, with Sugar and Sinamon, and make a moderate fire as to a Tarte,
then put the juice of Orenges or Rosewater upon them.

To roast them in whote embers.
Put them into the whote embers, turning them often on every side, and when they
sweat they are roasted.

To sees Eggs with the shell.
Put them in cold water, and make it boil a Pater noster while, and then take
them out.

To dress them after the manner of Florence.
Take new ^^ied Eggs, and break them one by one in a pan, and let the oil be
very whote, and as soon as you have put them into the oil, stir them
together with a spoone or some other thing, and make them as round as may be,
and turn them often until they change color, and yet let them not be hard
within, nor ouerbaked, but rather soft and tender.

Another kind of dressing them.
Take whole Eggs and lay them into the embers, then strike them with a small
stick until they break, and so let them roast, and when they are roasted, take
them out and cast a little Vinegar and Parsely upon them.

Another way.
Dress them in the Florentine manner as aforesaid, then straw Sugar, Spice,
and Salt on them, and so put them into paste as you would do Turnips, and fry
them or sees them, you may dress them also in pie paste with the foresaid
stuff, adding a little Veriuice, baking them like Tartes, or frying them, but
let them not be ouerbaked, because they will be the harder, and so much the
worse.

To prepare Hogs grease.
Take fresh larde or fat of a Hog, and cut it like to Chestnuts and salt it
well, then stamp it well and let it stand for the space of a day, then set it
on the fire, and if it be an hundred pounds, put in it ten or twelve quartes
of water to it, and let it sees until it be congealed, then skim it and
strain it, and put it into a vessel in a fresh and cold place, and by this
order it will continue a whole year or more.

To make wine of water.
Take the grapes of a wild vine and dry them in the son, then beat them into
powder, and put them into water and it will have the taste and color of wine,
and if the grape be white it will have the same color, if red the like.

To make sweet white Wine.
Take good sweet Apples according to the quantity of the Wine and stamp them
well, and put half as much Honny as Apples, and mingle them together, then put
it into the wine in the vessel and mingle it well: and this is done best with
new wine that boyleth in the Vate, or else boil these things in some vessel
with some new wine, then put it to the other, and stir them together.

To make meat for Nightingales.
Take a dram of Almonds, two drams of Pease flower, a dram of fresh Butter,
two drammes of Honny, a little Saffron and two yolks of Eggs, mix them
together, and set them to the fire in a pipkin, and give it to the Nightingales.

To make a composition of Pompeons or Mellons.
The Pompeons or Mellons would be scoured and made clean in Vinegar and not
in water, and so stand a month or more in Vinegar, and if need be the vinegar
may be changed, and then put them in Honny like unto a Gourd, and they are made.

To make a Composition of Figs, very cordial.
First prepare your Figs ready in a clean vessel, which are to be conserved,
then boil the Honny and skim it well, and being whote put it on the Figs,
and let them stand in it till it be cold, this you shall do four or five
times, the last time take new Honny and boil it well, and put to it Ginger,
Sinamon and Cloves, then put the Figs in the pot wherein they shall remain,
being conserved, these Spices must be beaten small, and set the Figs in a
vessel in the sun, and now and then put Honny mixed with the Spices
aforesaid, and so the Figs will be conserved.

To make strong Vinegar and quickly.
Take a pound of Pellitory well stamped and put it in four pottles of wine,
then take the foresaid Pellitory, and boil it in four or five quarts of
strong Vinegar, and so boiling put it into the caske, and in twelve days it
will be good.

FINIS.

