A very merry and pleasant History done not long since, in this realm of
England. Written in Latin by Erasmus of R^terodame, Dialoguewise, under the
title of a Coniuration or Spirit.

Newly translated into English, by Thomas Johnson.



Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, for William Pickring. ANNO DOMINI.
1567.

(...)from the bridge the way leads into the plain field.

Thomas. I remember it well.


Anthony. Of late a rumoure was spread among the husbandme^ of those quarters,
that bysides this bridge there walked a certain Spirit, Sprite.
whose miserable howlings were sundry times heard: Soul.
which they thought to be the soul of some man in those places tormented with
most cruel punishments.


Thomas. Who was the author of this rumor?


Anthony. Who but Pole? and this was the preface of his Interlude.


Thomas. What came in his mind to feign this.


Anthony. I wot nere, but that such is the ma^s nature, desirous to deceive
the foolish people, by such sort of delusions. I will show you what like pra^k
he has playd^ of late. We rode a good company of us together to Richmond,
whereof there were some, whom you would have sworn, Richmond.
had been both tall and stutdy fellows. The i. Act
The wether was very fair, neither appeared there any little cloud in the
Sky. There Pole casting his eyes up toward heaven: blessed all his face and
shoulders with the sign of the Cross, and fayning in his countenance, as
though he had been afraid, these words he spoke to him self: O immortal God,
what do I see? and being demanded of those that rode next unto him what it
was: Again, making a greater cross: O merciful God, I beseech thee (quod he)
take away from mine eyes this terrible sight. When they desirous to know what
it was, most instantly required him to declare the vision, Vision.
he castyng his eyes intentiuely up again toward heaven, and there with his
finger pointyng to one place: See you not yonder (quod he) an ugly Dragon, A
Dragon.
armed with light burning horns, and a winding tail? Which when they denied
that they saw it: again he had they should behold more earnestly, often
poyntyng with his finger also to the place, until at length an other of the
company, lest he should seem that he could see but a little, said also that be
saw it. Likewise did one or. ij. other, for they were ashamed not to see that
which was so evident. But what need many words? within. iij. days the rumor
had persuaded all England that there appeared such a Monster. England.
A wonder it was how the report of the people had augmented the fable, Monster.
neither lacked there such as would in earnest expound what this horrible sight
portended. Whose folly he much rejoiced at, who was the Inuenter of the
argument.


Thomas. I know well the ma^s wit, but return again to the Spirit.


Anthony. In the meanewhile commodiously, there resorted unto Pole, a certain
Priest named Fan, Fan.
of ye order which we ca^ not well call in Latin Regulares, Regulares,
Regulars, unless ye greek name agree also, a parish Priest serving the cure
in one of the next Parishes. This same seemed unto himself not meanly
learned, and especially in divinity.


Thomas. I perceive it well, he was found chief doer in the matter.


Anthony. About supper they fell in communication of this matter, or report of
the spirit. When Pole perceived that Fan had not only heard of the rumor,
but also believed it to be true, he began to entreat him, that because he
was a man both learned and godly, he would help that sielly soul so cruelly
tourmented. And if you doubt any thing (quod he) try the matter: Walk about
ten of the clock at night to the bridge, and you shall hear terrible
howlyngs. Take unto you what company you list, so shall you hear more safely
and surely.


Thomas. What then?


Anthony After supper Pole as he was wont or accustomed, a haukyng or hunting,
Fan walkyng up and down eue^ then when ye darkness had taken away all sure
judgment of things, at length hears pitiful schritchinge (...) fire out
of their nostrils, who assayde also to enter into the Circle, but that by
weighty words he drove them away with sorrow: At which Fan taking heart of
grace, the day following being well appointed, comes to the Circle, and
provoke the Devil to appear by many charms and prayers. Charms.
And Pole with his co^panio^s showing themselves a far off, sitting upon black
horses, with terrible noyses (as who should say) they would feign have entered
into the Circle.


Thomas. Had they no fire?


Anthony. None at all, for that had chanced unto them not very well before:
but here begins another tale. They brought with them a long rope which they
dragged softly on ye ground, each of them holding an end in their hands,
dispersed themselves abroad as though they had been so enforced by the
vehemency of Fan his invocation: and therwithall they tombled over and over
both the Priests and also the Vessel of holy Water which they had.


Thomas. Had the parish Priest such a reward for his good will in furthering
the matter?


Anthony. Yea truly, yet had he rather suffer all this and more too, than to
forsake the pretended pastime. The. 3. Act.
This done, when they came to talk together Fan declares unto Pole in what
danger he was, and how stoutely he drove away both the Spirits with his
words, and that he had now taken such an opinion, that there was not one
devil in Hell, were he never so hurtful or bold, which durst or could come
within the Circle.


Thomas. That Fan should seem truly to be almost a fool.


Anthony. Yet have ye heard in effect nothing. The matter thus far proceeding,
in good time came Poles son in law, The co^me^dation of Fan his Son in
law.
who had taken to wife his eldest daughter, a young man (as you know) of a
marvelous wit and pleasant disposition.


Thomas. I know it well, neither does (...)



