THE COMPARATION OF a Uyrgin and a Martyr.

AN.M.D.XXXVII.

The preface. To the right worshypfull Master John Ramsay, lord priour of
Merton, Thomas Paynell, chanon of Merton sends gretynge.
THis little and fruitful book, as you of your most gentylle nature, desired
me your obedient, I have translated into english, I fear some will say, much
more gladly than counnyngly, and that my will was far more ready tha^ my
wit: but how so ever I have done, if it may please your lordshyp, I hold
me well paid: for not only in this, but in all other things, my desire is, to
do that, that may be acceptable to your good mind: other that be learned, and
like not my translation, may set it forth in english more eloquently, and
so do both great profit and pleasure to many one.

Thus god preserve your lordshyp in good health.

The compar. of a Vir. and Mar. ERASMUS ROTERO. TO the venerable college of
vyrgins Machabeticas at Coleyne, sends gretynge in Christ Jesus, the son a
vyrgin, and Crown of all vyrgyns.
YOUR DEVOVT minds good virgyns do often times provoke me, with your delycate
and sweet p^sentes, that I should by sum manner of writynge, not only
celebrate and laud your most precyouse treasure, but also extolle and commend
unto you, your intent and purpose. In the tone ye be led by a certain
relygious desire, seeking nothing else but the glory of god, the which in his
sayntis is very glorious: In In the the other I perceive ye seek for spiritualle
gain, with your pleasant and sweet gifts, delytynge the mouth, diligently
labourynge to opteyne of me those things, that feed the soul: this is a very
devout captation, a holy desire, a right wise and gaynfull change, and most
comely and seemly for wise virgins: if I were the man that could bring forth
any thing out of the secret coffers of holy Scripture, that might in like
manner refreshe your minds, as your gifts and presents do refresshe my body.
You err not in your affection, but you faylle in your election: you love
that that is best, but you chose not him, that can satisfy your holy desires.
And yet because you shall not think me utterly unkind, I do not a little
rejoice, to see in you (chosen virgyns of god) this good mind, that is,
thyrstynge nothing else but the glory of your spouse. For it is an evident and
a sure token of a chaste wife, to reckon her husbands glory her own. For truly
he, unto whom you are specially spoused, is above all the children of men the
most goodlyest, and in all his acts and deeds he is the most glorious:
Though oone would contemplate and behold on every side the wonderful frame of
this world, yet shall he find him more gloryouse in the redemynge of the
world, tha^ in making thereof. Genesis 1.
He made the world, and the hole company of aungelles with tournynge of an
hand: but with his precyouse bloudde he redeemed that that he made. The same
wisdom, which is Christ Jesus, and which also is the wonderful werkman of
this work, to thente^t to make a thing more meruayllous, by dyuine craft he
edified a house eternal, and a temple worthy for god, that is the Church,
which he as a king most rich, did freshly garnishe and ornate with all
manner of spiritual ornamentis. For what is gold, silver, yuory, what is the
smaragde, the Topase, the beryll, or the variable shynynge of precious stones,
co^parring them to the rich giftis of the holy ghooste, which are prophecy,
the gift of tongues, the virtue of working miracles, and the curing of
infyrmities, peace, purity, charity, and sufferance? This holle Edifice, made
of lively stones, with a wonderful agreement couched together, ryseth up to
heaven, Act. 4.
Christ being the very corner stone, knyttethe fast to gyther all the hole
frame, yt it can neither fall in ruyn nor decay. These stones are the diverse
orders of saynctis. Pro. 3.
In this Temple he rejoices to dwell, like as he says in an other place: My
delectacyons are to be with the sons of men. He this magnyfycent Solomon
glorifieth him self in these rychesses: he is no where more meruayllous, no
where more glorious, than in his saynctis: to whom he has vouchesafed this
honor, to make them his own members: and accepting them as his brethren, to
make them heirs with him of the heavenly kyngedome. He dyed for all: but yet
his most glory and pleasure is in the bendis of Martyrs, and in the companyes
of vyrgyns. These are the most precious Jewels, of which the church of Christ
does so stately auaunce her self of, the which woteth not whereof to glory,
but in the only gifts of her spowse. For what so ever thing is glorious in
saynctis, the same is the gift of Christ. O good virgins, the delectations
and ornamentis of your spouse, are diverse and variable. wha^ he goth forth, he
is beset about with sondrye precious virtues, and with innumerable kinds of
flowers: but the rosis of martyrs, and lylyes of virgins, do most specially
please and delight him. And no meruayl, though he love that that he is him
self, ye whereof he is the very fountain to al other. I am (says he) Flos
campi, Cant. 2.
the flower of the field, and the lylie of the valeyes. He is the prince of
martyrs, for through him martyrs are mighty and strong. He is the chief
capitain of virgins, for by him virgins do subdue the flesh, and the desires
thereof. After that he descended down to the earth, and had spredde abroad
the fire of charity, winter passed away, and these fresh flowers sprouted up
every where in our countreye. How scarce was virginity before? But after that
Christ had ones consecrate virginity, how many thousands of young men and
women sprang up suddenly through out all the world, which wyllyngly gave them
selfs to pure chastity for the kingdom of god? After that he, suffringe death
on the cross, had taught, that they were very happy, that would dye for
goddis sake, how many swarms of men and women came forth, that wyllyngely yea
and gladly suffered death for the glory of Christ? Doutlesse for this cause
it is, that your spouse glories in the Cantycles, where he says thus, Rise
up, haaste you my svvete love and my fair dooue, and come. For now vvynter
is paste, the shoure is goone, our ground is covered with fresshe flowers.

How barrayne should our earth have been, if he the same heavenly son had not
kendled our hartis with ye hete his Charytie? if he had not watered our minds
with the shower of his grace?

But what flourishes fayrer then the Evangelical veer? What is more
plentyfulle? what is more lovely? The rosis ruddy hew abides not long, the
beauty of the lilye fades soon, whereon a certain Pagane writes thus:
Neither smallage is lively,
Nor yet the short Lylie.
But those fresshe flowers, with which the Church is plentifully furnyshed, do
never wyther away. For Christ is the immortal lylie, and gives immortal
grace to his lylyes. He is the Rose immortal, whose fresshe and fair color
does never fade, and the same perpetuity he gives unto his. He is called
Flos campi, that is the flower of the field, because of the Jews. Fields be
apt and mete for tillage. Among the Jews he was dyed with his own precious
blood, the which Jews Moses and other prophettes did ear and tylle, yet
they could never cause them to bring forth such fruits as they looked fore. He
was the lylie of the Ualleis among the thorny and untilled gentiles, to whom
it is persuaded, that he became man, and was borne of the Uirgin Marie without
spotte of sin. Surely he was the evangelical lilie, that god the father so
clothed, as never Solomon was arrayed in all his great glory. For why, neither
Solomon, nor yet none other, was ever borne of a pure virgin, defiled with no
spotte of the first parent. Who so ever couple them self by feyth to this
lilie, because they are made one flesh and one spirit with him, they are
pourged from fylthy sins, they receive the fair white garment of innocence,
and be also made Lylies. For so in the same place following says the spowse,
Cant. 2.
that names him self a lilie: Like as the lylie is among thorns, so is my
love among the daughters. what thing else is the lily among thorns? but a
virgyne among wives.

Matrymonye is an honest thing, but it is besette about with briers and
thorns. For such as be married, says Paul, 1. Cor. 7.
shall have trybulacyons of the flesh. If any man doubt, whether matrimonye
have thorns, let him enquere of married women, what great grefes she
endures, that has to her husband a froward fellow, a drunkarde, a dycer, an
aduoutrer, a waster, what dysplesures grow of kinsfolk, and what of wicked
children, and than (if he think it best) let him deny a virgyn to be a
lylie among thorns? A virgyn being free from the cares of this world,
myndeth those things that perteyne to our lord, how she may please him: She
that is married, as it were hither and thither haled and plucked with diverse and
sundry cares, sets her mind on many things.

Surely all they that have taken on them to follow Christ, are lylies, but
specially virgyns. Among them he the marvelous spouse fedeth and takes his
delight, which is not enterteyned with every body. Cant. 2.
He is my dear derlyng and I his, which fedeth among the lilies, until the
day break, and till the shadows be gone. Such flowers he gathers, that he
may make of them a garlande that never wythereth away in heaven: like as it is
said in an another place: Cant. 2.
My love is goone down into his gardeyne, unto the sweet smellinge beds,
that he may refresshe him self in the gardayns, and gather lilies. Trewely of
those lylies speaks the wise man saying, Eccl. 39.
Florisshe you flowers as does the lilie, and give sweet savor, and spredde
out your bows in grace, singe a song of praise, and bless you our lord in
his works. The spouse being a vyrgyn, delyteth in virgins songs. This is the
new song, that the Synagoge knew not, in the which she was cursed, that
brought forth no children. But there are in the gospel innumerable, that
sing a new song, which were redeemed from the earth, and called in to the
fellowship of angels, because that they neither mary nor defyle them self
with women, Apoc. 14.
but follow the lamb, whither so ever he gothe, and are without spotte before
the throne of god.

There be many without spot in the syghte of men, but happy are they that
appear such before the throne of god: happy are they, which to the laud of
their new spouse, do sing a new song, inwardly reioysyng, and to them
self demeanyng great gladness, that they being pure and chaste, do singe pure
and clean balades in honor of their pure and clean spowse. And often times
your quier to their spouse sings this melodious song:

O IESV the Crown of vyrgins, whom she thy mother conceived, which alone a
virgyne did bear, accept o most mekest these our vows.

O what greatte purytie is in this virgin, he the prince of virgins, and spowse
and crown of virgins, was conceived of the heavenly spirit, and borne of a
vyrgin, the glorious beauty of vyrgynite not broken. Of wives the husbonde is
the glory, but of virgins Christ is the glory: The which does feed among
lilyes, compassed about with crowns of virgyns, hyghtynge and adournynge his
spowses with glory, and yeldynge to them rewards. Your spowse is a sheparde,
which gave his life for his sheep, and is yet stylle carefulle for his flock.
For daily he saves them, daily he calls them hoome again that straye
abroad, daily he cures, and daily he feeds them. He has also his
delectations, in which he takes pleasure, he has his near fellows, whom he
calls husbands, he has his playfeeres young maidens, whom he calls wives.

In spiritual things there is no difference of sexes, but they are named and
called after their age and merits. Christ has but one spouse, which is the
church, she has many to accompanye her, and every one of them may be called
a spouse. The spouse self is but one, and yet has he sum, that he derely
loves, to whom he co^mytteth his wives, so that they also in manner may be
called husbands. For if bishops mow rightously be called shepherdes, sithe
there is but one shepeherde our lord Jesus, what shall than let them to be
called husbands. The wives of this world, are stately and proud of the
gifts and dignity of their husbands, they show and booste their gaye
garments and fresshe array, for such as have no husbands seem as persons
forsaken and destytute. But the spowse Jesus, for the despised ornaments of
this world, does gaily hight and adourne his spowses with doweries of the
soul: for the glory of the flesh, which so soon vanysheth away, he gives
them immortal glory. Trewely to those spouses, which following the example
of the high shepeherde, and like valyant champyons in defense of his flock,
do not refuse to dye, he gives rewards. what rewards? not a garlande of
oken leaves, or of laurel, not an image, or a title, or some other like
reward, that the world for deeds worthily done is wont to give in recompense:
but a garlande evermore fresh and flourysshynge in heaven, and a name written in
the book of life, that never shall be blotted out by no age. This delitious
and pleasant spouse, delyteth most specially in this company, which for all
that, lotheth no well disposed person, be he never so poor.

There follows in the forsaid hymn. Whyther so ever thou go, virgins do
follow the, and with lauds singing run still after the, and with their
sweet songs make pleasant noise. Concerning the fashion of the world it is an
uncomely thing, to see a virgyn wyllyngely rounne after her spowse. But it
were a fowler sight, to see many virgins follow one spouse. In thingis touching
the soul, it is otherwise, for there is nothing more goodly, then to se many
many virgins, that nere accompany one spouse Jesus. Nor it is no marvel, if
they run after him, as they were wood, for love of their spouse. For he
allurethe them to him by secret intycementes, whose louelynesse passes all
humayne love. Psalm. 44.
He is the feyrest among the children of men, flowynge full of grace are his
lyppes, the whose vysage to behold angels esteem most high felycytie. He
breaths with his sweet smellyng sauors on whom he wolle, and they on whom he
breaths say: Cant. 1.
Draw me after the, and we shall run in the odor of thy sweet smelling
oyntmentes. They can not run, except they be drawn: they can not love,
except they be first loved: And they that be already drawn, desire to be more
plentifully drawn: they that ru^ne, cover to ru^ne so fast, that they may
approach yet more nere to him that they love. Trewely they felt and perceived
his lyppes to flow full of grace, the which say: Joan. 6.
O lord whither shall we goo? thou haste the words of everlasting life. Al
they that profess the name of Christ, follow their sheparde Jesus: but they
al only his inseparable feres, do follow whyther so ever he woll goo: they
follow him even to the very beatinges, they follow him even to the very
persecution.

Our lord Jesus, what time he was in this world, often times led after him
great and huge multitudes of al sortis of people: but when he should go to
Jerusalem to be slain, few did acco^panye him, but yet fewer, when he
bearing his Cross, went toward the Mount of Caluerey. But they which be the
very fellows of the spouse, which be true virgins, could not at this point be
plucked from their spowse. When he hynge upon the cross, Peter, which was
thought to have a wife, could no where be found, but the vyrgyns, Mary the
mother of Jesus and John^, abode fast by the cross, the other women stood
afar of, and beheld what was done. They follow then, ye and that gladly and
wyllyngly: nor they follow him not as dumme persons, but singing balades, and
making sweet melody.

They that be men's wives have no leisure to be in the dances, they have no
leisure, no many times they have no lust to sing: they must please their
husbands, they must chyde and braule with their maids and servants, and
chastise their children. Our virgins, being free from all care and thought of
this world, do nothing else, but in spiritual quiers, sing sweet hymmes to
their spouse. For they ascribe nothing to them self, but give all the glory of
their felicity to him, to whom only they owe al things. He this lover
deliteth in such manner songs, he wol, he wol his gifts to be song: he
hates the phariseis songis, I fast twice in the Saboth, I give the.x. of my
goods to the pore, I am not as other men be. The more chaste that a virgin is,
the more shamefaste she is. Here the voice of a very virgin: Luc. 1.
Behold the handmayde of our lord. And he has seen the humility of his
handemayde. In the cantycles he calls his spouse a douue. He desirethe to
behold her shappe, and coueteth to here her voice: Cant. 2.
Come says he, my douue out of the caves of the rocks, out of the holes of
the wall: O let me see thy vysage, and here thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and fair is thy face. The soul has his face. The face is most
specially esteemed and judged by the eyes: with the eyes we show and declare
our intent: also with the eyes with out voice we signify the inward affections
of our minds. The eye of a vyrgin is simple, she enuyeth not, she lies not in
awayt to disceyue, she suspectethe none yuell, she myndeth not ill. The face of
such oone delytethe the spouse, Can. 2.
which a little after says thus: How fair art thou my love, how fair art
thou? Thou haste douues eyes.

Here some will say, What swetenes is in the complaynyng and mourning voice of
a douue, to delight and please a man with? The nyghtyngales voice should rather
be called to this parable and similitude. The rare and vehemente love makes
contynualle complayntes, but yet pleasant and most acceptable to the spouse.
Here a lamentyng douue: I desire to be lowsed, Phil. 1.
and to be with Christ. Romans 7.
And again: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Harken what an other douue says, Woe is me, Psalm 119.
that I dwell so long in this world. Psalm. 136.
And, By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered the
Syon.

These lamentable voices and full of sighynges, are most acceptable in the ears
of the spouse, in such manner of songs he much delyteth.

And because they said, O merciful lord accept our vows, it is time, that
they now express and declare, what they would opteyn of their spouse: Is it
richesses, is it honors, is it pleasures, is it a kingdom, is it long life?
For those things care have they none, for ye vehement love of their spouse
has utterly brought the^ to despise those things. What is it than? we pray
the, encreace our minds yet more largely, and grant, that we mow utterly be
ignorant of all corruption. They aknowlege how great a tresure vyrgynitie is,
that is, A clean mind in a body incorrupt. They also aknowlege, that what
so ever he has given them, he wol vouchsafe to encreace it, and to heap
benefyte upon benefyte. No vyrgyn is so pure, which has not, whereby she may
yet profit. For you shall scasely find any virgin, which to the end the body
may be undefiled, offends not otherwhile in thought. Nor true virginity
rests not only in the gift of chastity, but all vice of the mind is the
corruption of this virginity. Who so ever swarueth from the true feyth
catholyke, his virginity is defiled. 2. Cor. 11.
Of this pureness speaks Paul, writynge to the Corinthees: I have married
you unto one man, to bring a chaste virgin unto Christ: But I fear, lest as
the serpente begiled Eve with his wylynesse, even so your wits should be
corrupted from the simplenes, which is in Christ Jesus.

A vyrgin defiled with envy, backbityng, arrogancy, is wounded with
corruption: Therefore they pray, that their most munificent spouse woll
vouchesafe to augment the gifts that he has given them, and that he wolle
grant them to be utterly ignorant of all wounds of corruption. why say
they utterly? That is another in mind nor in body. what is to say of all? what
so ever the humayne affection does move and styre us to. This vow or request
might seem unreasonable, ne were it that the spowse is almighty, and most
faithful of his promise. He wol not that his shall be only like unto him, but
also he woll them to be the self same. But let us admytte, that no man in
this life can atteine to that, that the quier of vyrgins does desire, yet the
request of this most thankful quire shall not be made in vayn. For that that
they here through favor of their spowse are mindfulle of, shall in the
resurrection chance them fully through their spouses augmentynge.

There are degrees in the Church milytant, and so there be in the church
triumphant. I wot not whether I have tarried you longer than I should have done
in declarynge this hymn: Truly I repent me not, sith it is saint Ambroses.
For beside all other argumentis, the word of three syllables in the end of
every dimeter, shows who is the author. wherein I suppose that man had not so
much pleasure in the concent of the meter, as he delyted in the symbol of of
the holy Trinity. The church the spouse of Christ has many hymns, but I
wot not whether there be any that sing with more joy and gladness of al
persons, than they, which celebrate the spouse in the victories of Martirs, or
triumphs of virgins.

But now to return again to those two flowers, far passing all other
most fragant, the Rose and the Lilie. Like as the death of Christ with his
sweet odor drew many to the contempt and despysynge of this life: so the
virginity of Christ allured many a one to the love of chastity. They that are
drawn of him, being now them selves made flowers, have drawn other.

Christ said to Peter: Follow me. Joan. 21.
How many have followed Peter? Who denies, but that we be much bound to the
holy doctors, the which (every thing being in peace and rest) have taught
us the way of our lord? But how many mo has the fragraunt swetenes of the
martyrs, drawn to the professyon of the gospel? Yea how many mo the example
of virgins? It is a great thing, boldly and connyngely to dispute of the
gospelle: But the greattest point is, gladly to dye for the gospel. It is a
great thing, to despise and set naught by the glory and riches of this
world, but it is far greatter to mortify and slay the flesh with the
concupiscencis thereof. And the church knows to whom she is bound. The
church (next Christ) has had none in more honor, than they, which wyllyngly
and gladly offered their bodies to be cruelly turmented, for the glory of their
spouse, and for sauation of the flock, for the which he him self vouchesafed
to dye. They secondarily were had in honor, which wyllyngly for the kingdom
of god gave them self holly to live chaste. what a great joy and gladness was
it to all the Church, when a martyr constantly suffered death for Christis
sake? And how great sorrow and lamentation, if any shranke back. Again, How
greattely did the church rejoice, if a virgin, that might have be^ married to a
man, would rather put on the holy veil of chastity, and couple her self to her
spowse Christ? And how great sorrow was there made, if any such did cast
of her veil, and would be married to a man? Undoubted the loss of a thing,
that is most dear, is very grievous. with what feruente love did christen men
in time paste run to the ashes of Martyrs? How holy was the memory of them
among all christen men, when daily old men, young men, honest matrones, and
virgins, run thycke and threfolde to the prysones, as it were unto places
consecrate to god: when they would kys the cheynes, with which they were
bound: when the sword, with which they were martered, was reserved and kept
among the holy relykes? What memory is more joyful, and more hye and holy to
the church, than of Martyrs? When do men sing with greatter gladness, than
in their yearly feastis? The whose afflictions and peynes the church calls
vyctoryes, their turmentes triumphs, their deaths byrthes: nor in their
celebratio^s is no manner mournyng, but all things full of joy, fulle of
gratulation, full of preysing, full of mirth and sport. Nor the eloquence of
excellent learned me^ has been more showed or set forth in any argument, than in
celebrating the laud and praise of martyrs and virgins. Herein Prude^tius, in
the kind of verses called Liricum carmen, exceded the great eloquence of
Pindarus, he passed the elegancy of Horace, not possisyble to be followed.
Herein the trumpe both of the greeks and latyns, sounds out I wot not what
far greatter and more divine than verse heroical. In this argument,
Chrysostomus, Cyprianus, Ambrosius, Hieronymus, and many mo then can be
nombred, excel Ciceros aboundaunt and flowynge style. What thing may we
coniecte to be the cause? Truly the magnitude of the martyrs did minister
abu^da^ce of eloquence, the ferue^tnes of their minds added strength to their
words, and devotion alacrity. Of what matter so ever they write, their style
is plentiful and flowyng, But as often as they take in hand to endyte of martyrs
and virgins, now as it were by divine inspiration, they sown out, I wot not
what thing far passing man's capacity. Those things are not done by man's
study, but they are brought to pass by inspiration of the holy ghost, the
which woll his saynctes to be so glorified, in the which he desyrously gothe
about to be seen most glorious. We would grant those things to be done by man,
ne were it that god (which inspireth the minds of good men) does ornate the
monumentes of martyrs and virgins with so manifold miracles. For where are
wicked spirytes more tourmented? where are moo cured of grievous sycknesses and
diseases that no physicians could heal?

What emperor, what king is he, with setting up of any images, titles,
steples, churches, collegis, commandyng divine worshyppes, did opteyne so
greatte honor ye in this world? Doubtless thus god does honor his martyrs,
the which seemed here poor abiectes and wretched caytyues. Thus he honourethe
his vyrgyns, the which being as deed to the world, set surely al their
holle hope in their spowse Jesus. And they also aknowlege, that what so ever
they have, comes all of the lyberall gift of their spouse. But the glory of
martyrs does not lightly glytter and shine but after the death:

where as virginity even in this life is full gay and glorious. For who is so
barbarous, that will not favor a virgin? In the very mids of the ruffelynge
wars the fierce and cruel ennemy forbeareth virginity. And if we believe
histories, the dumme beastis, ye the hugest, the wyldest, and most cruel of
them all, bear reverence unto vyrgynitie. How greatly did the Romans in
old time honor the relygious virgyns, called virgins vestales? what a
natural worship and glory of virginity is that, which ydolaters do
aknowlege, which the barbarous ennemy does reverence, which the dumme beastis
do perceive, and to which the wild beastis obey? If so great honor be
done to the vyrgins of this world, how much more honorable is the virgin of
Christ? O good vyrgyne, take on the this holy pride, and repute what so ever
pleasures or honors this world braggeth of, to be far under thy dignity. It is
a holy thing to pride in your spowse, and a devout thing to glory in him, to
whom you owe all things.

It is also a sure thing, trusting faithfully in him, to rise and rebelle
against the world, which braggyngly shewethe forth his delectable pleasures.
My mind is not at this time to write, what so ever may be said in the laud
and praise of martirs or virgins. You have the books of Cyprian, you have the
books of Ambrose, of Tertullian and Hierome, of which the two last, were well
nere ouermoch in admiration of virginity. For the excellency of virginity
would not so be extolled, that the preyse thereof should be an injury to
chaste matrimony. I recyte those things most noble vyrgins for this intent,
that you may perceive how happy and fortunate your College is, the whose
chance is to possess both those things, which she the rich spouse of
Christ the church holds most special in this world. For you have in
keeping those most fragrant and sweet coses, of the.vii. brethern of the
Machabees, and of their mother, ye whose fecunditie brought forth no children
to her husband but to god, she fortunately redoubed ye loss of her virginity,
with the martyrdom of so many sons vyrgyns. She being a virgin brought forth
no fruit, for yt of al women was given but to one, but yet she brought forth
both virgins and martirs. Of her self she could give none example of
virginity, but she performed and did as much as lay in her to do. She
taught her children to be virgins, she exhorted the^ to martyrdom, and would
have suffered martyrdom before them, save that she feared their constancye, by
reason of their tender youth. And so the glory of vyrginitie chanced not to
the mother alyke with the chyldern, but touching the martyrdom, the laud of
the mother is so much the more, in that she beholdynge the cruelle turmentes,
suffered in each of her lyttel children, what so ever the cruel tourmentours
could do to the bodies of them. This is more stronger, then by turmentyng at
ones to be rydde from all pain. For the pare^tes are more cruelly tourmented
in the persecutynge of their chylderne than in them self. And that knowethe
right well the wytty cruelty of tyrants, which wreste out by turmentyng of
the children in their parents sight, that they could by no manner of turmentes
get of the parents. How often saw she being a woman and a mother, her own
flesh and bowels torre^ and rent to pieces? where was now the feeble freiltie
of yt kind? where was the tender love and pity that is wont to be more
vehement in mothers then in men? Surely her devout affection to godwarde,
overcame al humain pity, and her fervent feythe overcame the feebleness of
womanhed. All hayle most happy virago, which haste given exaumple of
fortitude to all men. All hayle most fair little flowers of the church,
which as ripe delycacyes before your time, you have prevented the spring tide
of the gospel, and have made a show of euangelycal virtue, before the gospel
was showed or known to the world. For as yet this voice of him, which being a
virgin, is borne of a virgin, was not hard, Mat. 19.
Blessed be they, that have given them self to live in chastity for the
kyngedome of god, And yet the same praise you by prevention have opteyned before
hand. Mar. 16.
Nor this was not as yet hard, Mar. 8.
who so will be my disciple, let him take up his cross and follow me, but you
as fore runners, did adumbrate Christis passion. And now your sowles in
heaven do follow the lamb, whither so ever he goes: But as for your undefiled
bodies (which were partners of your tourmentes and peynes, so in time to come
you shall receive them to the fellowship of everlasting felicity) there was
no place more comely nor more conueniente to keep them in, than in a holy
college of virgins.

Now to you good vyrgyns, that be the kepers of this so great a treasure, my
words do them adresse. You have in these young children both an example of
chastity, which you ought to follow, and a crown of martyrdom, that you
should extolle, gloryfienge your spouse, which strove in the^, which in them
got the victory, which in them does triumph. He has in one self basket
Lylies myngled with roses. The bright beauty of the tone stryueth with the
the other, nor yet the tone is not dusked or defaced of the the other: but ye tone by
reason the the other is with him, does ye more gaily glitter and shine, like as
when yuory (as one said) is myngled with purpull, or when a shynyng precious
stone is set in yolow gold. The strife is so doubtefull, whether is more
glorious a martyr or a virgin, that if the matter should be called in
contention, I dare not boldly say, which of them should be preferred the
tone before the the other. Both the tone and the the other are consecrate in Christ:
but yet we are more bound to his cross and passion, than to his virginite. He
gives to them the honorable title of blessedness, which for the kingdom of
god give them self to live in chastity: but yet he requirethe the following
of the cross. It seems a greatter thing, that wha^ he requires it not, yet
it makes him blessed, that wyllyngly will perform it. And in the time of
persecution it is a right great thing, for the glory of god to have the mind
alwey prompte and ready to suffer all kinds of deaths.

But times have like as the Sea has, his tranquillities and quiet caumes. And
other while one may lefully escape the persecuters hands. But if one be
driven to the last extremity, the death of the body is the end of grievous
tourmentes, and the beginnynge of felicity. A virgin has a long and a
parpetuall strife with her household ennemie, the which she can neither
laufullye slay, nor escape by flyghte. This household fooe is the flesh, the
which whether we woll or woll not, we must carry about, now and then
rebellynge against the spirit. And that it shall not seem easy to any man to
subdue this ennemie, we have read of those that were overcome with wanton
entycementes of the flesh, the which could not be vanquyshed with the very
terror and dread of death.

Hitherto our collation has pondered, whether of those two should be more
stronger: but me seems that virginity in this, is ye happier, that (as I by
occasyon said before) the flower of martyrdom, does not freshely sprede and
florishe, but after death: where as virginity has her bryghte beauty, her
fair fragrancy, her grace and dignity in this world. Uirgynytie is the flower
of the soul and mind, but in the vysage, in the eyes, and in all the holle
state of the body, there shyneth a certain angelical pureness, and a
flourysshynge clerenesse, not acqueynted with old age, here as it were
minding and thinking to be, that all we look fore after this life, which
live deuoutely and godly in Christ Jesus. The mind holle and incorrupt
sparpleth abroad in the body her vigor and strength, like as the mind
infecte with vices shows in manner a glimerynge light, or rather makes a
grisely show in the self shappe of the body. For carnal pleasure is a foul
blemyshe to a man's own body. Why do not the bodies of good blessed men
wax old in the resurrection? because now the soul shall rule them, which
woteth not what old age means. As death comes of sin, so does syckenes
and age. Take sin away, and age shall seem the less: and if age chance to
come, it shall chance more florishinge. And therefore a virgyn receyuethe now
in this world some part of her felicity, exhybytynge in this mortal body a
certain spece or fachion of the immortality to come. The princis of this
world are no moore careful for their soldiers, than they be for the thing
that they come of, of the which when need requires, they gather young soul
dyours, the which thing if it should fail, how should they furnysshe an
army? And now for a certain years there has been no such persecution
under christen princis, as was used in time paste under Nero, Domitian, Julian,
and Maxentius.

But whether the Christen feythe be in better caase under these or no, it
lies not in me to define, surely by them it was drawn into a narrow point.
But how so ever it be, if there should again chance persecution, the which
would require a martyr, where is it more lykely that such a company should be
gathered, than of them the which despisynge all the falls flatering vanities of
this world, have consecrate them selfs holly to Jesus the celestial spouse,
the which wyllyngly have crucified their flesh to gether with the vicis and
concupiscencis thereof, and for the love of their spouse, have contempned and
set at naught that same pleasure, for the favor of which only many
mortal men desiren evermore here to live. A true virgyn does differ very
little from a martyr. A martyr suffers the executioner to mangle his flesh:
a virgin daily does with good will mortify her flesh, she being in manner a
turmentour of her self. It is somewhat more maystry to tame an enemy taken,
than to kyl him. A martyr delivers his body to be persecuted: A virgin
kepethe her body in low subjection, and makes it obedient unto the spirit.
wherefore shall the virgin of Christ tremble and fear the handlyng of the
executioner? Shall she require rychesses, delycacies, worldly pomp, worldly
welthe, or worldly pleasures, which causen other to be very loathe to leave
this life? All these things she has now clean forsaken. Shall not she,
which loves nothing in this world, which is deed to the world, whose life
is only Christ, which daily makes her turtyls mournynges, coveting to be
nerer joined to her dear beloved spouse, and to be embraced and clypped of him,
will she not (I say) gladly depert out of this wretched body, in the which she
woteth well she trauayleth as a pilgrim far from her lord? what men have
suffered the tourmentes of martyrdom more meruailously and strongly than virgin
Martyrs, Agnes, Cecilia, Agatha, and other their fellows innumerable? And
therefore wha^ a virgin is delivered to the executioner, she does not begin
her martyrdom, but makethe an end of that that she began long before. If
those things seem to any manne over hard high and difficile, let him
remember, that the professyon of a virgin is above the powers of man, and egall
with the dignite of angels. But al they that wear black vayles, are not
virgins. For like as they (according to saint Paul's doctrine) which are
true wydowes in deed, 1. Timo. 5.
be discerned from those, which by a wrong name are called wydowes: and as
that widow, which lives in delytes of this world, is said to be dead:
right so a virgin, which loves any other thing in this world thanne her
spouse, is not a virgin. There are in the gospel wise vyrgins, Mat. 25.
which by manifold works of mercy and pity, have so provided for them
self, that oil in their la^pes shall not fail: there are in like manner
folysshe virgins. And Hieremie bewayleth such unwise virgins: Tren. 1.
for the dignity of this name is nothing mete and agreeable for her, the which
although her body has not ben touched of man, yet her mind has been defiled
and spotted with filthy and unclean thoughts. She that lives syngle against
her will, is married: and she that would be corrupted, if she might lefully, is
already corrupted. It is a thing of greattest difficulty, to repress and keep
down all cogitations and inward thynkynges of a wavering mind: and yet
against them assaylynge, there must be defense made with prayers, redynge of
holy books, fastings, devout and godly occupations: for why to assent to them
is very poison. Eua the first virgin, did commune and talk with the serpente,
and thereof sprange all yuels: her eyes were not chaste, the which the wanton
intycement of the flattering apple did adulterate and defyle. The gaye costly
apparaylle, the peynted face, the pleasant and merry enditynges of young men,
the propre knackes and gifts sent to and fro, are plain tokens and signs
that virginity dies. For whose pleasure does a virgin ones dedicate to
Christ, ornate and trim her self? Why does she coueyte the company of
young men, the which took on her the veyle of relygion because the world
should not se and behold that that was consecrate to the spouse Christ.

A woman that is married, does deck and trymme her self to plese her
husbands eyes: but why should a virgin that is married to Christ make her self
gorgious and gay for any erthely man's pleasure?

Hark what she should say by the mouth of a learned poet, but a pagane, For
whom should I make me fair and gay,
Or whom to please, do my dilige^nce
When of him, that of my fresh array
The only cause is, I have the absence.


If she so did neglect to make her fresh, because her husband was absent: how
dare a virgin make her self friske and galtard i^ this world, the whose spouse
is in heaven? To what intent does she that is ones betrouthed to Christ, stand
lokynge in a glass? Yea she should contemplate and behold her self in the
clear fountayn of holy scripture. Why does she arraye her self in those
garments, with which he is offended? This clenlynesse in the eyes of your
spowse ar very dirty spottis, this bright beauty but sluttysshe beggerye,
these sweet savors but stinking smelles. He loves a pure spirit, a clean
soul, and a well peynted mind. What so ever the world has, it is theirs,
that make them self gorgeous and gaye for the world: the virgin of Christ is
more richely arrayed with despisynge of those things, thanne with the
abundance of them. She is more comely apparayled with her hears clypped of,
and her holy veyle, than any bride trymmed in sylkes, gold, precious stones,
and purpull. For the dissembled beauty, set out with feyned colors, has ever
ben disalowed of the Gentyles. The spowse of Christ has as many fresh
garments, that make her gay in the sight of god, as she for her spouses sake
despised ornaments of this world, for precious stones she is ornated and
decked with virtues, instead of pourpull she has charity, for gold, wisdom,
for feyned colors symplenes of mind, for sylkes chastity and shamefastenes:
for broches and jewels, sobrenes and temperance in all her words and deeds. The
fair beauty of chastity can not be defiled with sluttysshe garments.

It does appear by old monumentes and wrytynges, how high and how laudable
a preise it was for virgins, to wasshe the feet of miserable creatures, to
wash poor folks clothes, to attend upon sick folk and serve them lowely,
and for the love of Christ to handel and touch their bodies full of sores and
botches. A virgin slubbred and soylled with those things, is most fair and
beautyfull in the sight of Christ. But for so much as the institution of holy
and devout virgins, is now otherwise, let them strive among them selfs in
the offices and works of charity, and prepare with their hands, wherewith
they may help and succor the pore and nedy. And if it happen a virgin at some
time to have communication with secular persons, let this be her study, that
they may go away from her amended by her talking, and she her self nothing
appayred. Let the example of the first virgin make you more wary and sly, the
which being corrupted by speaking with the serpente, threw her self into
lamentable mysery. A young manne with his slypper countenance, with his wanton
eyes, and with his rebaud tongue, is wors tha^ any serpent. Se that you follow
the new virgin, leader and princess of your institution, she talks not with
the serpent, but being close shut within her secret chaumbres, talks with
the angelle, and thereof began all our health. A virgin that talks with an
unchaste young man, speaks with a serpente. A virgin which with devout
vows and prayers callethe upon god, which has her meditation in holy books,
speaks with the angel, or rather with her spouse. Whether of these two is
most sure? whether is moore honest? whether is more magnificent?

Wherefore if at any time the desire of those things, the which as right sweet
and noble the world braggyngely bosteth, shall tikyl your minds: call to
remembrance as the truth is, that you have not forgone those things, but to
your great lucre to have made a change. And therefore there is nothing more
unfortunate than those, which let by carnal lustis, can neither use the
commodities of this world, which they most desire, nor yet their own
pleasures. The worldly virgins have their play fellows, they have their
orname^tes, their sportes and pastymes, their songs and their daunces, but
these things such as they be, they have no longer than their fresh
flourysshynge and tender youth endures. But as al these things are to the
virgins of Christ true and inward pleasures, so they be everlasting. These
worldely virgyns setting a side the garlande of virginity, do take and put
upon them the mantell of marriage, without dout (as saint Paul says) a
plain token of bondage and thraldom. But virgins dedicate to god, be always
kept close for their spouse, lest the world an aduoutrer should se them. For
Jesus is a ielous lover, he can not suffer to have his dear derlynges set and
showed forth to the sight of the world. But whether is it more plesante and
more welthy to be the hand maid of a married manne, Luc. 1.
or the hand maid of Christ? Ecce inquit, ancilla domini, Behold (says
she) the hand maid of our lord. Who so ever is truly the hand maid of our
lord, is lady of the world. O good virgin, interpretate what thing thy veyle
betokens, it is the sign of a kyngedome, and not of bondage. They that are
veyled and covered for their husbands pleasures, do profess a worldly
bondage. Nor the commandment of married men, good virgins, is not always light
and easy. Often times where you wend to have had husbands, you chance
upon masters hard to please, upon such as are froward and never contented,
upon such as be cursed and knauishe, upon dycers, dru^kerdes, riotttous
spenders, upon such as be greatly indetted, upon such as be scabbed and
scuruy, upon frantycke fellows, and upon fyghters, besides many other more
grievous and wicked conditions or diseases, which I speak not of. More over
there follows care of the householde, care of children, busynes of kynsfolke
and friends, strife in the world, lack of children, buryenge of husbands.
For why the affliction of the flesh is of no simple sort, the which
sayncte Paul signifies unto them, that woll rather chose wedlock than
virginity. My purpose is not now by reason of this declamatio^ to discriue,
what so ever grefe or incommoditie follows marriage. And yet to learn them by
experience is but a wretched wisdom: better it were to come by the knowledge
of them by redyng the books of learned men. But in case you woll not give
credence to learned men's writings, than call unto you good virgyne one of them,
the whose chance was to be very well and welthylye married, and desire her,
that she woll vouchesafe to tell and declare to you the true story of her
marriage: you shall here such rekenynges, that you shall nothing repent you of
your purpose.

Now lay before your eyes, the exaumples of vyrgins, the whose chance was
most vnluckely and vnwelthily to be bestowed and married, of which there is a
huge great company: and thynk thus, that what, so ever chanced to them, might
chance to you. What so ever yuelles, what so ever calamities and myseries
chance to them, that be married to a mortal man, can in no wise hurt or grieve
those, the which truly, the which with heart and mind mary them self to
the immortal spouse Jesus. Believe me, your spouse Jesus is in nothing
sorowfulle or heavy, but in all things pleasant and lovely. He seemed some time
to have neither fair shape nor goodly beauty, but he was never more lovely,
than when for the love of his spouse he did upon him that same shape and
form. What maid is she, that would not make far much more of her wower, if
he being a noble man's son, would forsake his fathers riches and tresure, and
clothed with a homely husbands wiede, would run to her cotage, being a pore
maid to the intent to opteyn her to his wife? But what if he refuse not to be
grievously wounded in hastynge him to come to his entierly beloved spouse? Should
not he, so poorly clothed and all bloody with his wounds, seem more lovely?
whithout doubt he should so seem to her that loves him. Now thanne think
with your selfs, whether your spouse should with a stately countenance be of
you disdayned, which for your sake left his fathers most royal palaice,
descended down into this world, and cloking and hydynge the majesty of his
dyuyne nature, took upon him the shappe and form of a servant, Phil. 1.
humblyng him self to the very igmony and shame of the cross. A monastery
to a virgin that louethe her spowse, is not a prison (as some sklaunderously do
say) but it is a paradyse. It is not lefull for you to wa^der and walk about
whither your lust leads you: perdye this thing for virgyns is neither
surenor honest, and therefore you should not desire it. Except peradventure
the example of Dina pleasethe you. Uirgynitie is neither sorowfulle nor heavy,
but a pleasant thing. Uyrgynitie has her fair orchardes to walk in holy
Scripture, in the which she may sport and play among that most goodlye
company of her spowse. O good lord with what manner company? With Tecla, with
Cecilia, with Agatha, with Theodora, with Eustochio, and other innumerable.
Also virginity has her spiritual garla^des, made and wrought with fresshe
flowers of diverse virtues: she has her sweet pommaunders and savors, so that
virgins may say with Sayncte Paul, Bonus odor sumus deo in omni loco, That is
to say, We be a good sauoure unto god in every place. Also the spowse has
his delicate and sweet spiritual pomanders, of which the fragrant sweetness
excellethe all aromatike savors. Whatte is more amiable than the name of
Jesus? His name is a sweet smelling savor, that is sparpled abroad. The
virgins being drawn with that sauoure, to follow him as fast as they can
run, what tediousness can they have or feel in this life?

A virgin also has her sweet pommaunder, wherewith in like manner she pleases
her spowse.

Dum esset, Cant. 1.
inquit, rex in accubitu suo, not dus mea dedit odorem suum, That is to say,
when the king satte at his table, he smelled my sweet nardus. Mar. 14.
And in the gospel when that Christ should be married to his spowse the
Church, the woman sinner powered sweet smelling oyntmentes upon him.

Uyrgyns have their harpes of David, they have the Psalter, they have their
songs and spirytuall hymns, with which in their hartis they sing
contynuallye to god, gyuynge thanks, lawdynge and besechynge, and sommetyme
with dulce and soft syghinges desyringe the presence of their spouse, if he at
any time absent him self for a season: for otherwhyle he declineth and passes
forth by, not to the intent he woll leave them, but to redintegrate and renew
his love with them. What thing have these worldely virgins, be they never so
fortunate, that may be compared to these solaces and plesures? The place can
not seem strayt and narowe to them, to whom within a short space after the
vnmeasurablenes of heaven is opened: nor they can not think them self to be
sklenderlye accompained, to whom within a little while shall chance, to be in the
felowshyppe and company of all saynctes. Why should I not say within a little
while? For how long I pray you, is all the holle time of this present life?
in case it happen a man to live till he be very old: which thing to how many
does it chance? Wherefore good virgynes, aknowlege your felicity and wealth,
and look that you have no spite nor envy, that the world has his iugglynges
of vain delytes and plesures, aknowlege your dignite, and look not you for
the sluttysshe and filthy marchandyse of the world. He says, Cant. 1.
Nis ite cognoueris pulcherrima inter foeminas, O most feyrest among
womenne, but if thou know thy self. The spouse thretteneth his virgins,
onelesse they will aknowlege their blessedness. But they aknowledge it not,
which repent, that they have bound them selfs to live a holy chaste life, nor
they which gape and look after worldly vanities and pleasures. Call unto
your remembrance, to whom you be spowsed, and love and stycke to him with all
your very hearts, in whom ones you have al things the which are joyful and
magnifycent. Let the example of the most holy young men animate and courage
you to be constant, the which shall a great deal the more rejoice and be glad,
that their bodies as pledges be reserved and kept in your College, if they
mow perceive, that you be folowers of those their virtues, with the which they
pleased god. They ornate and garnyshe your religious company: so in like manner
se that you with integrity of life and most pure and honest conuersations
hight them again.

They chase rather to suffer many and diverse kinds of tourmentes and peynes,
then they would ones taaste hoggis flesh. Look that you repute and think it
to be hoggis flesh, what so ever is displesa^t to your spouse. If you will be
emulaters and folowers of this most goodly conflict, you shall be part takers
of their glory, by the help of your spouse Christ Jesus, which with the father
and the holy gooste lives and reygneth eternally.

AMEN. Thus ends the comparation of a vyrgyne and a Martyr.
LON. DINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


