An Epistle of the famous clerk Erasmus of Roterodame, concerning the veryte
of the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which Epistle is set before the
excellent book, entitled D. Algeri De veritate corporis et sanguinis dominici
in Eucharistia.) which book was made by the said Algerus about five hundred
years passed.

And now of late years, has again ben over seen and reuysyted, by the said
famous clerk Erasmus of Roterodame, and dedycated by him, unto the Reverend
father Balthazar bishop of Hyldesyn.

This present Epistle of Erasmus making is to be found out, in the great
volume of all his Epistles, pagina 1577. Having this little writing over it.
In Algerum.

To the devout and good Christian Reader.
HEre follows good christian reader, an Epistle made by the right famous
clerk of late memory. D. Erasmus of Roterodame in the which he does
euydently declare, what mind he was of in his life time. Consernynge the
veryte of the body and blood of our sauyoure christ in the blyssed sacrament
of the alter, in which Epistle he does also with many reverend words set
forth the dew use of the holy mass. The same Erasmus has also translated out
of the greek tongue into latin the self manner of saying of mass which the
famous father of christ's church saint John^ Chrysostom vsyd in his days
having this little missa Iohannis Chrisostomi, Des Erasmo, Roterodamo
interpret, The said Erasmus speaks also very reverently of the mass in his
book intitelled Des Erasmi, Roterodami liber, de sarcienda ecclesie concordia
deqque sedandis opinionum diffid^^^, and in many other places of his works
besides as in his Enchiridion, and in his Paraphrasis super.ii. caput Johannes.

An Epistle of Erasmus written to Balthazar Bishop of Hyldesyn.
I Know very well right hyghlye renoumed Bishop that little ciuilite it is at
this season to dysturbe you, being enbusyed with so great a nombre of affares
as you now are, but sense that your well known devotion toward God, does so
right earnestly favor the matters of the catholyke church, it shall as I
suppose be nothing dysplesaunt unto you, though I at this time do mocyon you
in this matter, which of all other most hyghly does appertain as well unto the
concord, as unto the dygnite of our said mother the catholyke church. For of
truth our mother the holy church has in her none so high a treasure nor
nothing of more excellent dignite, than is the promotion where unto she is
called, by the wonderful benifyte of the body and blood of our sauyoure
Christ by virtue whereof, she beco^myth to be made one with christ both in
nature and substance ye and thereto is as it were transformed into god, and
surely there is nothing more effectual, to norishe in her a perfighte and an
indyssoluble concord: Than that the same our mother the catholyke church etynge
one self body and drinking one self blood, by one spirit is made and compact
into one body, by whom she also receyuyng life is knyt unto our living head
christ, and yet do we now se, that al these great benifites and high
promocions nothwithstandynge, how yt through the slyghtie crafts of our
deceytfull and strong adversary Satan, it is brought to pass, that ye same
most beneficial gift the sacrament of the body and blood of our most
merciful and most tenderly loving savior, given unto us to bring all
persons into unity and concord, has been the matter whereupon in old time so
many discentyons have risen, and of late years are now again renewed. While
that some there be which do deny that there is any thing else in the blyssed
sacrament, but only the outward tokens of the body and blood of our sauyoure
christ. Some others do kuoweledge that Christ is in the sacrament, but yet
under the substance of bread and wine. And again some there were that said
how that through the words of consecration, the substauuce of bread and wine
do first peryshe, and so succedeth after the body and the blood of our
sauyoure christ. Some others do hold that our savior by the words of
consecration does become bread and wine, by their minds making it but a
light matter, that he was once for us incarnate, and did for our sakes become
man. There have also ben some that were called starcoranista, which irreuerent
persons deseruyd well so vile a name because they did both immagyn and speak so
vyly and without all reverence, of so high a Sacrament the country of Greece
also, to disquiet the unity of the catholyke church, have sent forth amongst
us their leuanars so called because they dare presume contrary to holy
scripture, to leave the use of pure bread vnleuanyd, and do consecrate in
bread which is leauanyd. After this has risen the debate and strife for ye
receyuynge of the Sacrament in both the kinds, but yet as in that matter the
high Bishops have varyed amongst them selves. For Galacius did ordain that
all such parsons should be removed from the receyuynge of the sacrament in
both the kinds. which would nedys receive it but under one, which ordinance
he than made, because the use for that time was contrary. There have some ben
also which stryuyng for the matter, have styfly mayntained that an evil and
sinful priest, had no power to consecrate nor that the body of our sauyoure
christ was received of any wretched and sinful liver. and yet has it so
happened that the sundry errors of all these persons have been greatly
benyficiall unto the catholyke church, for thorough the means of these stormy
assaults made against her by these instruments of Satan, she has been
dryuyn to call to god for help, and to beseech him to send down his holy
spirit amongst his flock to instruct them of the truth, consernynge these
high and wonderful mystery and by these means have ever the catholykes ben
more and more inlyght nyd, better instructed and the stronglyer in the true
faith confyrmed. But yet is the catholyke church to no man more be holden, then
unto Berengarius, nay not to Berengarius, but to the great wisdom of our
savior, Christ which turnyth the malice of men into good, for the more parfit
establishing of his espouse ye Catholyke church how many notable men and
famous clerks has the perlous and shameless heresy of Berengarius set on
work and caused them to set their pe^nes to ye book which bere^garius first
did sow this poison abroad, yt after ye words of co^secracion were dewly
spoken remained yet still the substance of bread and wine i^ ye sacrament, But
against his heresy, Guymundus wrote an excellent work which now of late
days is newly come to light which, Guymu^dus being a monk of the order of
saint Bener, was afterward called to be the Bishop of Auerence. Now is come
forth also. The excellent work of Algerus: which being first a stude^t was
afterward made a monk of the same order. And of these two notable clerks,
Guymu^dus is in his writing more earnest and fervent, and his style is more
beautefyed with with the science of rethorike, but Algerus prosedyth more
quietly and tastes more of devotion, mete for a relegious person to have, but
each of them do show their selves to be very well learned, both in the art of
disputacion and also in Philosophy and yet apereth it not in their books, that
there is any affected desire in them to show them selves so to be, but yet
they both were greatly exercysed in the study of the canons of holy scripture.
And in the ancient fathers of christ's church, as in the works of Ciprianus
Hylarius, Ambrosius, Hieronimus, Augustinus, Basilius, and Chrisostomus, whose
wrytynges do yet represente unto us that heavenly spirit which the holy
apostles had in their time, and farther more ye said two holy fathers have
written their works, with as much eloquence, as unto a deuyne is requesite,
and suerlye thorowout all their works there is no place which wants any
quycknes of wit, in bestowynge of their words, nor any fine pythynes, in
cothynge of their matters together, they do so affectually set forth their
sentences, with such substanciall and well grounded reasons. Nor they do not as
to many writers do now a days which do bestow a great part of their books,
with chydynges, and braulynge words against other men or with disfamynge
checkyng and tauntynge words, nor much worse is they do not bestow sometime
hole pamphelettes with irreuerent and bitter words against those things which
both they and all other ouhgt to have in high reverence and dewly to worship
nor they do not ha^dell their matters with sophystical reasons, as many do now
a days which do care for nothing more, than to yllude such as do give
credence to them, and yet does it well appear that these two here above named
aunciente fathers which i^ their days were so notable clerks, did floryshe
before Bonauentures days, or Thomas de aquino, or Dunce, whom they otherwise
do call Scotus, or Albertus mangnus, or Petrus bombardus, whom clerks do also
now call the master of the sentences. Ye and of these latter writers, like as
some of them do much bost them selves to be profou^dly seen in Aristoteles
philosophy, even so is the manner of their endytynge, by means of that their to
much affectyd style, but harsche, and roughe, and without any comelye setting
forth of their matters which they do entreat of. As who should say, that in
their so doing (to their Judgment) they have thought the nerar thereby, to
follow the style of their Arystotele, where as it is with the^ much contrary
in deed, for though that Arystotele, regarding chefly the hardenes of the
matters which be entreated of, and therefore did not regard to set forth his
works with the using of any affections: or by any other means, affectately
beautyfie his wrytynges, yet used he in all his works, the highest sort of
eloquence that could be, which thing these before named writers otherwise
called scole men, could in no point attain unto. But as to me ward (I wot
not how) it semyth to be comely unto a deuyne, that in the setting forth of
the mysteryes of our faith, there ought to be used a certain dignity and
magestie in their writing, and there ought furthermore no convenient affections
to be wa^tynge, for by such manner of enditynge in effect it is brought to
pass, that the reader does not only the better understand, that which by
any learned man is after such manner taught him, but he shall also the better
favor and cast his love unto such things: as he shall perceive them to be
written, by a devout lover of such divine mysteries. We have it of the
Gospel. This is my body, which is betrayde for you. And of. S. Paul we have.
I have received of our lord, that which I have given unto you. etc. And
follows after. He that shall eat and drink unworthily, he shall be gyltie
of the body and blood of our lord. This is and ought to be unto all
christianed men a foundacio^ immovable. But certain of the ancient fathers
of Christ's church have upon this high mysteries sometime written darkely, and
sometime they do some to varye one from a another, yea and sometime, they do seem
to write dyuersly of this blyssed and holy sacrament but all such darkness,
and all such semynge to varye one from a another, or when that they do to any
readers seem to write things that do dyffer one from an other, that ought to
be ascrybed unto the unspeakable profou^ditie of this high mystery: or else
to their ware and syrcomspecte speaking or writing of the said ancient
fathers, which many times speaking unto the multitude, which did assemble
together to here them, they being of diverse sorts, myxed of Jews and
Gentyles and Christians together, for that cause oftentimes did they not think
it convenient, to give that holy of all holyes, unto dogs. And the varyte
which semyth to be in their wrytynges, ryseth here upon, that sometime the
forms sacramental them selves be called of them holy tokens. Sometime the
very receyuyng, is called of them, an holy token. And in conclusyo^ the very
body it self is by them, called an holy token, sometime of it self, and some
time of some other thing. And for so much as under these tokens, the body of
our savior Christ lies hydden by means of applyenge of those things unto ye
body itself, which do belong unto the vysyble signs, the doctors do use in
their speaking to say that the body is broken, or mynished, or crushed, into
small pecys, furthermore for so much as there is in the sacrament consecrate,
the self body in substance, which did hang for us upon the cross, though it
be not now the self body in qualyte, for why it is now gloryfyed and
spiritual unto such as do take, but little head, what they do read, the
ancient fathers do seem unto them contrary amongst them selves and to hold
one against an other, wha^ they at any times be found in their wrytynges to
say. The self same body, and not the same body. Where as in very deed there
is in their saynges no contrariete at all, unto such as have the knowledge to
dyscerne the true meanynges of their words, and for a conclusyon, the body of
christ is sometime taken for that natural body which he took of the virgyn
Mary, and often times by his body is meant his mystical body, which is the
catholyke church which things has also given occasion unto such readers as
have not ben attentyfe, and in these matters of so great importance, have not
taken dyligent head, what they have red, that the holy doctors have seemed
unto them to be contrary in their sayenges one to an other, or at the least
that they have not agreed amongst them selves. But now here making an end,
any farther to aduertyse all readers to be in ye readyng of these ancient
Fathers dewly syrcomspect, let us now return to our chefest purpose, and for
so much as that we have for the proffe of our special matter, the euydent
testymonie, both of our Sauyoure christ him self, and also of saint Paul. And
furthermore sense it is by these two holy Fathers here abouesayd, Guymundus
and Algerus, most euydently in their books declared, how that in veryte, the
body and blood of our Sauyoure christ is in the blyssed Sacrament of the
alter, and that all the ancient fathers here above said, and mo a great nombre
bysydes all those fathers, whom clerks do now call scole men whom the
catholyke church not without great and worthy causes ever have done and still
do give so high auctorite and credyte unto, with one assent agreement and
concord, do hold and constantly maintain and ever from age to age have done,
that as I have said in the sacrament of the alter is the very substance of
the body and blood of our Savior Christ. And for so much also as besides all
these aforesaid wytnessys, the constant and full auctorite of all general
Counselles do agree with them, and specially for so much as all the hole nombre
and congregacions of such as be faithful Christians through the hole
Christendom do concerning his high mystery consent and agree in one, with the
said ancient Fathers, and general councelles and Scolemen. Let us now also
at this time, join our selves unto all these, and agree also amongst our
selves concerning this heavenly mystery. And while we be here present in this
transitory life let us so with concord and hearty devotion, though it be
(during this our life) but under a dark shadow, and as it were under a covert
manner of spekyng unto us, mekely eat, and drink, of this bread and cup,
until the time may come that we may far otherwise to our heavenly comfort,
eat and drink it in the kingdom of God. That would to God, that such
parsons as have followed Berengarius in his manner oferrynge, concerning, the
veryte of the body and blood of our savior Christ to be in the blyssed
sacrament of ye alter, which thing he denied so to be, would in lykwyse follow
him in repenting of their selves as he did, and that they which now in our
days be infectyd with the same error, would so unite themselves unto the
catholyke Church again, as he did, which dyed for his offense full sore
repentaunt. Futhermore there have risen about this blyssed sacrament
innumerable questions. As how is the transsubstantyacyon brought to pass that
is to say, how does the substance of bread give place unto the very
substance of the body of our Savior Christ? Also how the accidents of
bread and wine be preserved and do remain after their former substau^ces be
gone? And how is it, that those accidents do keep their color, their smell,
their sauoure, and also power to fill like other fode, and to make dronken, all
which qualites the bread and wine had in them selves before that they were
consecrat, also at what moment of time, does the body and blood of christ
begin to be in the Sacrament? Also at what time the body and bolude of christ
does sease to be in the Sacrament? Also whether that after the forms be
corrupted any other substance do succeed? Also how that one self same body
may be at once in places innumerable? Also how the body of a perfyte man may
be under so little a broken peace of bread? And many such other questions
which it behouith with sobernes to be entreated of, amongst such persons as
have their wits exercysed, in disputynge and reasonynge upon such high
matters, But as unto the lay people it does suffice, if they do believe yt
after the words of co^secracion be once by the mynyster spoken over the
creatures of bread and wine, that there is incontinent the very body and
blood of our savior Christ, which neither can be divided, nor yet receive any
hurt, nor is not mete to receive any manner in iurye, what so ever chances do
become of the outward forms. For if the sacred body of our lord should be
thrown into the myer, or into any vile gonge, or any otherwise (unto any
irreuerent persons thinking) should be iniuryd or soyled, in deed the most
iniurye yt can be done unto it. Is when it is received in to the mouth, of a
wicked and sinful person, which is sore soyled and spotted with grievous and
odyble sin. Now suerly it is therefore sitting for our christian religyon,
to entreat and order, the outward forms of bread and wine of the holy
sacrament, with all dew reverence but as concerning the very body of our
Savior it self, like as god is after his nature is no less glorious in a
vile synk than he is in heaven, and can by no malice of man, or chance by man,
or other wise happenynge receive any hurt or Iniurye, no more can the
glorified body of our Savior christ, what Iniurye so ever be done unto the
outward tokens. And to be brefe against all the doubts and scrupules of man's
weak knowledge Let us first call into our minds, the Immesurable power of God,
unto whom nothing is impossible. Ye and unto whom there is nothing, but it is
light to be done, so it be his pleasure, that it should so be. And farther more
let us consider, how inestymable the gifts of any body gloryfied be, but
specially, and incomparablye of the body gloryfied, ye and these hyghly super
exaltyd body in glory and honor of our lord Jesus. There restyth therefore
now no more, but that the thing of which the veryte is here so sufficyently
unto us perswadyd, may on our part be worthily worshyppyd, and had in
reverence, and that the thing which we do profess to believe to be so, we may
by matter in deed, declare unfeignedly that such is our believe, as we do make
for. For with how great a pureness of living. With how much humble reverence
and with how much ferefull tymerousnes ought this, thryse ye and four times
to, worthy to be worshypped mystery, to be received, ordered, and entreted, who
can suppose that they do believe earnestly, and from the bottom of their hearts
which when this holy mysterye at the mass time is in doing do walk up and
down in the church, pratyng and Iangelynge together? or that (which now in
some places is taken up for a custom) do stand in the market place without
the church doors, there spending their time about telling of Idell tales? In
old time that place was appointed for penitentes, or for them that were but
new come to our faith, and had not yet learned their belefe, and so thought
them selves not worthy once to enter into the church doors. Some other or
ever the mynisters be showed unto the people, at the leuacio^ time, do get them
into some tavern or alehouse, and do in manner leave the church empty. What
kind of manner or condition call we this? if you should stand to here a play
made but for laughter, thou would endure to take patience and abide still to
the end, and that the game should be fully done and finished. And can thou
not endure till the ending of this heavenly mystery be fully done and
fynished, all the mass time the Angelycall sprites do with most humble rerence
stand about the altar, thereto do their worship and lowlye reverence. He
also is there present, whom all the heuenlye hoostes of blyssed spirits do
desire to behold, and look upon, and thou as though their were some leude
game or play there in hand, either thou gapyst, and gapyst for werynes, or
else thou make a pratyng there, and tellest some lewd or rybalde talles, or
else thou gettest the away straight to the tavern. I do se that it is now
adays a custom taken up amongst many folks, which perauenture ought not to
be called wicked, because it does some to proceed of some devout affection,
though it be but of man, without any dew and convenient ground. For that
custom is brought in, contrary to the old manner of the church: and in deed
not very convenient so to be, which custom is, that at the sacrynge time while
the mynisters of consecration be a doing, the Quyare vsyth to sing some song,
made in the laud of the virgyn Marye, and set forth by words co^taynynge some
prayer made unto her. But is it fyt and fyttynge at that time in the wonderful
presence of the Sone our Redemer to make suit by any prayer unto the Mother?
Suerly if we would now in our time herein, keep the ancient and laudable
custom of the church vsyd in old seasons, there was at the Leuacyon time no
manner voice herd in all the Church but all the people at once bowynge down
them selves to the groundewarde, with their still devout minds did give
thanks unto god the Father, which has given his sone unto the death for the
salvation of mankind. And thereunto in very dead, does the priest a little
before the leuation, exhort the people when he speaking unto them says. Lift
up your hearts. Let us give thanks unto the lord our God. For while this
unspeakable mysteryes be in doing, nothing is more convenient to be done on
the peoples behaulfe, than to keep a devout and a reverent scylence. Nor the
wonderful charity of our lord Jesus is by none other means more worthyly
praised than by a common scylence at that time of all the people, as the most
effectual kind of loud speaking, that is in man, when he speaks to God
before whom all hearts do lie prostrate and wide open? So that at ye leuacion
time, whylest that all manner noyses of orgaynes or other manner voices keeping a
still and reverend scylence, the people with their bodies being inclyned
down wards and lyftynge up their hearts, should at that time, after that
manner speak unto our lord and merciful god. Yea and that the people might
the more worthelye worship this holy mystery, according to the high worthynes
thereof, the deuouote and godly conversation, of the priests, is no small help
and Furtheraunce there unto. In old time, when the Church did most floryshe
in devotion and godly conversation, they vsyd no more but one mass which only
the Bishop did execute, as for the multitude of priests which be now a
days, first devotion and shortly after Lucure, has moved the world there
unto. And now at the last the thing is come here unto that many persons do
learn to sing mass, for none other intent, but as the lay people to
maynetayne their lyuinges, do learn their handy crafts as some do learn to be
shomakers, some to be dawbers or temperars of mortar, and some others to be
Taylers, and unto such priests their mass seruyth them for none other intent
but as to be a mean for them to get their living by. In very deed, it is
good reason, that he which does serve the alter should live of the alter. But
yet is it much requesite that the executoures of this high mysterye should
rather be mete to execute their worthy to be worshyppyd tome and office than to
use it like any vile bartrynge as it were of were for ware or of one
marchaundyse for a another. So that it is not only requisite for such
mynysters to have the knowledge of their outward gestures, and to have their
vestementes and voices to their office according, but it is also much more
requisite that all the hole trade of their lives and conversation, should be
mete and answerable unto the dignite of their office ye it is suerly a great
matter to consider how much sobryete it beco^myth for a priest to have of what
pure chastyte ought he to be and how much ought he to be garnyshed with all
manner clennes of lyuinges what contempt and dyspysynge also ought there to be
in them of all such voluptuous pleasures as the common people do delight in. And
specially what great and fervent love ought there to be in the^ toward the
dyligent and contynuall redyng of holy scripture. And how much vnsyttyng and
uncomely is it for a priest incontinenty after the selebratynge of such a godly
and deuyne mysterye, to consume all the resydue of the day, either in
gullynge, and dryukynge or intellynge or heryng of vile rybalde tales, or to
sit playeng at the dysce or at the cards, or to go a hunting all day to cast
away the time in Idell wandering about to and fro, and either to bestow no
part of all the day besides or else very little thereof, either in redyng of any
holy auctours or in any medytacion or contemplaciton of heavenly things, let
all priests therefore consider the hyghnes of their professyon, when they do
stand at the alter. They have Angels to mynister unto them, when they be
departed from thence, some of them do make it but a light matter incontinenty
after to gyt them into company of the most vile dregs of man because I
would here use no mo words which might be sharpelyer spoken I pray God that
the unworthy conversation of those which do take upon them a mynistracio^
which is above the dignite of Angels, do not give occasyon unto herytykes to
conceive a wicked opinion of so unspeakable mystery, but let all ministers by
their devout and godly conversation so demene them selves on their party, that
our lord on his party may honor them again. Both here in this world
before men, and also in another world before his father in heaven, but what do
I now writing of these things? Algerus and Guymundus, shall a great deal more
effectually exhort all priests here unto, which to godly auctours I do
knowelege my self that I have dilygently red over, to the highest fruit of my
soul yt ever I hitherto received by the reading of any other, for suerly
though I did never doubt of the truth of the presence of the body and blood
of our Sauyoure Christ to be in the blyssed sacrament of the alter, yet now
sense I have over red them (I wot not how) that by the means of ye over
readyng of them I do feel yt my mind is not a little thereby establysshed and
confermyd and my knowledge is made more stedy and certain, and my reverence
toward that blyssed sacrament, is a great deal the more incresyd. And now
these my poor labors what soever they be I have thought it good to dedycate
them unto your most reuere^de fatherhod, that they might unto others be a
testymonye that Erasmus has in him self dew remembrance of his duty and
service toward his patron, by that means to give you some little occasyon
on your party, to have remembrance upon me. And thus our lord prospere you
in all your good and holy purposys, so that they may redownde unto his glory,
and to the profit of our devout and Christian Religion. Given at Friburge
Brisgoie upon the Ides of March the year from our Savior Christ incarnat.
M.D.xxx.

Finis.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer.

Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.


