THE PSALM OF MERCY: OR, A MEDITATION upon the 51. Psalm, by a true Penitent.



LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, and are to be sold by Matthew Lownes.
1625.

TO MY REVEREND FRIEND Mr. JOHN DOWNHAM, Bachelar in Divinity and Preacher of
Gods Word.
REVEREND SIR.
WHen first I fell into my grievous affliction, as a man surprised with a
mighty Tempest, I did in the midst of mine astonishment, bethink my self, how
to apply my courses to the appeasing of Gods anger, (whence (...) cross
proceeded) and the saving of my perplexed soul, the main mark whereat (...)
aimed. In that case I suddenly and strongly resolved to take Gods Book into
my hand, and by it, as by the true Card and compass; to sail safely through
the sea of this worlds troubles, in hope joyfully in the end to arrive at the
haven of rest and true (...). Among the books of holy Writ, I (...) mine eyes
and thoughts specially upon the Psalms of David, which are a short and sweet
(...) of all Scripture, and (...) mysteries therein comprised. Among the
Psalms I conuersed more frequently, in those that are singled from the rest,
and styled by a special title, The Penitentialls, as the fittest medicines for
my malady, which are (as one says) the Anatomy of the spirit and the heart, as
it were, of the new man. True it is, (which I confess ingenuously, though to
mine own reproach) that albeit I had very often heretofore heard and red those
Psalms (wherein David his pangs and passions, are lively described) with a
kind of (...) delight, and pleasing regret, as men behold Tragedies on a
stage, and read lamentable stories: Yet could I not fully relish, and truly
taste them, whiles I lived in quietness and contentment, nor indeed, until I
had by personal experience, felt in some proportion David his (...) and
wounded spirit. So true is that, which sundry of the Fathers have observed,
Bern. ad frat. in Mon.
and Saint Bernard delivers in these words; You shall never rightly understand
David, until by experience, you have put on the very affections, in which
David his Psalms were endited; for none can express a passion that feels it
not, neither can the pen deliver but what it copieth out of the (...).

Now being best acquainted with mine own disabilities and defects; I did (...)
choose this Plaine-song to (...), being the prime (...) Penitential, and a
lively Character of a true Mourner, though shaped to the particular condition
of David, yet fitting every penitent sinner, because it seems to require the
compunction of the heart, rather then the consideration of the head; an
imitation rather then an interpretation, an application, rather then an
explication.

This is The Psalm of Mercy, by excellency, so called, because it begins
with Miserere, which prisoners indicted, and convicted, for lesser fellonies,
at our Assizes and (...), do so often call and (...) for, at the Judges hands.
For (...) that can neither understand nor read the Latin tongue, can say it
by rote (as they say) and do crave mercy, in desiring to be put to read, this
Psalm of mercy. But without all question, the most holy, and just man upon
earth, had need to beg of the great Judge of heaven and earth, that he will
(...) to hear him read with his tongue, and tune with his heart, this sweet,
though (...) Psalm of mercy in his daily (...), lest he be condemned when he
comes to be arraigned at the grand Assizes: When all offenders without witness
or Jury, are to be accused and convicted (...) the (...) and (...) of their own
consciences; (...) not to appear, it will be impossible, and to appear
without this Psalm of mercy, it will be intolerable.

For who is he among the sons of men, that may not truly say, with that
ancient Father? A sinner I am, spotted Tertul. de Paenit.
with all manner of stains, borne for nothing else, in this life, but to act
repentance all my life (what other person (...) I sustain) upon the stage of
this world.

Upon perusal of the Psalm, and some few (...) thereof (for I did not (...)
many) chewing the Cud, as it were; I have cast it and them into mine own mold,
expressed the sense in (...) plain language, and paralelling mine with David's
perplexities, applied his plasters to my sores: I (...) with the same measure
of spirit, I hope with the like success of grace.

If you marvel, that I being no Divine should adventure the conceiving, much
more the publishing of a Meditation of this nature: My answer is briefly;
That the subject of it belongs to the art of Christianity (which every man is
bound to know) and not only to the profession of Divinity; and that, in
absence of the Master, one (...) now and than teaches another, and he that
learnes of his Schoolefellow, will sometimes apprehe^d it sooner from (...),
(...) from his Master.

And I hope to suffer the more gentle censure, for suffering this weak Essay
to see light in this Age, which is active in scribbling and printing, even to
riot and excess: because I see men's wills of their gifts to charitable uses
daily printed, to incite others by their example, to the like courses. Why then
may not any man declare and publish, the pious bequest of his soul, (as it
were) and set the press on work, to express and record his repentance, build
his tomb of blackMarble, and erect it in the Temple of Gods people; that by
looking upon (...) Ensigns, and reading the Epitaph, others may be moved, as
in Christian affection to condole with him, so by a kind of reflection, to
mourn for themselves.

If a man would provide a mourning suite for his sorrowful heart, what hurt or
loss were it, to see diverse forms and fashions to make choice of for
patterns? The more course the Stuff, and less curious the fashion, the
fitter for the great Dueil or solemn mourning. My model may better please some
mourner, then a better. If no other use be made, The often iteration, and
frequent renouation of this matter, (...) usual and ordinary resort to houses
of mourning, may give occasion to refresh and revive that divine passion, which
should ever live in us, till it dye with us, to wit, Repentance.

What fruit others may reap by this my meditation, I know not, but sure I am,
that by entertayning the time, and employing my thoughts upon this subject, I
have excluded a world of idle fancies, and tumultuous cogitations (which
otherwise would have seized upon me) and swallowed many indignities, and
discontentments that would have disturbed the peace of my soul, had it not
been foreprized, by an exercise of this nature, as an Antidote against such
poisons.

The cause why I present and submit it to your view and censure, is not only
for that I reverence your great learning and singular piety, well known to our
whole Church by your sundry books; but specially in a recognition of the much
contentment I found in that work of yours, which deservedly bears the Title
of Consolations for the afflicted, or the Third part of the Christian Warfare,
which gave the first ouerture to our accquaintance, and begat sundry
conferences, between us sithence, to my no small comfort, as I do in all
thankfulness profess. Whether it shall dye in your hands, upon your private
perusal, or live a while, and so pass further, through the hands of others, I
leave wholly to your discretion. You shall bear the blame on the one side;
howsoever, you be like, to receive small thanks on the other.

The God of all consolation, return with interest, into your own bosom,
those comsorts, which you so freely and plentifully have imparted unto other.

Yours in true Christian affection. I. B.

THE PSALM OF MERCY, OR A MEDITATION upon the 51. Psalm, by a true Penitent.
To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet came unto
him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.
THE ARGUMENT.
AFter that David in many successful battles was become a Conqueror, and
had defeated and destroyed the Syrians and Mesopotamians, who came to succor
the Ammonites his Opposites, having now no enemy abroad, of any account to
encounter withal, he was surprised by his dangerous enemy at home, and taken
prisoner by Security, he grew by Plenty and Prosperity, (as it commonly fares
with men, in such case) forgetful of his former miseries, and God his singular
mercies, and was captiuated wholly, by his lustful desires, and sinful
concupiscence. For not contented to take by stealth, Vriah his wife from him,
in his absence, while he was employed in his service, but (which is the nature
of sin, still to increase and multiply) to his foul Adultery, he added
cruel Murder, giving order to his trusty Commander Ioab, to marshall him in
the front and point of those Israelites, who did assail the Suburbs of Rabbah,
when there was no possibility, at least, no probability of prevailing, and
(which could not but be, more displeasing to God) was wittingly contented that
many other his best servants and soldiers, under Vriah his command, should
perish with Vriah for company, to cloak and disguise his particular wicked
design against him. To omit his practice, in calling Vriah from the Wars,
and sending him home (both sober and drunk, though he went not at all) to
cover the shame, and shadow the sin, which David had committed, (she being then
with child by him:) no sooner was Vriah slain, but he married the widow,
whom being a wife, he had defiled; and so securely enjoyed the forbidden
fruit of his filthy pleasure, and mischievous Policy, till Nathan the Prophet
was specially sent, as an Herald, to summon and challenge, check, and reprove
him, for these manifold defections, and manifest rebellions against God.

Now the time of Nathan his coming to David, is purposely recorded, to show
that David was in a kind of Lethargy for about a years space (as it is
collected by the story) which is a strange and remarkable thing, that so great
a person, so endued with God his excellent Spirit, could sleep and snort in
the bed of security, as if he had been quite bereaved of the sense and life of
Piety, and out of his wits, (as it were) for so large a time. For who would not
think and say, he was bewitched by Satan, and benumbed with the spirit of
slumber, and grown, if not obstinately contemptuous, yet retchlesly careless of
God his Judgments? Which circumstance, as it does much aggrauate his fault,
that he felt not true remorce of conscience, till the Prophet Nathan came to
rowze and raise him; so does it exceedingly amplify the mercy and goodness of
God, who when ordinary means of Prayer, reading and meditating of Gods Word,
could not work and prevail with him, (for who can imagine, that such a person
could altogether in that time want such helps,) addressed an extraordinary
Ambassador, even one of his Prophets; a Prophet, to a Prophet; a Physician, to
a Physician; but to a sick Physician, who could not cure himself, to handle
and search his wounds, to touch him to the quick, and so to reduce him to a
sound and sincere repentance.

Now, who on the one side, does not tremble and quake, to think of this
fearful example, that so holy a Prophet, so worthy a King, could, after so
foul a fall, lie so long, in this dyrt and mire, and be so overwhelmed with
such a beastly and senseless sluggishnesse?

On the other part, whose heart is not ravished with delight, and even resolved
into tears of joy and comfort, to behold such a mirror of Gods mercy, in
David, after he had plunged himself into so many and manifold great and
grievous sins, as were folded up in those capital crimes of Adultery and
Murder, that he should yet find grace to rise again by Repentance, obtain
pardon of all his sins, and be restored and reintegrated into God his
special love and favor?

So then the Title tells both the time and occasion of composing this Psalm,
which does passionately declare, and lively express David his humiliation,
sorrow and coffeehouse, for the offenses he had done, and publish, and
record to posterity, a form and Model, (as it were) of penitent prayer, to be
used, by Sorrowful Sinners, in all succeeding ages.

This excellent Ditty of the sweet Singer of (...), was (as the Title purports)
recommended to him that excelled, to wit, the (...) of the (...) or (...)
Chanter, to be (...) into a note (...) tune fit for it, and to be played upon
an Instrument of Music, called Neginoth, that the Art (...) (...) might (...),
as all other humane arts ought to be accessory and serviceable, to the
advancement of divine glory. For the fashion was in those times, to sing such
Hymns artificially set and tuned to some Instrument, in the public
Assemblies, that by the melody of the ear, the Iubilation of the heart might
be enlarged.

THE ANALYSIS or Resolution of the Psalm.
THis is a penitential Psalm, and the chief of the penitentials, in common
account, a lively mirror of a true penitent, and a zealous prayer of a
mournful soul, oppressed with the weight, and perplexed with the sight of
sin.

The prayer is either
Special for himself; such are all the petitions to the 18. verse. General
for the whole Church, in the 18. verse, and so to the end.
As repentance has two parts,
To lament and (...) sins past. To prevent and avoid sin to come.
So the petitions of the Psalm, are either for
Justification by pardon of sins committed, to the 10. verse. Sanctification,
by future holiness, in the rest.
But the (...) does not exactly pursue this method, but rather the order of his
own judgment, often iterating and varying his petition for one and the same
thing, by the Metaphors of washing, cleansing, purging, blotting out and doing
away his sins, and in the midst of his prayer for sanctification, abruptly
and passionately interlacing his suit, for pardon of his crying crime of Murder.

O Miserable wretch that I am, what shall I say? What shall I do? Which way
shall I turn? To whom shall I address my self? Hell will not; the earth
cannot relieve me, and I dare not lift up mine eyes to Heaven, having so highly
offended against Heaven, and before thee the great King of Heaven. I am
assailed on every side, assailed by mine own iniquities, assailed by thy
graces. Where may I shroud my self from my sins? How can I hide me from my
self? Where may I expect succor? Whence may I hope for help; sithence thy
graces, which I have turned into wantonness, do convince me of foul
ingratitude, do multiply iniquities upon me, and even arm thy mercies against
me? The extremity of my Condition is such, as will afford no long time of
deliberation. In brief, there is one only way left of escape, and evasion,
and that is, by flying from thee, to fly to thee; to appeal from thy seat of
Justice, to thy throne of Mercy, as to thy Court of last resort, which is
always open. Either that way or no way, can I be rescued from utter
destruction. The most odious sin of desperation, will but plunge me further,
into the depth of damnation. But with the Lord, there is maruailous mercy, and
plenteous redemption. By this means it is possible; without it, impossible to
save my sinful soul. Wherefore my resolution is; in the lowest degree of
humiliation, in the deepest strain of contrition, faithfully, (and yet, (in a
sort) fearfully) to repose my self upon his infinite, and unspeakable
compassion. I will pierce mine entralles, and prick the heart of my corrupt
heart to the quick. I will let out a flood of tears, which are the blood of
my soul: I will mingle my zealous and humble prayers, with those salt and
brackish tears: I will knock hard at his mercy gate, and cry aloud, Miserere.

A MEDITATION UPON THE PSALM of Mercy.
1. Have mercy, upon me, O God, according to thy great mercy, and according to
the multitude of thy tender compassions, blot out my transgressions.
THAT which I beg at thy hands, O God, is mercy: for of many properties in
thee, which are all essential to thee, there is none so useful, none so
delightful, to my perplexed soul, as is thy mercy.

Were it not for thy Mercy, thy Majesty would affright, thy Wisdom confound,
thy Justice condemn, and thy Power destroy me; as on the other part, through
the sweet mixture of thy Mercy, thy Majesty will revive, thy Wisdom
enlighten, thy Justice acquit, and thy Power preserve me, and every of thy
other Attributes will contribute to the advancement of my inestimable benefit,
and endless good.

In Mercy all my prayers and petitions are comprised; by Mercy all my defects
and desires are satisfied; for Mercy all my praises and thanks are returned.

Every thing that has being, does naturally affect continuance, and well being.

Every Man does or should desire his chief good, and true happiness, which
consists in thy remission of his sins, in his reconciliation to thee, and
that is the blessed, and kindly fruit of thy gracious and tender mercy alone.

A sinner I am, and who is not? Therefore I cannot seek for happiness in
freedom from sin (that is above the nature of man,) but in the free pardon
of my sin, by grace, which surmounts all the sins of all the world. Thou
did look down, O Lord, from all eternity, out of thy highest throne of
Heaven, by way of Survey, among the sons of men in all ages and generations,
(all things and persons being ever present unto thee) to see, if there were
any, that would understand and seek after thee. But upon exact enquiry return
was made, they were all found corrupt and abominable, There was not one that
did good; no not one. Which for greater vehemence and evidence of the truth, is
repeated the second time, and purposely recorded, by an infinite foresight, to
take away all color of doubt, and to impose perpetual Silence, to such as
afterward might deceive themselves, and abuse others with an opinion of their
own justice and holiness, as answerable to thy divine law, and meritorious of
thy loving favor.

Wherefore I present this lamentable supplication, and sing this doleful ditty,
though framed for my self (...), yet fitting every of the sons of Adam
generally: Have Mercy upon me, O God. I call upon thee, O God, at this time,
by the name of Elohim, which purports the Trinity of Persons; and not of
Jehovah, which denotes the Unity of substance, in the Godhead: for my threefold
sin does justly occasion me, to fix mine eyes upon the Three persons
distinctly. Upon thee, O Father, who art power, against whom I have offended,
by abuse of my regal Power, in murdering Captain Vriah, and his whole troop;
Upon thee, O Son, who art Wisdom, by using finenesse and fraud in carrying
closely, and cunningly contriuing the murder. Upon thee, O holy Ghost, who art
goodness, whom I have grieved, by defiling my hands with blood, and body with
(...), which is, or should be thy temple and habitation.

When I implore thy great Mercy, I imply my great misery. The Physic Aug. in
(...). 51.
of the body must be attempered to the malady. If the receipt be given under
the due Dosis, it may move, but it will not remove the peccant humors.
Desperate diseases must have sovereign (...): for mean medicines will never
cure great griefs. If the plaster be too skant for the sore; If the wound be
not thoroughly teinted, and wholly covered, it will never be well cured, or
soundly recovered. As it is in the diseases and sores of he body; so is it also
in (...) of the soul. One deep (...) another: the depth of sin requires the
depth of grace; and a depth of misery calls for a depth of mercy.

If I ask my self, why is thy Mercy great? for that, there is no cause of thy
mercy, but thy Mercy. I must answer by the effect, Because thou can (...) my
soul from the nethermost hell, from such anguish of body, from such perplexity
of spirit, from such terrors and torments, as are ready to ouerwhelme me, in
the pit of destruction.

If I ask how great is Chrysostom. in hunc Psalmum.
thy Mercy? I must give an answer answerelesse; I know it to be marvelous
great, but how great it is, I cannot comprehend. The immensity of it I have
assayed to shadow out, by such resemblances as the world affords to outward
sense, for the shallow conceits, and weak capacities of mortal men, being not
able with my thoughts to reach, much less with my tongue or pen to express
it.

The height of thy mercy I (...) to the altitude of the Heaven above the Earth,
the breadth Psalm. 103.
to the distance of the East from the West, the depth, to the affection of
parents to their children: butalas, these are no even matches: for that which
is limited and finite, has no proportion at all, with that which is unlimited,
and infinite.

Thy Mercy, O Lord, is as thou art: thou art great without quantity, as thou
art good without quality. Thou art not merciful, but mercy: not good, but
goodness: not loving, but Love it self, in the abstract. The extent of thy
goodness, love, and mercy is such as has no bounds, the depth is such as has
no bottom.

The influence of it, will make me feel that which no eloquence can utter, no
Melius impressum quam expressum innotescit.
intelligence can contain. No man can tell how sweet honey is, but he In his
non capit intelligentia, nisi quantum attingit (...). Bern. in Cant. 3.
that tastes it.

I see, O Lord, great fruit of thy rich root of Mercy. For were not thy mercy
exceeding great, few or none could live Qui non gustauerit, non intelliget,
quam (...) sapit mel, Aug. in Psalm. 30.
here the life of grace, or there, the life of glory. Look how many Saints
there be in heaven or on earth, by inchoation here, in perfection there: So
many worthy examples, so many infallible demonstrations there are, of thine
unspeakable mercy, without which, they should (...) have perished and sunk
down to Hell.

If therefore thy Justice lift up it self as the high Mountains, to eclipse
the light of thy gracious countenance from me, I will raise my self yet
higher, in confidence of thy Truth, which reaches to the clouds, and thy
Mercy, which mounts even to the heaven of heavens. I will frame this
comfortable consequence to my distressed soul: if thy mercy be magnified
above thy Justice, it must needs be far above my transgressions.

O Lord, I have caused my sin to abound, far beyond the banks and bounds
of thy Law, but it is thy property, to pardon, and the property of thy Mercy,
where sin abounds, Romans 5.
there to superabound.

Thy mercy does even cross and control thy Justice; and as the highest Orb
does by violence carry with it the inferior Spheres, against their proper
inclinations and motions; So the force of thy powerful mercy does ouerrule my
natural and wilful courses, running to wickedness, and in that race, hasting
to just condemnation.

My sins therefore, how great soever, cannot stop the flowing of thy vast
Ocean of Mercy.

When I fall into computation, and comparison of my sins on the one side, and
thy mercies on the other; I find by divine Arithmetike, and the true
Iacobs-staffe, (to my singular comfort) that my sins, how great, and how many
soever, yet may be both measured and reckoned; but on the other part, that
neither the magnitude nor the multitude Miserationum Dei, nec magnitudo
mensurari, nec multitudo numerari potest, Basil.
of thy mercies can be either fathomed or numbered.

I beg thy great Mercy, because thy lesser mercies will not do the turn,
which my miserable condition requires. For they may ease me of lesser miseries,
of afflictions in body, of distresses in estate, of other encumbrances in the
world; but it is thy larger Mercy that must forgive, not my lesser only, but my
greater sins, which have provoked thy just and heavy indignation against me.

Thy ways, O God, are not as man's ways, nor thy mercies, as man's mercies.
Man's mercy is short and scant, mingled with hardness, and maimed with sundry
imperfections. In civil matters some man will forgive the interest, but not
the principal: some man will forgive the half, but not the whole debt: some
man will forbear to demand the debt, yet will not forgo the Bond; he will
keep that, to curb his debtor, upon all occasions. In matters criminal, one
will forgive the fault, but not the punishment: another will remit a part, but
not all the penalty: a third will forgive, but not forget the injury. But thy
Mercy, O Lord, is great and large, free and absolute, entire, and indefinite,
or rather infinite; Thou forgiuest both the fault and punishment royally and
really: all is acquitted and discharged at once, in accomplishment of that
comfortable clause in the cloze of thy new Covenant, Thou will remember our
Ierem. 31.
iniquities no more.

The multitude of my sins occasions me, to parallel them with the multitude
of thy mercies, that there may be a medicine for each malady, a salve for
every sore. I touch still upon one and the same string, though with some
variety, because the meditation and modulation of this mercy of thine, is as
sweet Music in mine ear, and a joyful Iubile in my soul. I strive to
express one and the same thing in diverse words or phrases; great mercy, and a
multitude of mercies, being all one in sense and meaning: for great mercy
comprehends a multitude of mercies, and a multitude of mercies amounts to one
great mass of mercy.

The greatest mercy, that the greatest person can do to the most miserable
wretch upon earth, is not to be compared to the least of thy mercies, which
thou affoordest to the holiest man that lives, in regard of the infinite
disproportion that is between the Offender and the Offended, the Creator of
Heaven and earth, and dust and ashes. Howbeit, even in thine infinite mercy, as
it has relation to sinful man, there be degrees, whereof we cannot better
take the skantling, then by our greater or lesser offenses committed against
thy divine Majesty: for the Law of gratitude amongst men, teaches me to
acknowledge, that thy love is greater to them, to who^ thou forgiuest greater,
the^ to such as thou acquitest of smaller debts. Therefore as my more heinous
sins, at the Tribunal of thy justice, do call for seuerer punishment; so at
thy throne of mercy (which is above thy seat of justice, and to which I
appeal, as to thy Court of last resort) they beg and crave, for thy more
great and tender compassions.

Debt is a burden; and a great debt, is an heavy burden: he that bears an
honest mind, cannot be quiet in mind, so long as he continues in debt. My
sins are my debts, and that scoare runs still in my mind, whereon I have
run so fast and so far; I profess truly, that my sins have gone over, not
my Psalm. 38.
body only, but my head also, and that they are a burden too heavy for me to
bear. I know, O Lord, thou keeper of men, that thou markest Job. 7.
what is amiss in me, thou scorest up my sins, my wild and wandering
thoughts, my vain and wicked words, my foul and filthy actions; thou keep
a day and a debtbooke of them, to charge me by way of account, whenever it
pleases thee: thou set them down in capital and red letters, (to declare
thine anger:) thou grauest them with the point of a Diamond, and writest them
with a pen of Iron, both in thy Registry of Heaven, and in the Tablet of mine
own conscience on earth, placing on the right side thereof, the straight rules
of thy Law, and mine Obliquities on the left, each as a foil to set forth the
other: Debts must either be paid or forgiven, else they cannot be discharged.
Pay, O Lord, I cannot, I am become bankrupt, I am not able, (no not, by way of
composition) to answer thee one for a thousand. Therefore it remains only
that I beseech thee, whose property it is to have mercy, and forgive, to
cross this debtbooke, to wipe out the score, to cancel the handwriting, and
deface the record that is against me, to put away and blot out my
transgressions, that there may remain no memory of them, either to provoke thy
heavy vengeance, or to affright my distressed soul.

Wash me, wash me again and again, or wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin. As my sins, being in nature of debts, are
registered in thy book, and set upon thy score: so like spots and staynes, they
blemish and deface the Image of thy divine nature, engraven in my soul at the
Creation of it, in such sort, as thou can hardly discern it to be thy
workmanship: and therefore I entreat thee, to wash me often and thoroughly,
that I may appear clean and holy in thy pure and piercing eyes.

There is nothing so pure, (O Lord) as thou art in thy divine nature, nothing
so foul, as I am by natural and actual corruption: Wherefore I think
nothing too much, to bring the most defiled thing on earth to the (...) Essence
in heaven, and that makes me to beg again and again, that thou will wash me
again and again.

Sin is filthy to think of, more filthy to speak and hear of, most filthy
to act and commit; there is nothing in it, or any part or passage of it, but
vileness, baseness, and filthiness.

All the washings in thy Leuiticall Law, were types and figures of this
Spiritual washing in the blood of the Lamb, slain from the beginning of the
world.

Wash me, O Lord, with the water of thy grace, with that water, whereof whosoever
drinks, shall never thirst: wash me with the water of mine own tears, with
the water of thy Word, with the water of thy Sacraments. I know, O Lord, that
unless thou wash me, I can have no part or portion in the. e Wherefore I
beseech thee to wash, not my feet John 13.
only, but my head also, and all the parts and members of my body; yea to
rince and scowre my soul and all the powers and faculties thereof, that I may
present both soul and body, an holy and acceptable sacrifice Romans 12.
unto thee.

It is thy blessed business, O Christ, to (...) me in this world, that thou
may render me spotless to thy Father in another world. I sin daily, and
therefore had need of daily washing: I sin continually, and therefore had
(...) of continual washing; for the word including a multiplication of
washing, does imply a multiplication of sinning. For if my soul lothing the
filth and mire wherewith she has soiled her self, even to ugliness, take a
course by the tears of contrition, for the clean washing of her face, how
soon does the old dirt of sin spurt into her visage again? So that the
business of the soul in this life, (if it be a life of repentance) is never
at an end, being indeed nothing else, but the washing of that which is foul,
and the fouling of that which was washed.

There be (as it is reported in the story of nature,) certain flying fishes,
whose wings by flying wax dry, and being dry, lose their flying; so as they
must ever and anon return to the Sea, by the moisture thereof, to enable their
flight again. Even so my soul, washed in the lauer of regeneration, and
mounting up toward heaven, through this wicked world, her wings, even her best
purposes, cogitations and conceptions easily grow dry, by the contagion of
earthly conversation, unless they be often bathed and moistened in the waters
of repentance, to carry her through to her iournies end.

So then, my case and condition is such, as in regard of many sports howerly
falling, and deeply staining my ill favored and disfigured Soul, (...) have
just cause to pray earnestly, that I may be both often, and thoroughly washed,
and by thee, who can alone make me clean, and cleanse me from my sins.

As I have a great debt to be discharged, much filthiness to be washed, so
have I a loathsome Leprosy of sin, to be cleansed; wherefore I pray thee, O
Lord, to cleanse me from from my sins.

This Leprosy, and the cure of it, were shadowed out, and figured also by
sundry purgations and clensings in thy Leuiticall law, all poynting to that
blood of the Lamb, whereby my sins are purged.

The Leprosy (as Physiicans tell us) is an hereditary disease, descending from
the Father to the Child. An ignominious and odious disease, banishing the Leper
from all company; a contagious disease, spreading from man to man, (...) then
the Plague; a dull and stupid disease, that makes him insensible altogether;
and a dangerous, or rather desperate disease, (...) or not at all to be cured.

In all which (...), sin may fitly be resembled to a (...): for sin comes
by propagation from our first Parents, to all their posterity. It separates us
from thy presence, from the company of thy (...), of Angels, and all good men.
It infecteth others, and poyloneth not only with the breath, but with the
sight of it too. It benums us so, as we feel not thy fearful judgments. It
is utterly incurable, otherwise then by the blood of the Lamb. It has been
observed, that the tears of a Vine, when it bleedes, are a very good medicine
for curing of the bodily Leprosy. (...) so the tears (...).
of the heart, (...) and lies low, as does (...) Vine, that (...) and mournes
in humility for sin, avail much to (...) clensing of this Leprosy of the
soul. My sin, as a Leprosy, does ouerspread both my soul and body, from
the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, from the highest faculty of
my understanding, to the lowest affection of my will, there is no sound part in
me, my disease is grown to the height, to full ripeness, or rather foul
rottenness: it has put out the scabbe (as they say) by enormious and
scandalous actions. Wherefore I beseech thee, who art the prime and sovereign
Physician, to look upon me with the eye of pity, and to cleanse, and cure me
of my Leprous sin and sinful Leprosy.

2. I know mine own wickedness, and my sin is ever before me, or, my sin
is ever against me.
BEfore the Prophet Nathan was sent as a special Bailife, to summon me, by a
writ, ad melius inquirendum, I cast mine eye carelessly, I did not fix it
fully, I looked slightly and superficially, as in passage, not sadly and
mournefully, upon my grievous sins: I did not behold them so seriously as I
ought to have done: I saw but the Epitome, or gross sum of them: I did not
view them in the large volume, written at length, or rathere painted out as
now they are, in their true shapes and colors.

Every man, by the light of nature, must needs see somewhat of this kind, in
the glass of his own conscience; but through the corruption of nature, no man
is willing to take a perfect suruay, and make a full portraiture of his own
transgressions.

There is in man an affected Ut liberius (...), (...) ignorant. Bern. de grad.
humi.
ignorance and blindness, in this behalf: and who so blind, as he that will
not see? who so ignorant, as he that will not know? As we put off the evil
day so long as we can; so we put by the evil object, so far as we may, from
our sense and sight.

I knew, I had offended; but I knew not, that I had so highly offended: I
thought thou did see my sins; but I did little think that thou had
taken such special and exact notice of them, as to send an Herald, or
extraordinary Ambassador, of purpose to challenge, and reprove me for them,
and to rowze me out of my sound sleep and snorting security, in them.

It was thy great mercy, (O God) to send a Prophet, to check, admonish, and
correct me; and it is of thy gracious goodness that crosses, which are thy
Messengers for that purpose, afflictions of body or mind, outward or inward,
one or other, are ordinarily laid upon thy children, to make them know
themselves; and by knowing themselves, to know thee; and by knowing, to love
thee; and by loving thee, to be beloved of thee.

This is that golden chain, every link whereof is fastened within another,
whereby a man is tied and nexed to thee: this is that Ladder of Jacob, by which
thou descendest to him, and he ascends to thee.

None is so dangerously Nemo est (...) insanabilior, qui sibi sanus (...).
Greg. in (...).
sick, as he that does not find, and feel himself to be sick. I know mine
own maladies, and therefore Initium salutis, notitia (...).
resort to thee the great Physicion, to be eased and Qui peccarese nescit,
corrigi non vult.
cured thereof. It is in vain to seek health and help, unless I lay open my
(...). Frustra medicantis auxilium expectat, qui valnus non (...). (...).
wounds, and discover the malignity of my disease, which is, morbus complicatus
(as the Physicions term it) not a simple or single, but a compound disease,
wherein many diseases are folded, and wrapped together: so as, if there Non
(...) scire quo modo morbos curare conueniat, qui vnde hi sunt ignorant. Cornel.
Cells. de Re (...). lib. (...).
be not extraordinary care taken, to apply somewhat, to each ill affected part,
respectively, I may soon come ad diliquium animae, to the fainting, and
failing of my spiritual life.

I know my sins in the plural number, which albeit they flowed from one and
the same fountain; yet ran they into diverse streams, for as much as to my
adultery, I added both treachery and murder; neither did I betray and expose to
slaughter, one man alone, or a few persons, but a whole band and troop of men,
fighting in mine own quarrel, and in defense of thy Church. Wherefore it is
not without cause, that in one gross body of sin, I represent unto my self,
many several branches, and kinds of sin, by multiplication, and sever it
into sundry parts, by division.

He that knows his sin, knows himself: which the Heathens held to be a (...)
coelo descendit, etc.
divine lesson, and most profitable instruction. For what can he understand
that knows himself, but that the imaginations of his heart, the words of his
mouth, the works of his Gen 6.
hands, are evil only, and wicked continually?

On the other part, he is not a sinner only, that is, one that has sin in
him, and somewhat also besides sin: but he is a great lump and entire mass
of Chrysol.
sin: nothing but sin, that does not know himself to be a sinner; and
that, he has committed many and manifold sins.

He that knows himself and his sins, cannot but displease himself, and
thereby please thee; as also, he that neither knows himself nor his sins, may
happily please himself, but he cannot possibly but displease thee.

He knows his own sin (as is fitting) who is sorry for it, and displeased
with it; he that is ready to abide Gods chastisement, and man's reprofe, for
his amendme^t; he that resolves for the time coming, to avoid sin, and all
occasions of sinning; who seriously considers what the malignity of sin is, of
what good things it bereaues him, to what penalties it makes him liable, how
venomous (...) poison of it is at home, how contagious the example of it is
abroad.

Thou have given me (O Lord) the knowledge of thy Law, and by the knowledge of
thy Law, the knowledge of my sin. Rectum index sui, and (...).
For that which is right and straight, does both show it self, and that which
is crooked also. But if thy written Law were silent, and dumb, and did
conceal it self, or my sins, from me; yet thy unwritten Law graven in every
man's heart, both Jew and Gentile, does accuse me, so often as I transgress the
limits thereof, and leave me without excuse. Mine own conscience cries alowde,
and lays wide open, before mine eyes, the Book wherein my enormous sins are
(...) in capital Characters, so that I may run and read them. It stands
Centinell in the watch-towre of my soul, and does keep me waking, when my
sense or sensuality would feign be sleeping, it does restlesly raise, and rowze
my dull, and dead spirits, out of the deep dungeon, and spiritual Lethargy
of carnal security.

The true fence and full knowledge of my sins, makes me so anxious and
ardent, in begging pardon, because I cannot rest, till I have made my peace,
and wrought my reconciliation with thee. The extremity of my danger and
distress, does cause me incessantly to importune thee, for relief and
remedy; and my strong hope is, that this force will not be displeasing to thy
tender mercy.

My sin is ever before me.] I do not only know and understand my sins,
and there leave the matter: I do not, upon a bare enumeration and cogitation
of them, cast them carelessly behind my back, but I muster them before my
conscience daily, I behold them as in a Table set before mine eyes continually,
that upon sight of the vglines of them, I may be humbled and cast down; of the
terror and horror of them, I may tremble and quake for fear; of the baseness
and filthiness of them, I may loath them, and my self for them.

For sins committed, being truly felt, and lively represented to the
conscience, like furies or ghosts of hell, fright their beholders away, with
their ugly shapes, and deformed forms.

Sin is of that ill nature and condition, that it will cast him that has
done it, in the teeth (as they say;) it will lie upon the conscience, as
unsavory oil floates upon the stomach, it will neither be disgorged, nor
digested. Thou toldest Cain, If thou Genesis 4.
do evil, sin lies at the door: it is restles, it will not be still, it will
not keep house, it will not hide it self in a corner of the heart; it will lie
in the way, so as thou can neither come in, nor go forth, but thou must
needs stumble upon it.

A sinner is fitly resembled to a dreamer, not only Peccatores somniantibus
similes. Joan. Her.
because the pleasure of sin does quickly and lightly vanish away, like a
shadow, or dream, but also, because the shapes and forms of his day-sinnes,
do represent themselves to him in the night, the pleasurable actions thereof
for the time, do beget hideous apparitions afterward.

On the other part, a sinners conscience, is like a grave, that casts up the
earth again, as fast as he casts it in. It is a grave Insepulta sepultara.
ever open, though he cloze it never so often.

It is reported of the Indian Bracmanni, that to the end they might still be
occasioned to think of their end, they kept their graves ready dug, and
always open before their houses, that at their coming in, and going out, they
might be ever mindful of their journey and passage to death.

If those Heathen, by the light of nature, took so wise a course; how much
more ought Christians, by the lamp of grace, still behold their sins as their
Graves, wherein their souls must lie eternally buried, unless they be timely
raised, and thoroughly renewed by repentance?

As the sight of the Brazen Serpent, did cure the sting of the serpents; so the
(...) and displeasing sight of my sins, does take away the biting of these
serpents.

So then, in the midst of the discontent which I find in this fearful and
woeful sight of my grievous sins, there is this singular comfort, that thou in
mercy turnest thy face from them, thou castest them behind thee, while I set
them before me. They do not deeply displease thee and me, at one and the
same time; when they procure my sorrow and humiliatio^, they cease to provoke
thine anger and indignation. My sins Peccata non nocent, si no^ placent.
August. de temp.
never (...) me, but when they delight me; they never displease thee, but
when they please me; Wherefore as foul as the object, as odious as the (...)
is; in my better judgment, I am contented with an impatient patience, still to
represent it to my soul; because howsoever in it self ugly, it vshers me by
degrees, to the view and contemplation of thy undeserved love and favor, which
at length, as the bright sun, dispels all the clouds of care, and mists of
Melancholy, and raises my dejected heart, to the participation of unspeakable
consolation.

Wretched and unhappy I was, in committing so great and grievous sins; but I
am happy in a sort, in this unhappiness, if I have eyes to see my sins, being
committed, to see them as it were through a perspectiue glass, so as they may
seem in full proportion, as great to me, as they are in deed.

Satan deals with his vassales, as the Raven does with the Lamb; the Raven
first picks out the silly creature his eyes, and then carries him out of the
way, securely to devour him. First, Satan blindes me in sin, and then he
binds me in the chains of darkness, as fast as he can, of purpose to throw
me into utter darkness.

When after shippewracke, I see the Rock, which I could not foresee, before I
fell upon it; I strive by all means to avoid it the second time.

When I see my sins past, in the true lineaments of their ugly shape, I
cannot but be shie and wary to shun the like monsters ever after.

When the bayted hook of sin is cast before me, I see the bait of pleasure
only, but not the hook of thy judgments: but after I have been catched, and
felt and seen the bare hook without a bayte, I become circumspect, and
suspect every bit I swallow, for fear lest I be ensnared again.

My sin is ever against me;] ranged as it were, and marshalled in battle
array against me. My sin does proudly affront, and directly oppose me, nay it
does even outface me shamelesly.

Before Nathan came unto me, I had cast my sins behind my back; his message
has caused me to transpose them; for now they are set before my face, they
stand stoutly against me, even to my face.

My sin (O Lord) as it is a witness, so is it an informer against my
conscience, it charges and conuicts me before thy judgment seat, I have no
hope of preuarication, I see no way of evasion. It makes hue and cry against
me, with eager pursuit; it will not give over, till I be apprehended, and
deliueted into the hands of justice.

When there is no man to vex me outwardly, I torment my self inwardly, as
holy Job confessed in those words; Why have thou Job.
set me over against thee? I am become burden some, even to my self. Thou
did set his sins against him, which made him conceive that thou did
set him against thee, as a mark to shoot thine arrows of anger at; but when
(...) began thoroughly to feel, thou did begin graciously to ease him of his
burden.

My sin as it opposes against me; so it interposes between thee and me, in
such sort, as neither my prayers can ascend to thee, nor thy graces descend to
me, unless thy mercy interuene to keep the peace, and clear the passage
between us.

Against thee, thee, only, have I (...).] Now my enclosed sorrow must have
vent, my oppressed conscience must be disburthened: This knowledge, and Meum
cognoscere, Meum agnoscere, Tuum ignoscere.
representation, breeds an acknowledgement and recognition of my sin. The
contrition of my heart forces August. Explorandum, (...) Implorandum. (...).
Syst.
from me, a confession of my mouth: I can hold no longer, but must needs, with
tears in mine eyes, and anguish in my soul, cry out, Peccaui, and with an
ingemination, by way of aggrauation: Against thee, against thee, only; to
declare my just indignation against my self, for committing so foul and
grievous faults against that great Majesty, and that gracious goodness, which
I have so highly offended.

And thus do I limit, and (as it were) appropriate my offenses, as committed
against thee alone, for many causes: For, although I have sinned against
Heaven, and against Earth; yet is there no witness of my sin on earth, but
thou, O God, in Heaven; so closely and cunningly have I carried it. That I
defiled the wife, and (to conceal that) destroyed the life of Vriah, was not
known to the world, that I so treacherously and cruelly exposed to slaughter,
a great troop of Soldiers, fighting for me and under my command, (to cover
my wicked design against Vriah,) was hidden from the eyes of men. Thou know
and see all things; wherefore against thee only have I sinned.

Again, though there be no man that dare reprove me, that will accuse me,
that ca^ punish me, being a King, and above Omne sub regno grauiore regnum est.
(...).
the Law; yet every King and kingdom upon earth, is subject to thee the King
of Kings, and thy soueraignety; I must render thee an account of my demeanor,
which I tremble and quake to think of.

Moreover, although I have not only sinned against thee in Heaven, but
scandalized men on earth also; yet it vexes me beyond all comparison, that I
have wittingly and presumptuously offended thee.

Although all the world should (...) emee; yet it is too too much to me, to
find and feel thee my Judge, that mine own conscience does summon me before
thy Tribunal, and frame my process against me, before thy Judgment seat. In
this case, no flattery of my servants (who (according to the fashion of Court)
do sooth and claw their Masters) can lessen my pain, assuage mine anguish, or
pacify my conscience. Say what they will or can, I must say still; Against
thee, against thee, only, I have offended.

Furthermore, none but thou that art just and without sin, have of right the
Chrysol.
cognizance of sin, and coertion of offenders. Sinners are not competent
Judges of sinners. Men do murmur and grudge to give account of their sinful
actions to sinful men, who are tainted with the same, or greater vices; but
the nocent cannot but yield and submit to such, as in the same and in all other
kinds, are innocent and faultlesse. Wherefore against thee only, have I
offended, who only may ask confidently; Who can reprove me of sin?

Now, albeit thou know (O Lord) my sins, not only before I confess, but
before I commit them too; yet I sinde, that thou art well pleased to take
knowledge of them, by my acknowledgement, and Fac illum (...), quem (...) is
(...). (...), (...).
that thy Saints have ever held it a point of honest policy, to make thee
propitious, by confessing, whom they could not find ignorant, by denying or
concealing their faults.

Finally, though the hurt redound to many men; (...) the sin is committed a
against thee only, because thou art supreme Lord and sovereign King, the
transgression of whose just Law, gives being and birth to all sin. In which
regard I may truly say, that against thee, thee only, I have sinned.

I have done this evil in thy sight.] Since, I profess to know mine own
wickedness; I will yet confess it more freely, because the more vile I am in
mine own, the more acceptable I shall be in thine eyes. By doing this evil,
by falling into this enormous sin, I have fallen into a kind of Atheism (at
the very name whereof I tremble,) for although I have not blasphemously and
shamelesly spoken with my mouth: yet have I impiously, and sinfully said in my
heart; There is no God; or, which is tantamount, all one in effect; God hides
his face, and will never see. Which when I call to remembrance, me thinks, I
hear Nathan the Prophet again, fearfully thundering, and directly charging
me, Thou art the man that think, There is no God.

For to deny expressly, or tacitly, thy science and wisdom (who art all eye,
and wisdom it self) is to deny thy very essence and being. Whereupon, my
soul even melts within me, and resolves it self into tears, to think
that I could be so impudently bold, and insolently careless, as in thy sight
and presence (though none else beheld) to commit such foul and ugly offenses.

He is held a desperate Chrysol.
Malefactor, that commits an outrage in presence of the Magistrate, and before
the Judge his own face. Such (in true judgment) is my case; and this
consideration alone (if there were nothing else,) ought to be, instead of a
bridle to restrain, and in stead of a bogle to terrify me from all sinful
and wicked actions.

I was loath that man should see me; and yet not afraid that thou should
behold me, whilst I did those foul and odious facts, which (in my better
judgment) I find to be so gross an absurdity, as I am exceedingly, both
agreeued and ashamed, that I forbear not, to do that, when thou lookedst on
with thy pure eyes, which I should have bin abashed to have done, if the
meanest servant in my house, or the basest groom in my stable had been by.

A frank and sincere confession, (such as this) is a full and direct
conviction in it self, and of it self, in courts held upon earth, Chrysostom.
and before men, in foro fori, (as the Lawyers speak.) Whereupon the Judge has
no other part to act, but to pronounce sentence of condemnation.

But in foro Poli, in thy court of Heaven, the course of proceeding is far
otherwise; the best way there, is to confess before accusation, or when thou
art impleaded, by and by, to plead guilty; for a free confession, moves thy
gracious compassion: and that, without any more ado, grants forthwith a full
and final absolution.

This confession of mine Confessio peccati, est professio desinendi. Hilar.
does imply of congruitie, or rather of necessity, a profession, and a kind
of obligation, of forsaking such sins in time to come, as I confess my self
to have heretofore committed. Else is my confession idle and counterfeit, such
as may deceive me that make it, but not mock Thee, to whom it is made.

The heathen man, by the dusky light of nature, derived from the nature of thy
supernatural light, can say; If I were assured that Seneca.
neither men should know, nor gods would punish what I did; yet would I
disdain to commit an act, in it own nature foul and filthy.

How much more ought a faithful man, who besides the obscure glimpse of
nature, has the pure light of thy Spirit, and the bright lamp of thy Word
shining unto him, to be careful and wary, that he do not wittingly and
willingly, or rather wilfully offend in the sight of thee, the omnipotent and
omniscient God, who do not only threaten the loss of thy favor, but the
execution of thine eternal vengeance, for the breach of thy commandments?

That thou may be justified in thy sayings, and pure when thou art judged.]
And thus I make this frank acknowledgement of my foul faults, as to ease mine
oppressed soul, so to vindicate thine honor from all unjust aspersions. For
as the scandal lies upon the Judge, when punishment is Reatus redundat ad
iudicem si Poena percellat innoxium. Chrysol.
inflicted upon an innocent person; so the ingenuous and voluntary confession
of the party, touching his own guilt, preuents and excludes all imputation
that may be cast upon the Judge or judgment. My desire is, as it is my duty,
to take my sins wholly to my self, and upon my self. I will yield the glory
to thee, to whom it is due; I will reserve the shame to my self, to whom it
appertains. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right; that thou have
afflicted me justly. I cannot impute any (...). (...).
thing to thee, O most just God, (whose will is perfect justice) that thou have
either provoked me to this enormous evil, or consented to the committing of
it; for even thy permission of this, was a just punishment for my other sins;
Mine own frail and perverse nature, my inbred corruption cast in the seed:
mine own will, or wilfulness rather, cherished and nourished it; mine own
consent and delight fashioned it in the womb of my sinful soul; and, at last,
brought it to light, as one of Satan's bastards, to my just confusion. But thou,
O Lord, art ever, and every way just, and so to be esteemed. Thou have dealt
justly in all that is come upon me; it is I that have done wickedly. I cannot
say, that thy severity or rigor is overmuch against me. I have deserved more
then is laid upon me. He that is aware of his own ill desert, and weighs it
in an indifferent balance, does rather thankefully wonder at thy indulgent
mercy, then impatiently repine at thy rigorous severity. O Lord, thou art just
when thou speak, pure when thou iudgest.

True it is, that the wicked cease not to grunt and bark against thee, though
they cannot bite thee. There is an ouer-great boldness and naughtiness in
men, that they desire nothing more, then to lift up themselves, and cast out
ill words against thee at all adventures. The creatures Nisi homini Deus
placuerit, Deus non erit.
pass their bounds so far, that thou the Creator, must needs be blasphemed
Homo iam Deo propitius esse (...). Tertul. Apolog.
and reproched, and thy creatures (O indignity!) must become thy Judges. But
yet for all this, thou art, and ever shall be found just and pure: and it is
my part, as, to believe there is equity and justice in all thy proceedings,
((...) sometimes, through my blindness I cannot, sometimes through my (...), I
will not (...);) so, even when (...) do most bitterly smart, to bridle my
unruly passions, and with a calm and subdued heart, to kiss the rod wherewith
I have been scourged, and to endeavor by all means, that thy righteousness,
as it is indeed, so it may shine clear and bright, to the face of all the
world.

Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me:]
Upon the straight inquisition, and exact suruay of my self, and my sins,
searching and ransacking every corner of my house of clay, I have found a
noisome sincke, and filthy puddle, or rather a poisoned and poisonous spring, a
paternall, or a parentall sin, an hereditary, a radical, and original
sin, whence all the sins of my thoughts, words, and deeds, are continually
and plentifully derived. This is that canker of sin, which being bred in the
bone, will never out of the flesh. This is the law of my members, which does
always resist the Law of my mind; the everliving seed of rebellion, which
maintains the implacable war, between the flesh and the Spirit; which will
never (...), till mortality has put on immortality, and death, the last enemy,
be swallowed up in victory. This is peccatum peccans, a sinning, or a spurning
sin. It is a sin, a punishment Peccatum, poena peccati, causa peccati.
of sin, and a cause of sin. Aug. contra Iuli. (...).


Which yet I do not allege, to excuse or extenuate, but rather to accuse my
self, and aggrauate my sin; knowing right well, that the viler I am in mine
own, the more acceptable I shall be in thy sight, and hoping, that the frank
confession of my miserable condition, proceeding from true humiliation, and
contrition, will the rather move thy tender compassion; as beggars Chrysostom.
upon earth, to stir the bowels of pity in their beholders, lay open to their
view, their grievous sores, and loathsome diseases. The greater misery is, the
fitter object of thy greater mercy; and the more desperate the malady, the more
honorable will the cure be to the Phisician. Where my sin abounds, thy
grace delights to superabound.

For the only and singular sin of Adam, as of him that bare the person of
all his posterity, is justly the sin of the whole posterity; and all being
guilty of sin, by his singular sinful act, thou, O God, in thy Justice,
did permit the natural propagation of sin in his offspring, which
deserved such a punishment, for such a sin. Hereupon it comes, that my
inbred corruption, and the inherent sting of sensuality, in me (who sinned in
Adams, as Leui tithed in Abraham's loins) is not the first cause of my guilt,
but a fruit or reward thereof, according to thy just judgment, whence it may
well be termed, the penalty of sin. For that prime sin, the chief source of
sin, which the further it runs, the faster it increases, by this stream
falling into it, grows in the end, to such a strong and forcible current, as
does even carry, and compel me violently to sin, if thy grace do not resist
the (...) thereof; because hence do flow my sinful passions, my evil
affections, my sinister inclinations, and from them, my sins of action, or
omission (which are sins of action also) in their full perfection, or
imperfection rather, which I daily, or rather hourly and continually commit.
In which regard, (my woe arising from mine own wickedness) my case is most
deplorable, every way. Wherefore I beseech thee, with the eyes of pity and
mercy to behold it.

I was conceived in sin:] And therefore there is no Aug. (...).
sin that I am not apt and ready to conceive, yea, to engender, and produce
from imagination, to assent; from assent, to delectation; from delectation, to
resolution; from resolution, to execution; if thou, O Lord, do not beget me
anew, by the immortal seed of thy Word; if thou do not quell and extinguish
in me this old seed, which will always be springing and sprouting in the
rank soil of my sinful flesh.

When my mother first warmed me in her bowels, she conceived sin; when she
brought me forth into the world, she was delivered of a child of sin.

The child in the mothers womb, is held to be a part of the mother; and
undoubtedly the mother has a great share in the Child; before she depart with
it, besides her nature and substance, she imparts unto it her qualities,
inclinations, and dispositions, being as it were a scion taken from her tree,
and a collop cut out of her flesh. That which is borne of flesh, is flesh: and
therefore holy (...), asks this unanswerable (...) 14.
question; Who shall appear clean before thee? or, Who (...) bring a clean
thing out of an (...)?

Not only actual (...), but (...), and natural; not the second motions of it
only, put into form, but the first, that are unshapen, do plot and contriue
the treason, are authors, if not actors of it; they bring fuel to the fire,
which afterward is kindled and set a burning; that fomentation of sin, is
not only the cause of sin, and the punishment of sin, but sin it self.
This is that threefold cord, every part and piece whereof is sinful, that
binds me fast to the bar of thy justice: First, Adam his primitive sin;
then, the diriuation of sin to all his posterity: and afterward, the
particular actions of sin, proceeding from them both.

Now, if I were a sinner (...). (...).
in my mothers womb; when, and where shall I be faultlesse? If I were so bad,
before I saw the light, how should I not be much worse, when through the
corruption of the world, and the contagion of sin, I have sucked in the
infectious air thereof? How can it be, but that my inbred naughtiness must
needs gain strength, and gather increase?

And what can the progress and end be, when the beginning of my life is so
(...) and sinful?

If I be cast out of my mothers womb, into the roade-way of sin, and
travel the journey of sin, still onward: let me but recount the vanity of
(...) childhood, the (...) my youth, the slips, or rather falls of my (...)
age, the infirmities of my old age, and I shall (...) find, that from my (...)
and (...), to my death and (...), I trod the way, not of life, but of sin.

5. (...), I was conceived in sin. 6. Behold, thou love Truth, etc.
IN these two Ecce's, which are happily sorted together, I desire to intimate
two remarkable things. The one is, the misery of my wretched condition: The
other, the largeness of thy tender affection. The first Ecce, is on thy part:
Behold, O Lord, my conception and birth in sin; behold me drowned and
overwhelmed in a sea of sin. The other Ecce, is on my part: I behold in thee, O
Lord, a fire of love, because thou love the least sparkles of grace in me,
(which mounting upwards, make me look toward heaven) thou do nourish and
cherish them, thou art utterly unwilling to quench or extinguish them, and when
thou find but such an inclination in my will, thou do strengthen it with
wisdom in my understanding. When the understanding and will concur, that I
both know what to do, and am desirous to do it, then do I bring it to effect,
or (which is all one in effect) thou in thy gracious goodness do accept it,
as if it were effected.

Thou love truth, O Lord,] for thou love thy self, who art Truth it self,
essential Truth, Truth, not in words only, but in actions, and even in
thoughts also; that is to say, Verity and Sincerity in all things.

Thou love truth in the reines] not in the shadows of my outward actions
(which I can disguise at pleasure) but in the most hidden, close, and covert
imaginations of the heart, which thou see continually, and know exactly.

Thou art, by a paramount power, and a peculiar attribute, styled, The searcher
of the heart and reins, (Who knows my heart, but thou alone?) therefore thou
can not but love truth in the heart and reins; that is the most pleasing and
delightful object, thy pure and All-seeing Eye can fix upon.

As thou love truth and sincerity in the heart and reins; so thou hate
all dissimulation and hypocrisy. Thou can not abide that which is fair in
show, and foul in deed.

Thou can not abide dissembled holiness, fained repentance. Thou abhorrest
such as make a sour face, and hang down their heads like bulrushes, that they
may seem to fast and mourn; that make false semblance of piety, in Sapiens
(...) Deus est, (...) fractumnon recipiet. (...) Bernard. de gradib. obed.
their outward fashion, and in the sight of men, when thou see their hearts
to be far from that they should, or pretend to be.

The light (faith Job) is Job 36.
as the shadow of death, to such, the hollow-hearted do but heap up and
increase wrath.

No man deserves (...) (...) meretur, quam amicum simuans inimicus. (...). de
Conuers. cap. 27.
of God, or man, then (...) enemy pretending friendship: yea, thou so love
truth in the inward parts, as thou acceptest them for just and righteous, who
(...) such only, in respect of their desire, study and endeavor, though their
practice be most imperfect, Tota vita honi Christiani, est sanctum desiderium.
Aug. in (...).
such as sincerely and heartily affect to serve and please thee, though they
come far short of the due performance of thy Word (...) tota posita est in
voluntate faciendi bona. Lact. (...). l. 6.
and will.

As a husband passes by with conniuence, and bears with patience, many
faults and imperfections in his wife, so long as she is true and loyal, and
keeps her self chastely and solely to him: Even so, thou (O God) winckest at
many errors, and pardonest many offenses in thy people, (to whom thou have
married thy self in mercy) so long as they be such as they ought to be, in
the main point: that is, in the truth of their affection, and the sincerity of
their devotion toward thee.

To increase the comfort, which I apprehend, in this sweet Meditation and
Admiration, I follow the scent (as it were) and represent to my mind and
memory, the sundry traces and footsteps of thy marvelous mercy.

First, That it is not so much the quantity, as the (...); not so much the
(...), as the sincerity of grace, which thou regardest.

A little (...) and course Melius (...), (...) auri (...). in Cantic.
gold, is of much more value, then much bright copper, then much shining
brass. An (...) of gold is true gold, (...) it be mingled with much dross.
Nor will a man Nec vinum (...) etsi fecem habeat, (...) aurum, quamuis (...).
(...). de (...).
that is in his right wits, cast away his gold for the foulenes, be it but a
grain or two, wrapped up in a great mass of other earth, but will keep the
one with the other, till he have fined and severed the one from the other.

In like manner, thy grace in the hearts of thy children, though it be still
mixed with many imperfections, and corruptions too; yet it is true grace, and
(...) all the (...), and (...) shows of it, that are (...) in the lives,
either of Heathens, or (...).

(...), I hope strongly, (...) wilt not reject it, though it be never so small
in (...), (...) and refine nee; so as my (...) osse may be (...), and thy grace
more and more (...) in me.

(...), that in thy (...), thou art wont to (...) the will, for the work; and
the desire, for the deed. As in evil, Voluntas pro facto (...). (...). Ep. 77.
(...). Iuris.
the very desire and endeavor of ill doing, makes me to stand guilty before
thee, though the evil be Res mira ille viuit, (...) homicida. Illa casta, tu
tamen (...). Aug. de verb. Dom.
not actually done; (He that lusts after a woman, He that hates his brother;
the one is an adulterer, the other a murderer:) So in goodness, the settled
study, true desire, and earnest endeavor of holiness and piety, causes me to
be esteemed pious and holy in thy sight, though I cannot attain to that
measure of it, that I would and should; for thou, Lord, regardest more what I
affect, and desire to be, then what I am; more what I endeavor and strive to
do, then what I do.

Such, undoubtedly, is thy disposition, such ought to be my apprehension,
unless I will needs, to thy Nisi forte putetur in (...), quam in bono, etc.
dishonor, and mine own disadvantage, peeuishly and peruersly imagine, that
Thou (being Love it self) art more prone to punish, (...) to pardon; that Thou
(being Mercy it self) art more forward to revenge, then to reward thy servants
and children.

Thirdly, that thou do Nos etsi (...) minus diligimus qua (...); diligimus
(...) qu (...) valemus, (...) and (...) vt a (...) vnde amplius diligamus.
(...). Epist. 85.
exact no more of thine, then thou have bestowed upon them. For I observe, (to
my singular contentment) in the legal sacrifices and oblations, how low thou
do, in mercy, descend. Thou art content to accept a Sheep or two, or a
Lamb or two, for a Sacrifice; or if a man be not (...) to bring so much, thou
(...) pleased with one, or if he want means for a Lamb, thou art not (...).
5. 6 (...), (...), 14, 21, 30.
unwilling to take a pair of (...), or two little Pigeon, instead of it: yea,
if a (...) not able to (...) so far (...); a handful or two of flower, with
a (...) of salt or two, does s (...), where it is offered with an honest heart.

There is a curse laid upon the coozener, who Mal. 1. 14.
(...) a sound or a fat male in his flock, brings a corrupt carrion, or a
lean starueling to thee, for a sacrifice: But he is not accursed who brings
no better, because he has no better to bring. And I find it often iterated
for the comfort of poor and weak ones, that being not able to offer as the
rich did, might therefore doubt of the like acceptance: Leu. 14. 22, 30, 31, 32.
Look, what he is able, according to his ability, even what his hand is able
to reach unto, and it shall be accepted: for thou measurest the gift, not by
the worth or greatness of it; but by the might and mind only of the giver.
Thou do not so much 2. Cor. 8.
regard, what I should, as, what I can, and am willing to do. What I would,
but Quic quid vis and non potes, (...) Deus reputat. Aug.
cannot do, thou do account it as done. Thou crownest willingness, when thou
find not ableness in me to perform.

Cain offered sacrifices, Genesis 4.
but thou did not accept them, because thou did see his cruel heart. But
Abel his sacrifices were pleasing, because they were offered with a loving and
sincere heart unto thee.

Thou do not accept the person for the sacrifice, but the sacrifice for the
persons sake. The truth and sincerity of the heart is all in all with thee.

Lastly, that it is not so Si (...) ea, quae (...) merita nostra, sunt spei
quaedam seminaria. bernard. de (...) and lib. arbit.
much any uprightness in me, in regard of the worth and dignity, much less of
the perfection and purity of it, that ministers this comfort unto me, but as
it is a fruit of thy favor, and a token of thy love, not it self so much, as
that whereof it gives me assurance, and that in two respects.

First, as it is a sign and seal of my Adoption; assuring me, that I am thine
adopted child: For my regeneration, whereby this sincerity is wrought in me,
does ratify and seal up my Adoption (the old man harbors no such ghest.)
None are thy Adopted, but such as are thy regenerated children; and on the
other part, all that are thine by Regeneration, are thine by Adoption also. Now
as earthly Si non dilexisset (...), (...) amicos. Sicut nec quos (...). essent,
si non dilexisset, qui nondu^ erant. Bern. in Cant. 20.
parents love their children, not so much for their wit and comeliness, as
because they are theirs; so do thou, O God, love thy children, because they
are thy children. If thou do not love them before they have, they shall
never have any thing, to Qu (...) inuenit, neminem saluat, nisi quem (...).
idem de (...) and li ber. a. b (...). 10.
make them be loved of thee. So then, this beginning of true grace argues thy
child; and a weak child of thine, being yet thy child as well as a strong,
may, in that regard, expect a childs portion, in thy heavenly inheritance.

Secondly, as it is an earnest, Arra potius, quam (...), quia (...), arra (...).
or Gods-penny of my glorification. For this sincerity is the earnest of that
Spirit, which thou give August de (...). Apost.
me beforehand, for full (...) of the faithful performance of all thy
gracious promises afterward. Therefore as a penny given in earnest, bin death as
strongly, as a pound, (the person that gives it, being a sufficient man:) Even
so the least measure of true grace, being thy earnest, binds thee to the
faithful ac complishment of all thy Pignus donum est verbo (...) (vt
Iureconsulti) nec potest esse sine pacto pignus.
favors, promised to all thy faithful servants whatsoever.

It is thou only (o Lord) that preparest my heart, and workest this truth in
it, and thou will never frustrate the desire, that thou thy self have there
wrought. As no man canseeke thee, but he that has found thee; so no man can
desire grace, but he that has grace: for evermore he that desires Grace,
has grace to desire it.

It is thy gracious Proclamation: Ipse vt diligeretur dedit, qui non dilectus
dilexit. Aug. in Joan.
The Lord God will be merciful, yea, he has been already, and is merciful
to those, that set their hearts aright, that desire to fear his name.
Whereupon I take heart, and say: Then shall I not be Psa. 119. 6.
confounded, when I have respect to all thy precepts, and when I am upright
with my God.

The loving kindness of the Lord is from ever, and for ever upon those that
think upon his commandments to do them: and therefore unto such also, is
joy, in plain terms promised; The righteous Psalm. 64.
shall be glad in the Lord, and trust in him, and all, (without exception)
that are but upright in heart, shall rejoice. And therefore having by warrant
of the blessed Spirit, pronounced them blessed, not that never sinned, but that
have sincerely repented their sins, and in whose soul there is no guile, I
conclude with an Iniunction, awarded under the seal of the same Spirit, and
laid Psalm. 32.
upon all such; to rejoice: Be glad, ye righteous, and rejoice Psalm. 32. 11.
in the Lord: be merry (not only in your own selves: and souls) but even
with acclamations and iubilations: shout for joy, all you that are upright in
heart.

The sum of all is: I do not find my heart so free from sin, or so full of
grace, as it would and should be; but I find it to be true, plain, and
upright (wherein I appeal to thee, O thou searcher of hearts) not such as has
no sin, (for it has in a manner nothing but sin) but such as loves no
sin, not such as wants no grace, but such as is hum bled for want of grace,
having the grace to feel that want.

6. In the secret of my heart thou shall teach me wisdom: or, Thou shall teach
the seacrets of wisdom in my heart, or hidden part.
THe conscience of my unfeigned sorrow for sin, on the one side, and my true
desire to serve thee better hereafter, on the other, do raise my dciected
soul, and make me believe and hope, that thou in thy gracious goodness wilt
teach me more wisdom, even the mystery of godliness, and art of Religion
(which is the soul of the soul) in the secret of my heart; I say, thou shall,
because I beg earnestly, and hope confidently, that thou will teach me such
Wisdom.

The teaching of the inward man, by the true instruction of heavenly wisdom,
the end whereof is eternal salvation, belongs to thee alone. It is thy proper
and peculiar work; whereupon thine elect ones are termed, The taught of God:
for flesh and blood reueales not these things unto me. He has Cathedram in
Coelo habet, (...) docet. August.
his chair in heaven, that teaches the heart: and to thy scholars, it is
only given to know the secrets of thy Kingdom.

Therefore, I trust, thou will teach me thy ways, and thy statutes, thou will
open mine eyes, that I may sce the wonders of thy Law, thou will give me true
understanding, and send me thy good Spirit, as a perfect Pylot to lead and
guide me into all truth and goodness.

This is the wisdom of Sol non omnes, quibus lucet, etiam calesacit.
the heart and breast, not of the head and brain: whereby I shall become, Sic
sapientia (...), quos docet (...) sit facien dum, non (...) accendu ad (...).
Bern. in Cant. Non (...) sapientem, sed timor facit, quia and afficit. Grego.
not more learned or politic, but more godly (...) virtuous; not more able to
discourse and dispute, but to do, and live well: (...) become righteous, that
is, (by a little variati on of the word) right wise. For when all is said and
done. That is right wisdom, which makes me wise unto Salvation: That is not
seeming and shining, but sound and solid wisdom: that is real and operative,
Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis dicitur.
not speculatiue and formal wisdom. The true information, and thereby
Reformation of the soul, is the soul of wisdom.

It is never taught enough, which is never sufficiently learned; and this
wisdom is of that nature, that the soul is never satiated therewith, but is
still hungry, and covetous of more. I have heard and read many lessons, by way
of instruction, in this wisdom; but either through my dullness, I could not
apprehend them; or through my oblivion, I could not remember the^; or through
my infirmity, I could not practice them: Howbcit, by the supereminent authority
of thee, the Teacher; the excellency of the matter taught, and the increase of
my diligence (all happily concurring together,) I hope at length, to attain
the depth of wisdom, in the deep and secret corners of my heart.

7 Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean.
THe tongue will be licking, Lingua sequitur dentem dolentem.
where the tooth is aching; the finger will be touching, where the pain
Vbidolor, ibidigitus.
is fretting.

The Leprosy of my sin is so irksome and loathsome unto me, as I cannot but
it erate my earnest Petition, and re-enforce my humble Prayer, to be purged
thereof, and for the fitter application, and better operation of the purgation,
to be purged with Hysope.

Thou, O Lord, did appoint Hysope to be used in thy Law for diverse purposes.
In the institution of Ex. 12. 22.
the Passover, the blood of the Lamb was appointed to be sprinkled upon the
door cheeks, with a bunch of Hysope, and with a Scarlet lace. In the
purgation of the Leper, Leu. 14. 6.
the bunch of Hysope was to be dipped in the blood of the Sparrow. In the
burning of the red Heifer Number. 19.
(which was to be chosen without spot or wrinckle) the Priest was to put in
Hysope, besides Cedar wood and Scarlet.

By the blood of the Lamb, the Sparrow and the red Heifer, the blood of that
immaculate Lamb was undoubtedly prefigured and represented. By the bunch of
Hysope, the besprinkling of the soul with that blood; and the applying of it
thereunto by faith: by the red, or crimson lace, the union and communion of thy
Saints was shaddowed, who are tied together by a True-loues knot, and sprinkled
with that same blood, for the remission of their sins.

Whiles I survey the virtues and qualities of this herb, (to unfold this
riddle of thy Law) I may justly take occasion, as to magnify thy goodness (O
God) who have provided so powerful a medicine, to cure all man's corruptions;
so to observe thy wisdom, who, for our better apprehension, have so fitted
the sign and figure to the thing signified and represented thereby, Hysope:
whence I borrow, this Allegory has many things whereby it does aptly and
nearly resemble Christ.

It is obscure, base, and low; the Hysope, as the Proverb.
lowest herb, is opposed to the Cedar, as the tallest tree. In the person of
Christ, I have said, I am a Vermis, non homo.
worm, and no man, the reproach of men, and despised of the people: all they
that see me, do scoff at me, they (...) a mow with the lip, and they wagge
the head. Hysope grows of it self, among stones, not planted by man: Christ
was hewne out of the Rock, without hands.

Hysope is bitter and sour, unpleasing to the taste; so Christ his Cross, by
which we are crucified to the world, and the world unto us, is harsh and
unsavory to flesh and blood.

Though Hysope be sour, it is wholesome for the body: The bitter medicines
are ever the better: so the Recipe of repentance, albeit odious to the flesh,
is most profitable to the soul. The doctrine which is seasoned with salt and
Hysope, is fitter for us, then that which is sweetened with honey: For on the
one side, honey was never appointed to be used in any sacrifice; on the other
side, not any sacrifice, Omnis (...).
but was to be seasoned with salt.

Hysope (as Physicians (...). (...). (...).
tell) is powerful to purge the lungs. The humility of Christ, like Hysope,
does purge our pride, which floteth in the lungs, and is discovered by the
fuming, puffing, and blowing thereof.

Hysope, being hot in operation, Cyrill.
does cut and extenuate the gross and flegmaticke humors of the body. So true
grace takes away all the dullness and drowzinesse of my Spirit, makes me
fervent in prayers, and zealous in holy duties.

Hysope euacuateth the Hug. Card. Lorin. in Psalm. 51.
body, nourishes the native color, cures the biting of Serpents, provoke
the appetite, sharpeneth the sight, warmeth the blood, cools Feauers. So
grace purges by contrition, spitteth forth by confession, warmeth by
charity, seasoneth by temperance, quenches the fiery inflammations of unruly
passions, makes us hungry after righteousness, quicke-sighted to discern our
own errors and faults, yields remedies against the stings of concupiscence,
restores again that spiritual vigor, which we daily lose by our manifold
transgressions.

Hysope has many virtues and properties, (if well used) for the health of our
bodies. But that which is shaddowed by it, towit, the blood of Christ, cures
all the diseases of the soul, and cleanses us from all our sins.

With Hysope this blood is sprinkled upon us, that is, by faith it is applied
to our consciences, to purge and purify them from dead works.

7 Wash me, O Lord, and I shall be whiter then snow.
BEcause I find my self so spotted with the stains, so polluted with the
dirt and dross of my sin, so soon soyled again after my washing, even in
the tears of repentance; so prone, with the Dog, to return to my vomit, with
the Hog to the mire, wherein I formerly wallowed: therefore I harp still upon
this string, which I touched before, I do iterate this Petition also, and cry
again; Wash me, etc.

If thou, Lord, be pleased to wash me often and thoroughly, I shall not only
be freed from the foul blackness which my grievous sins have cast upon me,
but I shall become neat, fair, and white, yea, whiter then snow.

If I wash my self with Job 9. 30.
snow water, (says holy Job) and make my hands never so clean; yet shall thou
plunge me in the ditch or mire, that is, thou shall discover an uncleanness in
me (which was not perceived before) and mine own clothes shall abhor me. But
if thou, Lord, be pleased to wash me, I shall be whiter then snow; that is, I
shall abandon all evil affections, and preserve my heart pure and holy,
consecrating all the faculties of my soul, and members of my body, to thy true
and sincere service.

Can the Blackamore Ier. 13. 23.
change his skin, or the Leopard quit his spots? If that cannot be; yet thou,
O Lord, can so wash me, that I shall be whiter then snow.

That which is impossible by nature, is possible and factible by grace. That
foulness which is propagated to me by descent, and bred in me by natural
generation, as also nourished and increased by continual actual transgression,
is not only removed, but quite changed by free justification, and
supernatural regeneration.

If my sins be as red as Esaias 1.
skarlet, thou can make them as white as wool; if they be like crimson,
thou can make them whiter then snow. O wonderful mystery! O
incomprehensible miracle! that blood should make me white, that the washing and
bathing of my soul in the blood of that immaculate Lamb, should make we
whiter then snow! that even the garments Revel. 7.
of thy Saints, by washing in this blood, should become white, which yet shall
be revealed to, and wrought upon thy Saints!

I shall be white here by grace, yea, whiter then snow; I shall be bright
hereafter in glory, brighter then the stars, yea, then the Sun in the
firmament; grace here shall be the beginning of glory there, and glory there
shall be the complement and perfection of grace here.

This is arcanum (...) diuini, a secret of thy Divine state and government,
which thou shall (I am hopeful, thou will) not only teach by infallible
demonstration, but also work by thy blessed Spirit, his powerful operation in
the secrets of my heart.

The cause of the snow his whiteness, is held (by Philosophers) to be the
store of air, shut up, by the extremity of cold, in the clear water that
distilleth from the clouds.

Thy celestial air and light, which surpasses all bodily and natural
whiteness, being gathered into my soul, when it is melting into the tears of
repentance, makes it clear and bright, even to admiration.

Christ, by washing my soul, has taken my spots out of me, upon himself:
he himself remains all (...) and stained with my sins; insomuch, that the
Spouse is amazed at it, and wondering demands; Wherefore do thou wear
garments all spotted and dyed with blood, like unto them that Esa. 63.
stamp grapes in the winepresse?

Thy servant Moses, out Number. 12.
of his kind and undeserved love, took an Ethiopian woman to his wife. No
wife is deformed in Nulla vxor proprio marito deformis. (...).
her own husbands eyes, if he be such a husband as he ought to be.

The mystical Moses, who in love has married himself unto his Spouse the
Church, not only black and deformed, but ugly and filthy in her self, has
by his gracious election of her, though neither by her beauty nor manners
recommended unto him, made her (because he so esteems her) fair, comely and
graceful, he has changed her color and complexion, yea, and her nature and
condition too, so as she sticks not to say, I was black by nature, Nigra and
formosa. Cantic. 1. 5.
but I am fair by grace.

Can that which is black as Pitch, or Ebeny, become perfectly white, and
whiter then snow? yes verily, for my state by adoption and regeneration in
Christ, is of more perfection, then Adam his happiest condition in Paradise;
This might and did fail: that can never alter or decay, but abides firm and
sure, to all eternity.

Black by the art of man, can take no other hue: nor can this whitenes by the
fraud or force of the prince of darkness, be ever either darkened or defaced.

Snow is white without and within, on every side. Thy Grace will make me, not
like a painted sepulcher fair without, and foul within, not hypocritically
specious, but really sound and sincere, and the beauty of the soul thus
washed, will infinitely exceed the whiteness of any body, yea, even of snow
it self.

Make me to hear of (...) and gladness, etc.] O Lord, I beg of thee the
whole tree of life, growing by the river side in the Garden of Eden, whose
root is justification, by remission of my sins, and whose fruit is true joy
and consolation, in thy gracious favor. There may be a Potest esse radix sine
(...), stipes sine fructu, sed nec stipes nec fructus sine radice.
root without a stock, as when a Tree is hewne down: a stock without (...),
as in the winter season: but nor fruit nor stock, where no root is. The
forgiveness of my sin is the root of all my joy. O Lord, give me the fruit
of that root, and that will assure me of the root of that fruit.

Unless thou make me, I cannot hear; Unless thou open mine ear, the voice
of gladness will not enter; or if it go in at the one, it will go out at the
other ear, I shall be never the better for hearing. Thou must not only tell me
the tale, but find me ears also; thou must not only present the object, but
enable my faculty also, to perceive, or receive it.

The Adder or Cockatrice, is (as some say) naturally, (as some others)
cunningly deaf, laying the one ear close to yt ground, and stopping the other
with his tail, purposely to prevent the skill of the Charmer, who seeks to
enchant him in such sort, as he shall not be able, either to bite, or sting.

So man, in his pure, or rather impure naturals, is either sencelesly deaf,
and cannot, or voluntarily deaf, and will not hear any voice, that tends to
the spiritual solace of his soul, no not the sound of sound joy, not the
melodious noise of true gladness, unless thou that sendest the tidings of
Grace, do give him the grace also to entertain those tidings.

Now what is the end and endeavor, either of this corruption by nature, or
perverseness by will, but that none of thy words or spells (O God) none of thy
holy Spirit his motions or inclinations may have power (wickedness being so
powerful) to charm or inchant me, but that I may still bite, and sting, still
hurt and annoy, both my self and others.

I desire joy and gladness doubled, that is, both of soul and body, and I
cannot rest contented with one or two, or a few comforts; I seek to have them
multiplied, that as my tribulations were increased, so, in like proportion, my
consolations may be enlarged; and I term this joy and gladness indefinitely,
because this is the only solid joy, and true gladness. All other joys are
but toys, like false fires, and counterfeit (...), such as deserve not the name
of joys at all.

I beseech thee, O Lord, not only to blot out my transgressions, and to take
away the guilt of my sins, but (for the raising of my dejected, the relieuing
of my distressed soul) to let me know so much, also: let me hear this joyful
Word, in the ear of my heart, from thine own mouth, by thine holy breath and
Spirit, Thy sins, Mat. 9. 2.
are forgiven thee.

Not only be unto me a Savior, but say unto my Psalm. 35. 3.
soul; I am thy salvation. For I may stand pardoned and justified in thy
gracious, (...) and certain resolution, and yet not know so much; and not
knowing it, how can I be but grievously perplexed, and fearfully distracted in
my conscious and distrustful cogitations? Wherefore, O Lord, let thy Spirit
certify my spirit, that All is peace. Let my soul sensibly feel, though it
cannot fully conceive this peace, which passes all understanding.

To a Prisoner convicted and condemned for high treason, to cruel death, and
every hour expecting execution, according to course of Justice, what greater
joy can there be, then to hear of a gracious and free pardon, of all his
offenses, from his Sovereign?

This is the true character of my self, and every other sinner, in respect of
our spiritual condition. We were damned before (...) antequam nati. Bern.
we were borne in sin: since our birth we have lived in sin, we have
multiplied sin upon sin, we have drunk up iniquity, Job 15. 16.
as a fish drinks up water, we have committed sundry heinous and horrible
treasons against thy divine (...): (to say nothing of other capital crimes)
we have after all this, wilfully drawn down thine indignation, and called
for thine eternal vengeance upon us: In this deplorable, and even desperate
case, what more welcome tidings, then to hear of this Iubile?

Sin does not only bring me into a dull slumber, but even into a dead sleep
also. In sleep all my senses are bound up, as it were, in chains; when I am
fast asleep, I hear nothing at all. Wherefore awake me, O Lord, and make me
to hear.

Make me to hear thy Word (the conduit of comfort) openly taught, with such
diligence and devotion as is meet; make me to hear the secret whisperings of
thy blessed Spirit, with such reverence and obedience as is requisite: make me
so to hear, as I may believe (faith comes by hearing with thy blessing) and
then I shall not fail to hear of this redoubled joy and gladness, which my
sorrowful and perplexed soul does so much hunger and thirst after.

I do the more earnestly desire, and affectionately long to hear of this joy,
because it is an assay and foretaste of that joy, which I hope fully to enjoy
in heaven: it is not the (...) redditur, arra (...). (...).
pawn or pledge (that must be returned again but the earnest, or Godspenny
(which continues still with the receiver) of a far greater joy hereafter,
and where thou give earnest, thou never failest to perform the bargain.
This joy is great in Bernard. Gaudium in praesenti exhibitione. Gaudium in
futura expectatione.
the present exhibition, far greater in the future expectation, no mean joy in
the mean time, while I live in this valley of tears, the life of grace, but
glorious Et res plena gaudio, and (...). Idem. Gaudium in fine, sed gaudium
sine fine. Bernard.
and unspeakable joy hereafter in the life of glory; such joy in the end as
shall be without end, in the heavenly (...), where there shall be peace without
trouble, plenty without want, light without darkness, health without
sickness, melody without discord, security without fear, felicity without
misery, joy without interruption or intermission, joy upon joy, joy exceeding
all joy, without, or beyond which, there is no joy at all.

If I hear this word of comfort in this life, which gives me title and
interest; ( Thy sin is forgiven thee:) I shall be sure then to hear the
warrant for possession and fruition; ( Enter, good servant, into thy Masters
joy.) Without this joy, there is nothing but disquiet and discomfort, nothing
but (...) and horror, nothing but apprehension of wrath and vengeance.

The wicked, who hears nothing of this joy, feels no serenitie or
tranquillity of mind, but (as holy Job says) is like a Job 15. 35.
woman that is always in travail, like the raging sea, Esa. 57. 20.
still foaming and casting up dirt and mire; on the other part, the penitent
sinner, who in anguish of soul harkeneth after these tidings, deriueth joy
from the wel-head, where there is Gods plenty (as they say) fullness of most
sweet and delightful comforts, even a torrent, or strong running stream of
pleasures, flowing perpetually.

He shall have incomparably more joy than the worldling, whose corn, and wine,
and oil, are increased, and therefore may lay him down in peace, Psalm. 4.
and rest in security, because thou make him to dwell in safety.

Such as the matter is, Cum de transitorijs (...) non poterit non transire
laetitia, (...) ijs, de (...), (...), (...) ignis. (...). de Temp.
whereof joy arises and consists, such is the joy it self. If the matter
be slight, flitting, and momentary, (as the world and the flesh are,) how can
the joy be constant, solid, and durable? On the other side, the joy that is
grounded upon so precious a foundation, as remission of sin, and
reconciliation with thee, how can it be but unchangeable and inexplicable?

This joy will eat up all false joys and flitting delights which men fancy,
to take in the pleasures of sin, as the Rod of Aaron Exodus 7. (...).
did devour the rods of the Egyptian Sorcerers. This joy, like water, will
quench and extinguish all the hot desires and fiery lusts of the world and the
flesh whatsoever.

That the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice.] I made my moan
heretofore, that my bones were Psalm. 32.
sore vexed, that there was no peace or rest in them, by reason of my sin. I
now profess, that they were not only crushed and bruized, but even disioynted
and broken, that is, the most strong and able powers and faculties of my soul
and body (which I describe by the name of bones) have been oppressed, and
battered, as it were, with the terrible pangs and restles tortures which I have
suffered, by the hammer of thine indignation, conceived against my grievous and
enormous transgressions.

But if thou, Lord, wilt now be pleased, after my unfeigned repentance, to make
me hear of this joy and gladness, all these bones, (...) with the (...) and
marrow of thy (...), shall in just (...), and (...), cry out, Lord, who is
(...) (...)
unto thee?

It is thy (...) and manner of proceeding, O Lord, with thy dearest Deuteronomy. 32.
children. Thou make the wound, and bindest it vpagaine; thou smitest, and
healest again; thou killest, and quickenest again; thou castest down to the
nethermost hell, and thou raisest up again to the heaven of heavens, showing
and declaring thereby, thine irresistible power, to work mine humble
obedience; (...) unspeakable wisdom, to breed my reverent admiration; thy
severe Justice, to beget mine awefull fear; thy supereminent tender mercy, to
purchase mine affectionate love toward thee.

The deeper mine humiliation is, the greater will be mine exaltation; the
sowrer the sorrow is, the sweeter will the succeeding gladness prove, when
thou shall please to afford it unto me: for not my spirit only, but all the
parts of my soul and body, will exceedingly rejoice, when after these
tempestuous storms, I shall safely arrive at the haven of rest and contentment.

For as water is more grateful to the wayfaring man, after a long drought, and
a calm more (...) to a seafaring man, after a terrible tempest: so will my
deliverance be, after my tribulation. O how beautiful will thy mercy appear,
after the depth of my miserable affliction. How shall I rejoice, (...) ever I
was sorrowful. How shall my bones be glad, that ever they were broken! I
shall gratefully acknowledge, that thy (...) Psalm. 23.
and thy staff have (...) me; that is, I shall take comfort that ever I was
chastized with them, and that according to the multitude of my griefs, thy
consolations have made my mind joyful, that is, for every sorrow that I
received in time of my tribulation, I shall receive a consolation after my
deliverance.

O then what a madness is it, to buy a little vain, idle, frothie, and
momentany pleasure, at so dear a rate, as the vexation and anguish, the
terrors and tortures, both of soul and body? which none can conceive by
imagination, but he that feels, and he that feels, is not able by any
representation to express.

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot (...) all my transgressions.] Because
my sin is the source of my sorrow, and the bane of my bliss, I make this the
burden of my song, and do reiterate my Prayer, for pardon: I beseech thee
once again, O Lord, either to remove thy sense from the object, or the object
from thy sense; hide thine eyes from such an ugly sight, look another way,
behold any thing rather then it; or if being all Eye, thou can not but see
all things that are, and so all my sins, (if they be at all) O Lord, blot
them out, let not them be to be seen, blot them out all, and at once, vna
litura, with one dash of thy pen, efface all my transgressions.

Hide thy face not from me, but from my sins: Thou have charged me lovingly;
Seek my face; and Psalm: 27. 8.
I have answered resolutely; Thy face, Lord, will I seek. If thou withdraw thy
face from me, woe is me, I shall be like those that go down into the
bottomless pit: wherefore still show me the light of thy countenance: look
upon thy creature, which thy hands have made and fashioned; look upon thine
own Image, which thou have stamped upon me; look not upon my sins, which
have blemished and disfigured my soul, which have almost quite defaced that
thine Image, and in stead thereof have placed the very portraicture of Satan.

Although custom of sinning have made my sin another nature in me, although I
be so compassed with infirmities, so enclosed in my corruptions, as they may
seem to be incorporated in me, and become my very substance; yet thou, O Lord,
can distinguish between the (...) and the rust, between thine own and Satan's
work, between man and a sinner. Duo nomina; Homo, Peccator. August.
Thou can look on that which thou have made, and look off that which I have
marred, with one and the same Eye of pity and mercy.

When thou seek a Chrysol.
sinner, thou (...) the man, and not his sin, that thou may despise the
sin, which is man's work, and not lose the man, which is thy work.

He that loses a precious Chrysol.
Jewel, seeks it in all the sluts corners, and stickketh not to rake the
kennell, and stir the dunghill to find it.

The Judge, when he will Chrysol.
pardon, looks upon the man, and not upon his fault: the father, when he is
disposed to pity his child, thinks upon his own affection, and not upon his
sons transgression: Even so, O Lord, thou art mindful of thine own work,
that thou may forget the work of another; thou turnest thy face to the
tone, that thou may hide thy face from the the other.

O Lord, at least hide thine angry face from me. I cannot deny, but that I
need correction, and am not therefore altogether unwilling to bear it; if
thou hold it meet. Correct me, but not in thy fury; chastize me, but not in
thy displeasure; let mine August. in Psalm. 103
afflictions be instructions, and not destructions; rather medicines, then
punishments; castigations, not condemnations. Let them (...) a diligentis.
be the wounds of a lover. Let me perceive thy grace even when thou do seem
to frown upon me; let me discern the sweet sunshine of thy mercy, through the
thickest clouds of thy fiercest wrath.

I will follow the way, which thou have taught me; I will set my sins before
mine own face, that thou may hide thy face from them; I will remember, that
thou may forget them: I will confess, that thou may forgive them.

I am much ashamed and agreeued to see mine own sins: I am much more ashamed
and agreeued, that thou with thy pure eyes, and bright face should behold
the fowlenesse and filthiness, the folly, and madness, the absurdity and
grossness of them. Yet, O Lord, let me behold my sins always, so as thou will be pleased to hide thy face from them altogether.

Thou can, but thou do not always, because thou will not, sometimes in
favor, see the faults (...) thy people. Thou did not, because thou
would not see iniquity in Jacob, nor, perverseness in Israel.

If thou can not, in Justice but look toward my sins; yet I beseech thee
in mercy, to suffer the Blood of thine Immaculate Lamb, to interuene between
thy glorious face, and my loathsome corruptions. Let that spectacle either
divert or restrain thy sight, and hinder the representation of the ugly shapes
of my faults, to thy pure and perceiving eyes: Look upon that precious object
first, and there stay and terminate thy sight; or, at least, look through it,
as men look through a colored glass, that the foul object may appear in
the color of the glass, and not in his own colors. Let the robe of the
Lambs innocence, cover the shameful nakedness of my unrighteousness, so as
it may be hidden from thy angry face and fearful countenance.

Blot out all my transgressions.] When a man feels his soul laden with the
burden, and his (...) affrighted with the apparition of some one or two
grievous offenses lately done, he begs earnestly for pardon of those sins in
particular, or (...) his sins indefinitely, (...) falls not at the first,
into computation or consideration of the rest of his sins, in former times
committed. The fresher wounds seem, ever the more fearful; and the new
terrible object does so dazzle and confound the souls sight, as it cannot look
either beyond or besides it.

But the more grievous and enormous sins, after awhile do occasion us to
make a more narrow inquisition, and take a more exact survey of the whole
course of our sinful life; whereby we cannot but find, that we have run
into many errors, and manifold crimes, the remembrance and recognition whereof
we had formerly, in a sort neglected.

Then we begin seriously to consider, that in this general muster, there is
not any one sin, (seem it never so light or slight) but being an offense
against an infinite Majesty, and a violation of the whole Law of God, deserves
an heavy judgment, in the severity of (...), and that, if some of our sins
(...) be remitted, and others retained, we remain still in a most woeful
condition; and therefore do not content ourselves with a prayer that some, or
many of our spots and sins may be wyped out, but crave, with a note of
universality, an abolition of them all. Blot out all my transgressions, my
sins in thought, word and deed, my sins of omission, and my sins of
action; my sins of childhood, youth, middle-age, and elder years; my sins of
infirmity, and my sins of presumption; my sins within, and my sins without my
body; my bloody and my unbloody sins; my sins committed in mine own person,
and my sins committed by others through my ill example: (for they are mine too)
my single sins committed by me as a private person, my double sins
committed by me as a public magistrate, (who when he sins, does rather
teach then act sin) my lesser and my greater sins (the sins of Sovereigns,
are (...) sins) my secret and open, my known and unknown sins, (who can
tell how (...) he offends?) my sins past, present, yea and to come, (for
whilst I live in this body of death, I cannot but sin) all my sins
whatsoever, when I say all, I except none; no minyon or darling sin at all.

Thou did command (...) the (...) the (...) (...) Leuit. (...).
be (...) away. Who is not sinfully (...)? and whose sins are not more in
number then the hairs of his head? Let them all come under the Raisor of true
repentance, and then they will come within the reach of thy free remission. Not
one Egyptian escaped, out of the red Sea. Saul was 1. Sam. 15.
commanded to kill all the Amalekites; men, such as offend of malice, women,
such as offend of infirmity, children, such as transgress out of ignorance
only.

Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me.]

Whosoever beggeth Justification, which is the foundation, will seek
Sanctification also, which is the goodly frame (...) thereupon, and cannot but
after sins committed and remitted, shine and flourish in holiness of life
and conversation. He that has that fire, cannot be without this heat; he
that has that Sun, cannot be without this light.

When my great and enormous sins had plunged me into the sea of misery,
finding no other mean of help in that fearful danger, I catched up, and
took hold of the planke, or boordof Repentance, to save me from drowning.

Repentance has two faces, and so looks two ways, backward and forward, to
sins past, and holiness to come. I have grievously lamented my offenses
formerly done, and importunately begged pardon for them, accounting this
remission (because thou art pleased, O God, so to esteem it) my justification.

I now earnestly crave a clean heart, and a new spirit, that being cleansed, I
may keep my self clean; that being renewed, I may entertain newness of life
for my sanctification.

For if I fall again upon the same rock of presumption, which caused my
shipwreck before; it will plainly appear, that I have not really acted, but
formally counterfeited repentance; in which case I must pronounce an heavy
doom against my self, for dissembled holiness, is Simulata aequitas non est
aequitas, sed duplex iniquitas, quia and (...), and simulatio. August. in Psalm.
63.
double wickedness; wickedness masking under the sinful veil and vizard of
hypocrisy. Repentance never attaines her Crown and Garland, till she have
brought forth amendment of life; after lamentation for sin, to make some kind
of reparation.

That which thou requirest of me, O God, is my heart, and how can I deny thee
one thing, that have given me all things? for what have I, that I have not
received of thee?

Well then, I resolve (as it is meet) to give thee my heart: But when I look
into my heart, by the help of thy survey (for it is thou that declarest unto
man, what, and how ill his heart Amos 4.
is) I find it so foul and full of corruption, as I am ashamed to present it
unto thee in that plight. Nay, I tremble to think, that thy Pure and Radiant
Eyes, should behold such a puddle and sincke of sin as lurketh in my heart.
For, alas, every imagination of the thoughts of my heart, is only evil
continually. Were my heart such as it should be, I would cheerfully give thee
my heart. O Lord, therefore, create in me a clean heart. Thou made my heart
first in Adam; he marred it, (and I in him) by disobedience; from him to all
his posterity, the contagion of this pollution is spread and propagated;
wherefore create my heart again, create it a clean heart, either a clean
heart, or no heart at all.

I affect purity of heart by thy grace: for indeed I cannot so much as affect,
much less effect it, without thee. Unless thou take the work in hand, it
will be undone. My heart, that is originally and totally unclean by natural
generation, and daily soiled by actual transgression, cannot become clean and
neat, without spiritual washing, and supernatural regeneration, and that is
thy proper operation.

Seek not to new make and mould my defiled heart, out of the forebeing matter
thereof. (That may seem a strange enterprise and fruitless work.) But thou,
O God, who by thy power made the world of nothing, by thy powerful grace,
Create (which is thy peculiar attribute) a clean heart within me.

To create, is not to make a thing out of the power of any subject or matter
formerly being. But to create, is to make a thing of nothing, and that is an
act of divine power, that is a case excepted, and a prerogative reserved to
thee alone. The production of grace in a graceless heart, is a wonderful and
gracious creation.

Create in me powerfully, and of nothing, without any (...) matter; create in
me (...), and for nothing, without any precedent merit of mine, a pure heart;
so (...) thou crown in me, not my deserts, but thine (...) gifts, if ought
proceed from my heart, to my tongue or hand, not displeasing unto thee.

Work this work thy self, and take the praise of Psalm. 115.
it to thy self alone, O God. Not unto me, not unto me (I do iterate and
ingeminate my disclaymer) but unto thy Name give all the glory.

It is another manner of power to make the quality, then the substance of the
heart; yea, it is a harder task to make a heart clean, that has been soiled
with the filth, and tainted with the putrefaction of sin, then to make a pure
and innocent heart at the first. The more shall be my thankfulness, if thou, O
Lord, vouchsafe me so great a favor.

I will not curiously enquire into the means or manner of atchieuing this
work. Let me henceforth really find, by the imaginations and inclinations of
it, that it is a clean heart, conformed (as it may be in the frailty of (...)
flesh) (...) thy holy (...), (...) all is well.

As a woman (...) by the stirring of the (...) in her womb, that (...) has
conceived: so (...) me feel, by the effectual motions of thy good (...), that
I am begotten anew unto a lively (...), by the resurrection of Christ,
according to his abundant mercy.

The sum of all is; Give me, O Lord; what thou enioynest, and then enjoin
me what thou please. I am of no ability to do what thou command, and
therefore am enforced to beseech thee thy self to do in me, what thou
requirest to be done of me. Create a clean heart in me.

If my heart, as the spring and conduit head, be pure and clean; the waters
that flow thence, though conueighed in earthen pipes, will be clear still: my
secret thoughts, my open words, my visible works, though they savor somewhat
of earth and flesh, will not be altogether unclean and unsavory.

A man must be twice borne, ere he can enter into the kingdom of heaven. As
he is made to the 1. Cor. 15.
similitude of the first Adam, so must he be made to the similitude of the
second Adam: and the regeneration is a more excellent work then the
generation; the re-creation, then the creation. In the first, man was wrought
out of clay; in the other, God works grace out of sin. In the former, he
breathed a soul into the dead body; here he breaths his holy Spirit into a
dead heart. In the creation, he made man perfect in all his members. In this
re-creation, not only all the members of the body, but the faculties of the
soul also, must be framed anew. It is a greater matter to raise a man dead in
sin, then to raise a rotten carcass out of the grave.

In the one birth and the Primum (...). Arist.
other, the heart is the first (...) that is enlyued: my (...) must first take
fire, (...) can I never be (...) with the true zeal of (...) glory, and mine
own salvation.

In the first creation, this (...) Chaos and dark (...), was covered by thy
(...), without any contradiction or resistance: Thou spakest but the word, and
all was readily done, and perfectly framed. But in my re-creation, my flesh or
my spirit, or my fleshly spirit, does oppose and encounter thy holy Spirit,
grieueth and makes it sad, labors to quench it, even then when it strives
to revive, repair, and reform me. This is notoriously verified, not only in
the aliens and reprobates, but even in the domestics of the household of faith,
in thy most enlightened and best disposed children, even in the Elect
themselves, and those that are sealed up for the Day of Redemption.

Wherefore I must say freely, as I may truly, I am thy workmanship, not only
of thy power, (as all other creatures are) but of thy mercy also, created in
Christ unto good works, whereof he is the sole Author and Actor, working
effecaciously in me, both the will and the deed, according to his good
pleasure.

O Lord, give me a lively Faith (thy Gift alone) which has power, to quicken
my dull, to enlyue my dead, to purify my impure heart: Give me grace
steadfastly to believe thy Word, to take sure hold of thy promises, evermore to
cleave and stick fast to thy goodness: Kindle this fire in my soul, which
will inflame my love of all good duties on the one, and on the other side,
waste and consume, eat up and de uoure my concupiscence, and all my carnal
desires, and cause them to return into that dead sea, whence they were first
exhaled.

Renew a right Spirit within me.] He whose spirit is deserted by Gods Spirit,
loses the vigor and viuacity of his spirit, his spirit waxes old and crooked
in him. Sin, where it inuades, makes such spoil and havoc of all goodness
and virtue in the soul, as it cannot subsist, unless it be timely repaired,
and truly renewed by repentance.

When a man lies groueling upon earthly, and houering upon fleshly desires: his
spirit, which should directly (...) upward, is bowed down and made crooked. A
(...) spirit then, is a sincere and upright heart, raised and lifted up into
heaven and heavenly things.

What is sin else, but an obliquity, a deprivation or deprauation of that
rectitude, and uprightness, which was originally, and should be continually,
in the soul; if it were thoroughly purged and purified?

I have impaired this rectitude and uprightness, which once I had in some
measure, by my heinous and enormous transgressions, and therefore, resort to
thee for help, who only art able to renew and repair it again.

Give me, O Lord, a spirit rectified in it self, directed by thy Spirit,
corrected by thy discipline, and erected to thy glory; a spirit firm without
failing, constant without varying, and durable without decaying; that I may
happily choose new ways, walk in them carefully, and persevere in them
constantly: give me grace to turn over a new leaf (as they say) to abandon
the old man with the lusts and affections thereof, and to put on the new man,
and so to serve thee in holiness and newness of living, all the days of my
life hereafter.

I do wittingly and thankefully ascribe the purity of my heart, to thy
Creation, the uprightness of my spirit, to thy renouation alone; as to give
thee thy due honor, so to prevent and anticipate the proud and fond conceit of
those men, (if any such there be, or shall be hereafter) who to grace
themselves, will abate the power, and diminish the luster of thy grace, who
though they cannot but confess, that they need the assistance of thy Spirit,
and that they are helped by thy, both preventing and following, grace; yet
between those two graces, (for their own credit) will needs vainly
interpose, or rather violently intrude man's reason, whereby he chooses what is
good; and man's will, whereby he assenteth to thy divine power, in the blessed
work of regeneration.

But hereby, I take secret comfort in my self, to preserve my perplexed soul
from utter despair, that I discern the foulness of my heart, and feel the
weakness of my spirit; and therefore pray earnestly, for a purification of the
one, and a renouation of the other: for I know, I cannot crave either of those
graces, without some measure of grace. As the sun cannot be seen but by the
Sun, nor the light be perceived, but by means of the light; so neither can I
beg a full cleansing of my heart, without some cleanenesse in it, nor a
through-renouation, without some newness, in my decayed spirit, at least, in
true affection, and unfeigned desire.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.] I
fear, and cannot but fear thy face; and yet I fear withal to be cast from
thy face (...) presence. Mine own (...) makes me, on the one side, to fear
the face of a severe Judge, and my worthless weakness on the other, (being
not able to subsist at all, without the light of thy countenance,) makes me
desire thy presence and sight.

What-euer thou do with me, while thou look upon me, I shall endure, though
not without fear and perplexity; But if thou cast me quite away from thy
presence, I am utterly undone for ever.

The presence of the Physicion is a present, if not help, yet comfort to the
sick patient. But thy presence, Lord, being the sovereign Physicion,
ministers all comforts, and cures all maladies both of soul and body.

Therefore I love the habitations of thy house, and the place where (...)
honor dwells.

As the hunted and chased Psalm. 42.
Heart desires the water brooks; So longs my soul after thee: When shall I
come and appear before thee?

O how amiable are thy Psalm. 84.
Tabernacles? My soul even longs, and faints for the courts of the Lord.
One day in thy Courts (where thou art present and resident,) is better then a
thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a dorekeeper there, then to dwell at
liberty, and in iollity, in the tents of the ungodly.

The privation of Gods presence, is the position of all misery, and the
withdrawing of his countenance, draws with it all manner of discomforts.

Heaven it self were not heaven, if thou were not there present, and Hell
could not be hell, if thou were not absent thence.

To be cast out of thy presence, is to be cast out of joy, into sorrow; out of
light, into darkness; out of life, into death; (not the first only, but the
second also) out of heaven, into hell.

The very sight and vision of thee, is of it self, and in it self, the height
of happiness. In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy right hand is
plenty, without satiety of pleasure and delight, for evermore.

Wherefore though I have multiplied and increased my contumacie beyond all
measure; yet I beseech thee, O Lord, not to excommunicate me. I submit my
self, with tears in mine eyes, and anguish in my heart, humbly and wholly to
thy discipline; I am content to endure any penance, rather then to be banished
from thy presence.

What the want of this presence is, none can know but he that feels; and he
that feels, cannot make another know by any relation. He may endeavor to
shadow it out slenderly, but he is not able fully to express it.

If the Master turn his servant out of doors; if the Father abandon his son
from his fight; if the King command his subject from the Court, (that he come
not within the Vierge) how grievous and irksome will the damage and disgrace
be, to every, or any of these respectively? Thou, O God, art our Master, and to
serve thee, is to reign with thee. Thou art our Father; and what greater
preeminence then to be the Son of God? Thou art our King, and to be in
subjection to thee, is our chiefest dominion. How then does it concern me,
being an unfaithful Servant, a prodigal Child, and a traiterous Subject, to
beg earnestly of thee, my bountiful Master, my loving Father, my gracious
Sovereign, that thou will not take away thy (...), banish me from thy fight,
nor expel me from thy Courts?

As the soul does excel the body, and the (...) the flesh, beyond proportion;
so the one loss is incomparably greater then the other.

Thou, O God, art present with me, by thy good Spirit; and so long as I have
this Ghest in my soul, I have the fruition of thee and thy presence; wherefore
suffer not this noble Ghest to be dislodged and taken from me. Thou and thy
Spirit are undivided companions: If thou cast me from thy presence, thou take
thy holy Spirit from me; and if thou take (...) Spirit, thou take thy self
from me.

I do yet enjoy thy presence, in a sort; I behold thy countenance, though full
of anger; I feel thy Spirit within me, though sad and grieved: for I find
contrition in my heart, confession in my mouth, and confusion in my face, for
my grievous offenses. I hate my sins, and my self for my sins. This smoke
cannot ascend, but from that fire of thy Spirit; this fruit cannot grow, but
from that root of repentance. Howbeit, when I behold the ugliness of my
offenses, with an impartial eye, and consider how hard and harsh a thing it
is, for Purity and Holiness, to dwell or abide with wickedness and
filthiness: I tremble and quake in an awefull fear, that thou will (as justly
thou may) deprive me of thy gracious presence, and bereave me of thy
blessed Spirit.

Lord, thou art in all things by thine Essence, thou art in all places, and at
once, by thy Power and presence. I may well be asked; Whither will thou Psalm.
1 39.
fly from his Spirit, or whither will thou go from his presence, etc? If thou
shall say; The darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light about
thee. Yet thou can, and wilt cast me from thy presence, and withdraw thy holy
Spirit from me, if I be settled upon the dregs of my sins without remorse, in
contempt of thy Majesty, and abuse of thy mercy. If thou in thy just
judgment and wrathful indignation, abandon me from thy presence, thou
castest me out of thy providence and protection, thy blessed Spirit does quite
desert me, I am banished out of the land of the living, into the Desert of
desolation, (which is without the compass of the whole Universe, that thou
did create, and d'st uphold.) In that case, happy were I to be no more, but
I shall be most unhappy, to be and continue helpelesse and hopeless in
endless misery.

Thy holy Spirit is, by a special title, styled, The Comforter, by
excellency, because all other comforters and comforts, are cold and
uncomfortable, without and beside it. I have (I confess with grief) many
times checked this Spirit, when it has presented good motions to my mind, and
good desires to my heart; I have grieved it exceedingly, while I carelessly
neglected, and stubbornely refused the good counsel it ministered unto me.
Howbeit, sithence without this Comforter, I must be for ever comfortless in
the depth of discomfort, I (...) thee, not to take utterly and finally thy holy
Spirit from me.

Thy gifts, O Lord, are (...). (...). (...)
without repentance (therefore I trust I shall never be without repentance) who^
(...). 13. 1.
thou love once, thou (...). 31. 3.
do ever love; if thou begin, Semel (...), semper (...).
thou will persevere to love. Although I do not Mulier soetum conceptum non
semper molitantem (...); vbi tamen semel and iterum (...), (...) se esse non
ambigit. Spin. de (...). (...).
always feel the graces of thy Spirit in my sinful soul; yet I shall ((...)
trust) have (...) ever, because once I had them. My sin may take away the
sense and (...) for a while, but not the interest and property (if I may so
say) which I have in thy blessed Spirit: Which notwithstanding, the fruition of
this Spirit being so precious, and the loss of it so inualuable, I cannot but
in fear and anxiety of soul, instantly pray, that it may not be taken from me.

Although the seed of 1. Pet. 1. 23.
thy Word, whereby I am begotten again to a lively Hope, be immortal and
incorruptible; yet it is so choked with the weeds of fleshly desires, so
entangled with worldly allurements, it lies so buried in the furrows of my
hard and stony heart, as I may much doubt, and, in a manner, distrust the
shooting and springing of it up again, without an extraordinary influence of
thy heavenly grace, which cannot descend upon me, unless my humble and earnest
prayers ascend up to thee. Wherefore retain me, O Lord, in thy favor, and
permit thy blessed Spirit, not only to soiourne for a season, but to remain
continually with me. Let me so keep a door in the Sanctuary of my soul,
(which is one of thy Courts) as I may never suffer this Ghest to go out of it.

12 Restore unto me, the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy firm
Spirit, or stablish me with thy free Spirit.
I Do not say; Give me what I never had, but restore unto me what I had, and
have lost by mine own fault and folly. It is a greater favor to restore
Tertull. de poenit.
then to give, in as much as it is a greater unhappiness to lose a Jewel Quid
boni sanitas habet, languor ostendit. Hier.
which I had, then never to have had it. Privation is a greater punishment then
want: It is the height of Gratior est reddita qua^ retenta sanit as.
misery to have been happy. To come out of darkness Post tempestatem dulcior
serenitas. Quint. Desiderata dulcius obtinentur.
into light, out of sickness into health, out of perplexity into security, out
of sorrow and sadness, into joy and gladness; and so by the contrary, to
August. de Verb. Dom.
come out of cheerfulness into pensiveness, sets out more lively, and causes
to be felt more sensibly, both the one and the other condition. One contrary is
a foil unto another.

We then make the true. Quoniam ob bona (...), gratias Deo non agimus,
necessaria nobis est priuatio, vt quid habutrimus sentiamus.
est valuation of thy greatest mercies, O Lord, when we are for a time deprived
of them, which is one special cause why thou take them from us, that by the
want, we may learn the worth of them, Basil. Plus sensimus quod habuimus,
postquam habere desinimus. Hier. in Consol.
and show our selves accordingly thankful, because thou did vouchsafe us
the fruition of them so long, and much more joyfully embrace, and charily
preserve them, when thou please to restore them to us again.

For as the eyes cannot discern a goodly object when it is held close unto
them, but when it is removed in some distance; so our untoward and unthankful
hearts cannot judge of the excellency and sweetness of present graces; but
when they are withdrawn a while from us, then do we more cheerfully behold,
and fully observe the riches of thy bounty and mercy in them.

This joy of thy salvation, consists in an assured hope and hopeful
assurance of eternal happiness. This hope, is the heart of my soul, and the
very life of my life. It puts spirit into my decayed spirit, and vigor into
my dead heart; for a hopeless, is a heartlesse life, and were it not for this
hope, (amidst the inward and outward crosses of this life) my very heart would
break.

All the joys upon earth cannot make me cheerful, until I be seized of this
joy, nor can all the crosses and calamities which the world affoords,
dishearten me, while I find and feel this joy of thy salvation.

What greater joy to an afflicted soul, lying (...) oppressed under the heavy
apprehension of thy wrathful indignation, and for a long and tedious time,
suffering even hell out of hell, then to receive a gracious pardon of all his
sin, freely granted unto him by thee, through the mediation of thy Christ,
sealed by thy blessed Spirit, and delivered to his spirit into the hand of
faith.

Wherefore turn, O Lord, my mourning into dancing; loose my sackcloth, and
gird me with gladness, O Lord; let me shout out songs of deliverance from the
captivity and thraldom of sin and Satan.

I have wilfully put my self out of possession of this joy, which I so happily
enjoyed. O Lord, restore it unto me again, by a new order and iniunction, out
of thy Court of equity and mercy; let me return into it, by Remitter, and
hold it, as in my former ancient right.

I have just cause to style it, Thy salvation. For I am the patient only,
thou, O God, the only agent: thou have not the greatest share, but all the
interest, in this affair. Thou art the sole, not only Author, but also actor
in it. For the purchase thereof, I need thy first grace of Initiation, and thy
second of Confirmation, thy preuenient and thy subsequent grace, thy
accompanying, and thy perseuering grace. All is thy grace, and thou art all in
all, and therefore to thee alone, I ascribe all the honor and glory. It is
merely and entirely thy salvation.

Christ his righteousness imputed and imparted to me, is the true root; joy
and peace are the happy fruit; and faith is the rooting of it in my soul.
Though there come a winter of affliction, to restrain the sap, and hinder the
show: yet the Summer of cheerfulness will make all to flourish again in
perfect luster.

But how can I expect the serenity and Sunshine of this joy in the valley of
tears? Why should I desire this garment of gladness, when my heart ought
continually to wear the sables of sadness, and the mourning weed of
repentance, for my daily or rather howrely sins? how can there be any time or
place left for joy, when there is almost a (...) of sorrow enjoined?

He that will reconcile himself to thee, O God, may easily reconcile these
different passions, and make them dwell together in his soul, with amity and
unity. Else thou that have required me oft-times to mourn, would never
have commanded me to rejoice always. The faithful man has a sorrow mingled
with joy, and a joy mingled with sorrow. There is a grief in joy, as there is
a joy in grief, nay (which may yet seem more strange) the greater grief
sometimes, the greater joy, and the greater joy, the greater grief; for one
and the same man, at one and the same time, may be exceeding sorry for his
sin, and excceding joyous with the apprehension of thy mercy, in the free
forgiveness of his sin.

The greater grief he conceiueth for his sin, the more comfort he may
justly take, even in that regard. And the greater joy he feels in the
hopeful assurance of thy favor, the greater sorrow must he needs conceive
for his sin, that bred thy displeasure: for, the more assurance he has of
thy love toward him, the more he will love thee: (Love is the loadstone (...)
love, and will draw love even from an iron heart) and the more he loves thee,
the more his soul must melt into tears, when he recounts and considers, how
by his wicked and rebellious courses, he has demeaned himself, wretchedly and
unworthily, toward that God whom he finds so graciously and pitifully
affected toward him.

Sorrow may be sometimes unseasonable, but this spiritual joy (as we say of
some kind of meats) is never out of season.

The precept of rejoicing, though conceived in the affirmative, does always
bind, and at all times. Rejoice in all things, and 1. (...). 5. 16.
evermore rejoice.

The grace I beg, is the complement, crown and garland of all the graces I
have formerly craved. For although I be washed never so clean from my former
staynes; though my heart be never so thoroughly purged from old corruptions, my
spirit never so well renewed and rectified for the time to come: yea, though I
obtain a full restoration of the joy of thy salvation, which I had and have
lost; yet, unless thou be pleased to confirm and stablish me with thy firm
and free (...) none of those blessings apart, nor all of them (...) together,
can much avail me.

For without this (...) and establishment, I (...) never be able to (...) and
persevere in true Piety of Religion, in sincere probity of (...). Well I may,
like a bankrupt Merchant (supplied by friends or credit,) set up my trade of
godliness awhile, but I shall soon be enforced to shut up shop again. Well I
may begin to run the race of godliness, but I shall never get the goal;
well I may enter the lists afresh, with my old and deadly enemy, the Devil,
and his two valiant Champions, the World and the Flesh; but I shall quickly be
foiled, I shall never (...) the victory fully and finally.

Wherefore do not only raise me that am fallen, but uphold me when I am
raised; sustain me continually with thy firm Spirit, that I may not only
begin well, and proceed cheerfully, but also persevere constantly, and end
happily.

I did endeavor when time was, in some sort to serve and please thee; I
frequented public assemblies in thy holy Tabernacle; I sent up sundry Prayers
from my private Oratory, and the secret closer of my heart, unto thy Majesty;
I labored to govern my people with Justice and equity, to punish wilful
offenders severely, to reward well-deseruers cheerfully, to deliver the
oppressed, to relieve the needy; but (this notwithstanding) how soon, alas,
was I taken with the sight of Bathsheba, and, through my frailty, carried
captive into Adultery, to satisfy my (...); and into Murder, to conceal my
Adultery! Wherefore settle, confirm, and establish me, O Lord. I have directed
generally.

All you that trust in the Lord, be strong, and he shall establish your heart;
he keeps the faithful, and vpholdeth the just; by him alone the steps of men
are established, that is, firmly directed and perfected.

My spirit, which must be wrought upon by thy Spirit, through the contagion of
my flesh, and the carnality of it, is become almost wholly carnal, and by that
means weak and frail, soon weary of well doing; it quickly slips from good
Meditations and Actions; slides from honest purposes and proceedings, unless
it be sustained by thy Spirit.

But being quickened and enlyued by thy Spirit, though otherwise dead, I shall
live in thee, by thee, and for thee: all my thoughts, words and works shall
breathe continually thy praise and glory.

Thy Spirit, O Lord, is the life of my soul, as my spirit is the life of my
body; if my spirit fail, my body perishes; if thy Spirit desert my soul, my
soul cannot but fall irrecouerably. Wherefore uphold me with thy Spirit.

Thy Spirit is free in it self. As the wind blows, so the Spirit breaths
where it lists. As it is a free, so it is a freeing Spirit, a Spirit of
liberty, which delivers me from the bondage of Sin; a Spirit of Adoption,
whereby I cry, Abba, Father. As the Spirit Romans 8. 15.
is free, so are those that are led by the Spirit, free, ingenuous, bold, and
courageous: it infranchizeth and naturalizeth me in the heavenly Jerusalem.

This Spirit has power to help all my infirmities; it has skill and will to
frame my Supplications within me to be expressed, if not by tongue and voice,
yet by sighs and groans unutterable, but still intelligible to thee; it can
preserve me from falling; it can raise me after I have fallen; and then so
establish me, that I shall never come again into danger of relapse or
recidiuation.

My spirit, thus vpheld and established by thy free Spirit, what is it else but
a cheerful alacrity and forward disposition to embrace any thing that is
good, for it own sake, and for thy sake, without any by or secondary respect
whatsoever; banisheth all drowzy dullness and untoward listlesnesse in thy
service; that puts wings to my obedience, and makes it not to walk slowly,
but to fly nimbly in the accomplishment of thy errands and directions; that
causes me to do ingenuously what becomes me, for love of virtue, and not
for fear of the whip, basely?

When thou had appointed that the first (...) of every beast should be set
apart to thee; thou did specially ordain, Ex. 13. 13.
that if it were the Foale of an Ass, it should be redeemed with a Lamb; if
it were not, the neck of it should be broken; thou would not have it
sacrificed unto thee at any hand. Surely, it may well seem, that this is,
alterius rei (...), a kind of riddle; and that by this shadow, thou would
show thy (...) of slothfulness and (...), want of life and cheerfulness in
thy service, that an Ass being one of thy dullest creatures (Sloth is wont to
be pictured riding on an Ass) thou would not be honored by the sacrifice
of such a beast.

Thou, O Lord, love a swift hearer, a cheerful giver, a zealous Petitioner,
a voluntary Soldier, and a diligent (...) for all which purposes, thy free and
firm Spirit will strongly enable and support me continually. Wherefore
establish me with thy free Spirit, O Lord.

13 Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners, or impious persons,
shall be converted unto thee.
WHen thou have vouchsafed graciously to bestow upon me those graces, whereof
I have gracelesly (...) my self, then will I (...) my self grateful unto
thee, I will (...) that duty of thankfulness, so suitable to humanity, so
agreeable to piety; it being a thing good and commendable, (...) and
profitable, pleasant and dilectable, (...) and graceful to return praises and
thanks to thee for thy mercies, duly to acknowledge, and truly to (...) thy
singular favors; in such manner as I can, and by such means as are within the
reach of my weak and worthless ability.

I will not follow the common fashion of worldly men, who, like barrels, sound
when they are empty, but are still when they are full; who crave earnestly when
they feel want, but are dumb and silent when their turn is served. I
solemnly vow, and will really perform thankful acknowledgement for so great
benefits, when I have received them.

Thou, O God, by difburthening man of his sin, Onerat nos Deus (...), quando
(...). Aug. in Ps.
do impose a burden of gratitude upon him. A benefit is a burden to an
ingenuous mind, that cannot rest quietly, but lies shut up (as it were) in
prison straightly, till it have procured liberty, by venting some kind of
retribution.

Although there can be no proportion between thy infinite goodness, and my,
not only finite, but infinitely weak means of requital; yet inasmuch, as
for a more bountiful favor, a larger return of (...) is (of congruence)
required, and the greatest blessing that can be bestowed upon a mortal man in
this life, is peace of conscience, intended by the joy of thy salvation, and
employed in the firm support of thy free Spirit: I will endeavor, in way of
(...), to do thee the best service that any man can perform upon earth; that
is, I will teach thy ways to Transgressors, and cause (as much as in me lies)
sinners to be converted unto thee.

I will teach such as wander and go aftray, how to come into the way: Again,
those that go bywayes, I will teach thy ways; that is, the ways of thy
directions, which lead us by a right line (as it were) through the maze of
this miserable world, to the land of Canaan, that happy country, which we
should so love and long for. Converted sinners, are (...) iniquorum (...),
(...) quia tales (...).
the fittest conuerters of sinners. The sickly Physician, who has not only
read in his Book, but felt in his body, the maladies whereupon he is
consulted, is the likeliest man to work a cure upon his patient.

Goodness of it own Bonum natura sui diffusiuum.
nature, is apt to spread and enlarge it self. It is the Naturalis. opus
viuen. gignere sibi simile. Arist.
most natural and kindly work of each living creature, to engender a like
unto it self. As in nature, so is it in nurture also. An honest well-disposed
man, will strive as much as he can, to make others good and godly. A chaste and
sober man, will endeavor to restrain and reclayme others from wantonness and
drunkenness; the like may be said of all other virtues and vices.

The rule of Charity requires, that he, who has been raised out of the dyrt,
and reskued out of the mire, should lift up others, who lie wallowing therein.
If we be once inflamed with the love of God and godliness, we shall labor to
kindle the zeal of others, and set them on fire also. Bad men are, and why
should not good men much more become, Incendiaries.

This is the matter and effect of my gratitude, which though it may seem to be
no great matter: For my goodness extends not to thee, neither art thou any
whit the better, for my being better any way, (the grace is thine, the good is
mine alone,) yet I know it to be very aceptable and highly pleasing unto thee,
being so loving and gracious, so covetous of man's salvation, as thou do even
hunger and thirst after his conversion. Thou do even long for our return
home, from out of those far remote countries, wherein we have wandered, and
spent our patrimony of thy gifts, in wickedness, to the house of thy
habitation.

I, even I that lost my way in my pilgrimage, and fell among thieves who robbed
me of my garment of godliness, of my (...) of righteousness, of my girdle of
gladness, and wounded me with bitter Arrows, and (...) darts, almost to
death; I (I say) being reduced into the way again, refreshed and comforted,
raised and set on horseback (as it were) will teach others, carefully to keep
themselves in the right way, to shun idleness, and security, and all other
occasions of sin, to avoid such inconveniences, as by woeful experience I
have found, and felt with intolerable grief.

I will teach Transgressors Homines malunt exempla qua^ verba. (...). act.
(...) ver. sap. Validior (...) quam oris, oration. Greg.
by instruction, and (...) will teach them by example also. Men are more
effectually persuaded by the works they see, then by the words they hear;
Regis ad exemplum nec sic inflectere (...) edicta valent, ac vita regentis.
Claud.
by Princes acts, then by their Edicts. I will join both precept and practice
together; my words shall be working words, and my deeds shall be speaking deeds.
Nay, I will not only Habent and opera suam linguam.
teach them, by my words, and by my deeds, Author de dupl. martyr.
but by my writings also. I will cause my Psalms (the webs which my restless
soul has wouen) to be sung in Gods Tabernacle, while I live; and when I die,
bequeath them to God his Church, to be used in all succeeding ages; which (I
hope) will be of some force, to mollify and qualify the hard and stony
hearts of retchlesse and impenitent sinners.

I will use all the ways I can, to teach sinners, in thy ways, and I will
endeavor to reclaim all sorts of sinners from their evil ways, As there be
several sorts and degrees of transgressors; so I will apply my counsels and
admonitions, in several kinds, respectively.

I will teach sinners of Sin of infirmity.
infirmity; that they yield not at all to the assaults and allurements of
sin; that they fight courageously in that neuer-dying combat between the
flesh and the Spirit; that in no wise they suffer themselves to be carried away
Captives to sin; that they let not sin reign, howsoever it will remain,
Romans 6.
in their mortal bodies. I can, and will tell them (out of knowledge and
experience,) that if they give the water passage but a little, they shall not
be able to withstand the Current of their own concupiscence; that a little
spark of a wanton look upon Bathsheba, bred such a huge flame of lust in me,
as I could not quench. That Satan is subtle and will cunningly insinuate
himself every way; he will seek to make the breach where thy fortification
is weakest; he will undermine, if he cannot batter thy strongest castle; if
he see where thou mynest, he will countermine: That he makes semblance
sometimes to strike at one place, when he intends to hit another; that now and
then he faignes to make a retraite, when he returns suddenly again, to find
thee the more unprovided. That he is like those Pirates which always carry in
their ships, flags of peace, when they intend nothing but war; that when
they hold out those flagges, their enemies may hold them for friends, and so
become their prisoners; and that therefore it behooves them to watch
continually, and carefully to keep Centinell over themselves, and in time of
peace, more then in time of war. The ship that saileth, many times incurres
more danger when the Sea is quiet, then when storms arise: for in the calm
water, the Sailors ride without care, or dread of danger; but in time of
tempest they provide for every mischief that may befall.

I will tell them, that sinners Vitia catenata inter se.
are linked and chayned, nexed and twisted together, so as one still draws on
another, and the lesser ever a greater; that Satan that foul thief, and old
Setter, has in each pack of Thieves, little sins, (...). in lib. Sapient.
like little boys, to creep in at the windows, or other narrower passages,
and then open doors for greater sinners, like greater thieves, to enter sreely,
and so spoil the goodman of the house of all goodness and virtue, at their
pleasure.

I will teach sinners of Sin of presumption.
presumption, that as God is merciful, so he is just; that we must not so
remember Volo te praesumere, ne diffidas, (...) praesumere, ne torpescas. Bern.
Ep. 87.
his mercy, as we forget his Justice. Our Lord is sweet, but yet upright. All
his ways are mercy and truth. These be the two feet, whereby he walks
Psalm.
in his ways; that every sinner that will truly turn to God, must lay
handfast on both these feet: for if he lay hold on Bernard.
mercy only, letting pass justice and truth, he must needs perish by
presumption; If he apprehend Justice only, without mercy, he cannot but perish
by desperation. Let him therefore kiss both these feet, that he may, in
respect of Gods justice, retain fear; and in respect of his mercy, conceive
hope. I (...) teach them to tune their notes to my ditty; I (...) Psalm. 101. 1
sing of mercy and (...) I will not sing unto thee (...) mercy alone, nor
judgment alone (O God) (...) mercy and judgment joined together. I will teach
Absit vt redundantia clementiae coelestis, libidinem faciat humanae temeritatis.
them, what an absurd consequence, and unkindly kind of reasoning it is: In as
much as God is merciful, loving and long suffering, therefore I will abuse his
Tertul. de poenit.
mercy, and continue my Prauicordis est ideo (...) esse, quia Deus bonus est.
Bern. in Cantic.
wicked courses; I will do what likes my wilful appetite; that, the
Argument, in moral congruity, as well as logical divinity, holds strongly in
the quite contrary form; God is gracious, and expects my conversion; and the
longer he expects, the heavier will be my punishment when it comes, if I
neglect, or rather contemn the riches of his patience and gentleness; and
therefore I ought, even to day, before to morrow, to hear his voice, and
presently to accept of his undeserved mercy.

Whereunto I will add another consideration, of great weight and much fear;
and that is, Though Qui (...) poenitenti veniam, non (...). August.
God promise pardon to him that repents, yet he does not promise repentance to
him that offends: (Repentance is his gift alone.) Though he offer thee grace
to day, thou know not whether he will offer it again to morrow; though he
afford thee life and memory this week, little do thou know whether thou
shall enjoy these favors the next.

Finally, I will teach them to take my whole period together, and not to catch
at one piece only, for their advantage, or disadvantage rather, (which is
against the rules both of Law and Logic,) for when I have said; The eyes
Psalm. 34. 15
of the Lord are upon the just, and his ears are bent to hear his prayers: I
add on the other side, in the same sentence: But the face of the Lord is
against them that do evil, to root out their memory from off the earth.

My last Corollarie and conclusion shall be; Blessed is the man that fears
the Lord: Therefore serve the Psalm. 2. 11.
Lord in fear, and rejoice in him with reverence.

I will teach transgressors Sin of Desperation.
in all kinds and degrees, that they do not at any hand, through the terror
of their own sins, or apprehension of Gods displeasure, either by cowardice
or carelessness, quite despair of Gods abundant mercy. I will use my best
skill, and bestow the most powerful persuasion I can devise or find (...) for
the purpose. I will tell them of my Soliloquie, and the secret conference
between me and my soul, to this effect; Though, unhappy man that I am, I have
not alone slipped, but fallen; and not fallen only, but fallen foully too: though
I have not only done much evil carelessly; but This Evil; This Evil in Gods
sight contemptuously, (This Evil, which is a massy chain of enormous
iniquities, nexed and linked together, strongly binding, and grievously
burthening my soul:) yet will I not do worse, or rather, what is worst of
all; I will not still add sin unto sin; I will not fill up the full
measure of my wickedness, with that horrible sin of sins; I will not stab
my soul (if I may so say) with the deadly dagger of final impenitencie; for
the depth of desperation, is the height of impious abomination. I will not
wilfully wayue, and scornefully reject his general, free, and gracious Pardon,
proclaimed to all penitent sinners, without any exception or limitation at all.
His benefits are infinite, endless, and inestimable; therefore the Origin,
fountain, and wellspring of all these favors, graces, and goodturnes, is
infinite, unmeasurable, and far surpassing all the compass of man's
understanding. But specially, he loves souls, which are his by a manifold
interest; created by him, when they were not; saved by him, when they were
lost; marked for his, with the stamp of his own Image. Far be it therefore
from me to fall into that desperate resolution, which, of all other offenses
upon earth, does most exasperate his anger, and does deprive his divine
Majesty of that most excellent property, wherein he chiefly delights and
glories, which is, his infinite and unspeakable mercy.

I am his workmanship (his hands have made me, and fashioned me:) The workman
cannot choose but be favorable to his own work, especially so excellent and
bountiful a workman as he is, toward such a work as man is, framed to his
own shape and likeness. He is my Creator, and thereby privy to my frailety,
of how brittle and weak a metal I was (...) 1 3.
made. He is my Father, (which is the title of the greatest love and
conjunction that nature has left to men in this world;) and Facile impetratur
quod filius (...). Tertul. de (...).
therefore cannot but affect his child: His divine Majesty is so earnest and
vehement to give assurance in this behalf; that being not contented to
represent his love unto us by the love of a fathers heart; he goes further
yet, and protests that his heart is more tender toward us, then the heart of
any mother can be to the only child of her own womb. Can the mother Esa. 49.
forget her own infant? if she could, yet can I not forget or reject thee.
Nay, he is my heavenly Father, who in Tam pater nemo, tam (...) nemo. (...).
depoenit.
this perfection of true fatherly love, so far exceeds all earthly parents
put together, as in power, clemency and goodness he surpasses the infirmity
of his feeble creatures; and therefore his bowels and entralls of tender and
endless mercy, will be moved (I know) in commiseration toward me,
unfeignedly returning unto him.

Nay, I have yet a further claim, and title to his gracious favor and
compassionate mercy, in that he is not only my Creator, and Father, but my
Redeemer Job 19. 25.
also. I know (with holy Job) that my Redeemer lives, for I have (...) it by
his (...), and (...); that (...) will (...) (...) (...) (...). 16. 1.
hell, nor suffer his (...) to see (...). (...) this be not (...) to the (...)
by the act (...) execution and performance (...), (...) in the fullness of
time, it will be accomplished and acted, to the admiration of all the earth,
and the amplification of his eternal glory. Not his Son only, but his only
Son, will take my nature upon him, become flesh of my flesh, and bone of my
bones, will vouchsafe to be borne of a Virgin, descended of mine own race and
pedigree; he will converse upon the earth, in the similitude of sinful flesh;
he will, in the nature and property of man, not only suffer hunger and
thirst, but also all manner of indignities, affronts, and disgraces; he will
be content to be beaten, and buffeted, launced, and pierced, wounded and
crucified for me, and for my sake; he will shead his blood upon the Cross,
as a malefactor, to satisfy Gods justice, and to purchase my freedom from
hell, and everlasting damnation. And sithence he has in his immutable decree
given him, and will in his time, apparently give him to such a shameful death,
for gayning me unto him; how should he not, but with him give all Romans 8. 31.
things else whatsoever? I know and am assured, that he who believes in Christ
to come, has as (...) and full interest in his excessive love, and this
inestimable benefit, as he who shall believe in him, when and after he is
come. The times must be changed, (...) variata (...), non fides. August. in
Psalm. 51.
but it is and will be one and the same faith, yea and one and the same object
of faith, in substance, in all times.

His promises of pardon, whereby he has obliged himself to sorrowful
sinners, are affectionate, absolute, and universal. First, Whosoever shall 2.
Cor. 6.
depart from his wicked ways, and turn unto him, shall be received of him.
Secondly, At what time soever Ezekiel. 18.
a sinner does repent him of his sin, and turn to him, his wickedness shall
not hurt him. Thirdly, If your sins were as Esa. 1.
red as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow.

How then can I mistrust my self to be excluded from this assurance of mercy,
wherein all sorts of people, all kinds of sins, all times and seasons are
comprehended? His Love, that calls me to repentance, is inexplicable. His
Truth, and certainty of promise, is infallible. His Power of performance, is
omnipotent and endless.

This threefold cord, or rope (which cannot be broken) binds me fast to the
bar of his mercy, and will not suffer me to slip away, or start a side, till
I have obtained full remission of all my sins.

Cain, my unhappy precedent Genesis 4.
in murder, did more offend God, by those words; My sin is greater, then
that I can August.
hope for pardon, then, by all his former iniquities. My confidence in this
mercy is assured, and my hope invincible; therefore I resolve, though he kill
me, Job 13. 15.
yet to trust in him, with holy Job.

I will tell such hopeles, and retchlesse persons, that my sins are set
before them, for caution; my repentance, for imitation; that they which stand,
may warily look to their August. in Psalm. 51.
footing, that they fall not; and they that have (...), may rise hopefully and
speedily, by (...), and not ingulfe themselves into the depth of all detestable
enormities, specially the gulf of desperation.

I will tell them, that their vouching of my example, to extenuate, is an
August. ibid.
odious circumstance, to aggrauate, such sins as I have committed. So as he
that shrowdes himself under this sinful shadow, offends, even in that
respect, in a higher degree then I did; because he wittingly propounds an
unwarrantable precedent to warrant his wickedness; whereas I fell only through
frailety, without alleging, or thinking of any such pretense or pattern. I
will tell them, that Nathan the Prophet was sent to rowze me out of security,
but I am sent as a Prophet August. in Psalm. 51.
to raise them to repentance, and to rescue them from (...): I will advise
them, that are prone to (...) God his bundant mercy, to hear (...) with (...);
to hear (...), and (...) with me; to hear me wayling and weeping, and to
join their tears (...) mine; to hear me reformed, and to rejoice with me;
that howsoever (...) could not stay the current of their own sins, they stop
not the (...) of Gods mercy, (...) they have sinned; that howsoever they could
not bar sin from entering in, they exclude not hope of pardon, out of the doors
of their sinful souls.

Have thou sinned? Repent, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 51.
Have thou sinned a thousand times wretchedly? Repent a thousand times
unfeignedly. This is the only Oil, that may be powered into thy wounded soul,
and afflicted conscience, to revive, and refresh it at all times. This
sovereign salve is of power, to cure, and recover thy most incurable, and
desperate sores, and diseases of sin, yea, if thou be upon thy deathbed, and
ready to breathe out thy soul and spirit, even at the last gasp, fear not to
repent, Nec enormitas criminis, nec extremit as temporis.
for that Gods mercy is not restrained, either by the enormity of Crime, or
extremity of time; and for that, between the bridge Inter pontem and fontem.
and the brook (as they say) when thou art fallen from the one, and not fallen
into the other, Gods grace may interuene, to save thee from downing.

Howbeit, let not this ftrong water, and most comfortable Cordial of the
tears of repentance, make thee negligent, to delay thy conversion to God;
both, because repentance will not come at thy beck and call, (being by custom
habituated in sin;) and because also, though true repentance be never too
late, yet late Sera (...), (...) vera.
repentance is seldom true, and such as it should be: but let it only revive
and animate thy confidence in Gods bottomless mercy, if, and when thou art in
the greatest straights, and come to the last exigent, to preserve thee from
utterly fainting, and falling into the deadly swoone of desperation.

The impious persons, or sinners shall be converted unto thee. I do not, I
may not, say, I will convert sinners unto thee; for conversion of sinners, is a
peculiar belonging to thine own Jurisdiction; a case reserved to thy power
alone; a branch of thy Prerogative and honor, which thou will not impart to
any other. Well I may plant by my instructions and admonitions; I may water by
my practice and example: but it is the influence of thy grace, that must give
the increase. I will by the assistance of thy Spirit, do my best and uttermost
endeavor, with fidelity and diligence ministerially to help, and cooperate
with thee the prime Agent and principal Efficient in this most difficult and
important affair: for a greater business it is to regenerate, then to create;
to build a new house upon a false and rotten foundation, then it was to erect
the first Fabric. And I hold my self the more obliged to this service,
because I have not only scandalized thine own people, the Jews, by my
heathenish iniquities; but I have caused thy holy name to be blasphemed among
the Gentiles also: for me thinks, I hear thine own people whispering and
murmuring among themselves, in this sort; If this King and Prophet did believe
what he pretends and professes, his behavior would be suitable to his belief;
his actions answerable to his profession; his words and deeds would better tune
together, and not make such a harsh discord as they do. Surely, sithence
works are surer testimonies then words, of our hearts affections, we may
justly conceive, that he uses Religion only, as a stalking horse, to serve
the turn for policy and worldly respects, that he thinks and says in his
heart, though not with his mouth, There is no God.

The Gentiles, on the other side, who are Aliens from God his covenant, and
strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, me thinks, I hear them boldly, and
broadly speaking to this effect: That King that seeks by all means, both of
prowess, and policy, to reduce us under his obedience, to the worship of his
God, and the embracing of his Religion, we see how he carries himself; we
can discern by our light, that he violates the law of nature imprinted in all
men's hearts; that he shamelesly defiles the beds of his Subjects, and kills them
cruelly and treacherously, at his pleasure, to attain his lustful desires.
We will be still irreligious, rather, of no religion, then his religion; we
will submit our selves to any Princes yoke; we will fall into any man's hands,
rather the^ his.

To make amends for these faults, and to repair these ruins, I will teach at
home and abroad, Jews and Gentiles, such as err either in Religion, or
conversation, the ways of God and godliness, by instruction, by discipline,
by example; what has fallen to the ground by my evil, I will build up again
by my good demeanor; my light shall so shine before Domestickes and
Foreigners; before mine own Subjects, and before others, both Princes and
people, as they shall glorify the God of Israel, they shall believe Psalm. 48.
1. and 95. 3.
and say, Great is the Lord, and worthy to be served above all gods; Blessed is
the Lord, even the God of Israel for ever.

14 Deliver me from blood (...), O Lord, thou that art the God of my salvation.
AMong all my sins, which are sans number, and many of them heinous in their
quality; this horrible and crying sin of murder lies heauiest upon my
distressed soul, in the general muster of my sins; the shedding of so much
innocent blood, makes the most fearful and hideous apparition to my tormented
conscience. In regard whereof I cry out, Deliver me, not from blood, but from
bloods, in the plural number.

I begged first indefinitely, (...) 2.
that God would cleanse me from mine iniquities; then, that he would blot out
all my transgressions universally. Verse 9.
I presented and iterated this petition in humility and faith, knowing that my
prayers, if they were not so accompanied, could not prevail. Howbeit, because
this sin seems so enormous, so exorbitant, that it can hardly be comprised
and inuolued in the generality of all my sins; I send up a single petition as
a special messenger for more surety, in no other errand, but to solicit at
the Court of Heaven, that this grievous, this bloody sin, may be not only
necessarily employed and infolded, but expressly named and specified in my
general and gracious pardon.

Thou did in thy Leuiticall Leuit. 7. 26 27.
Law forbid thy people to eat any flesh, with the blood thereof (whatsoever
soul eats any manner of blood of Foul, or Beast, that soul shall be cut
off from the people) that thou might make them so much the more to abhor the
blood of man, wherein his life consists.

Deliver me (O God) from the guilt of that blood which I have spilt by the
(...) of Captain (...), and so many Soldiers under his command, from the
punishment of that sin threatened by Nathan, (that blood should not depart
from my house) and finally from future blood, that I may never embrew my hands
in blood hereafter.

The tears of those widows, whose husbands were slain in that disastrous
assault made at Rabbah; the cries of those children, whose Fathers then lost
their lives; have mounted up to (...), do frame my Enditement, and make my
Process against me before thy Tribunal, and do call instantly for judgment,
according to the just law of Retaliation; He that sheddeth man's blood, his
blood shall be shed.

Wherefore, that I may the sooner obtain my pardon in such latitude as I
desire it, I do re-enforce my prayer with all manner of zeal and
earnestness. Deliver me, O God, thou that art the God of my salvation. I
double thy Name, when I tender this single supplication, hoping by my
affectionate insinuation, and vehement compellation, to draw thy gracious
compassion toward me: I take hold of thee, as it were, with both my hands: I
cry incessantly for pardon of this sin, which cries so eagerly in thine ears
for vengeance against me.

Thou God of my salvation. Psalm. 3. 8.
I said elsewhere, that salvation is the Lords, because it can flow from no
other fountain; but here I desire to apply it particularly, to draw the water
to mine own Mill, and to appropriate it, as it were, wholly to my self. Thou
art of that gracious nature, as we cannot better please thee, then by
challenging a special interest in thy love, by assuring our selves that thou
art ours: so that howsoever our premises be general for remission of sins,
our conclusion must be special, proper, and peculiar: Thou art my God, and the
God of my salvation.

I will sing joyfully, or aloud of thy Righteousness.] The satisfaction should
be answerable to the trespass done, and the retribution to the benefit
received, in some proportion. As to a greater sin, a deeper repentance is
due; so for a more bountiful favor, a larger return of thankfulness is, (of
congruence) required. I have grieved beyond measure for my bloody sin; for
the inestimable benefit of my free pardon, I know not what to render again. In
brief, I can return nothing but praises and thanks; (a poor requital for
so rich a mercy:) But sithence I can yield no better, no other; it is meet I
should improoue this, and set it forth to the utmost advantage. Wherefore I
will sing joyfully, with a lively spirit, with a cheerful heart, I will sing
vocalissime Alleluia. My tongue shall become a Trumpet of thy praises, which
shall sound them out lustily and loudly: I will bestow all my breath and
strength in proclayming thine honor: I will become a chief Chanter: I will
eleuate the note in the highest strain: I will so chant out thy praises, as
thou shall take notice of it abundantly, and so, as the noise may be heard, not
only in my private Chapel, or Oratory, but in the chief Cathedral Churches,
in the greatest congregations on Earth, yea, even in the blessed Synod of
Angels and Saints in heaven. Nay, I will not only sing my self, but I will
call in others also to make up a full Quire: O come, (...) us sing Psalm. 95.
loudely, let us (...) rejoice, etc.

Thy righteousness, that is, Thy faithfulness and truth, in accomplishment of
thy gracious promises to such, as truly and sincerely repent, and humbly and
hopefully crave pardon for their sins: for true justice does much consist in
the due performance of promises. Thou thy self have made thy self our debtor,
Debitorem se fecit, deus non accipiendo, Sed (...), (...), etc.
not by receiving from us. but by promising to us. No man can say unto thee,
Render, Lord, what thou have received: but every Augus. Psalm. 25. 10
man may, and must say; Perform, O Lord, what thou have promised.

All thy ways are mercy and truth; Mercy, whereby thou forgiuest sinners, and
Truth, whereby thou make good thy promises. O then, how happy are the people,
whose God is the Lord, who by his (...) promise is become their faithful
debtor, and whose justice gives assurance of his mercy, whose mercy and truth
are met together, and whose righteousness and peace have kissed each other! So
as by a reverent confidence, and a holy kind of boldness, I may (...) thee in
this (...), (...) by the worth of (...), but by (...) of thy promise, not to
lay my sins to my charge; be they never so many, never so great, I may
plead my interest in the death of my Savior, and in thy faithful promise,
and free pardon, to this effect:

O my God, thou that art the God of my salvation; it is agreeable to divine and
humane justice, to keep promise, to perform covenant. In the new and sacred
covenant, it is the Article of Inprimis (as they say) that thou will forgive
the sins of thy people: and remember their iniquities no more. Make good then
thy word, and full agreement, really and effectually. It stands not with thy
justice to exact twice one and the same debt of me. My suerty and elder
Brother Christ Jesus, has paid the debt which I owed, has suffered the
punishment which I deserved: wherefore enter not into judgment with thy
unworthy servant, O Lord; but for the (...) of his death and passion, accepted
by thee; with free consent, for full satisfaction, let me be acquitted and
discharged of all my transgressions whatsoever. I will rely and repose my self
securely, upon thy word and promise, because thou have ratified and confirmed
it with an oath, with a solemn oath. Thou have sworn by thy self, (because
there is no greater to swear by) by thy (...); the Lord Jehovah Psalm. 132. 11.
swear unto David; Truth, that is, a true oath, a faithful promise: or Truth,
that is, God swear unto David; He will not turn away the face of his Anointed,
his seed shall endure for ever: thou have sworn by thy life; I will not the
death of a Ezech. 33. 11.
sinner, if he repent, he shall live. Oh happy people, for O nos soelicis
quorum causd Deus jurat! O nos (...), si nec Deo, etc. Tertul. (...).
whose cause thou vouchsafest to swear! Oh most miserable wretches, if we
believe thee not when thou swearest! Thy word (O Lord) is an (...) in it self
and of it self, (so faithful thou art) but to give us full (...), thou do
condescend to our capacity and infirmity, thou make assurance to men, after
the manner of men (with whom, a promise clothed with an oath, seems of greater
strength and validity, then a bare and naked word) and therefore out of
abundance of thy love, do use a protestation, or adiuration (otherwise
needless) to remove out of our incredulous hearts, all distrust, and color
of dubitation.

15 Open thou my lips, O Lord, and, etc.
But I have been too forward (now I think of it) to engage my self, so
deeply, to sing joyfully, and sound loudly thy righteousness. I confess I
have promised more the^ I can perform; I have assumed and presumed, to do
that (...) is out of my power, unless thou (O Lord) be pleased, by thy
gracious favor, to enable me for accomplishment thereof. It is graceful to me
to show my sefe grateful to thee; yea, it is just, that for the singular
benefit of thy Justice, in performing promised and undeserved mercies, I (...)
render all possible thanks, and return all manner of praises, unto thee; but
this I am not able to make good, without thy goodness. As I could not repent,
nor believe; so neither can I yield thanks or praises, but by thy gifts and
grace alone.

I am blind, and cannot see; deaf, and cannot hear; dumb, and cannot speak
thy wonders, thy words, thy praises, unless thou open mine eyes, ears, and
lips. It is thou alone that must speak in me, that must work in me, both to
will and to do, nay, thou must do in me, and for me, what thou requirest to be
done by me; else it will be unsaid, and undone; thou must be all in all to
(...), else all will be nothing.

Who is he among the sons of Adam, that cannot sing and say any thing that
is evil, by his own power and will, by Satan's instigation, (howbeit, not
without God his permission) that cannot speak vain and wicked words, that
cannot sing wanton and ribald songs, scandalous and scurrilous libels, that
cannot blaspheme thee, slander his neighbors, that cannot flatter his
superiors basely, lie to his equals cunningly, reproach his inferiors
scornefully, that cannot say and unsay, swear and forswear, and what not? But
it is a good thing to sing praises to thee; That he cannot do, nor say ought
else that is good, unless thou put the thoghts into his heart, and the words
into his mouth. Wherefore open thou my lips, O Lord, circumcise them, vnty the
strings of my tongue, and (...), (not before) my mouth shall show forth thy
praise, My lips shall speak thy praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes.

It is possible for a man, that is stirred up and prevented by thy grace, to
think and conceive well, what is to be said: but to utter and deliver that
well, is a further blessing, and requires a new supply and help of grace, for
guiding and governing the tongue, in that behalf. Nay, there is yet a further
and subsequent grace required, to take a fit occasion and opportunity,
seasonably to utter what is well conceived and digested, both in regard of the
speaker and hearers, that all interuenient impediments may be removed and
taken away. And in our case, this is the more requisite, because our prayers
and praises commonly go together (as is meet) so as at one and the same time,
we are, both to encounter Satan (who is then most busy to distract and
disturb us,) and God himself, to whom by the fervent importunity of our
prayers, we must offer a kind of violence, as Jacob did, when he was said to
have wrastled with thee.

Wherefore there is required a long Chain, fastened by many several linckes
of grace, to bind together this blessed work, of setting forth thy just and
due praises.

My mouth shall show forth thy praise,] not only in Psalms and Hymns, with
all manner of Iubilation, but in the instruction, admonition and correction of
wicked and impious ones, and the reduction of them to thy law and lore. Nay, I
will play the Advocate, and open my mouth for widows, orphans, and other
miserable creatures, such as are tonguetyed and cannot, as are ouer-awed, and
dare not speak for themselves. I will in earnest and effectual manner
recommend the care and protection of them also, to all my subordinate
Magistrates and Ministers. He that speaks for such Clients, may be said to be
thine own mouth, because thou (...) the Patron of all those that are
oppressed, for want of assistance and defense, and men undertake their causes
by thy special assignement and deputation, which redounds to thy praise and
glory, in an extraordinary manner.

True it is, that the thankfulness of the heart, is the heart of
thankfulness; there is the wellspring. The heart, as a King, commands this
duty to be done; the tongue, like an Herald, sounds the Trumpet. As the heart
is the heart, and the tongue the trumpet; so the life, is the life of
thankfulness, it must be acted indeed, as well as proclaimed with the mouth.
Then will the tune be perfect, when there is a true consort, between the
heart, and the tongue, and the deed. The thanks and praises must be
cordial, vocal, and real, all together.

I do sometimes, in contemplation and admiration of thy wonderful blessings
and bountiful favors, wherewith thou have laden my soul (as it were) break
out into this exclamation and interrogation; Quid retribuam? What shall Quid
retribuam.
I render to thee, Lord, for all Psalm. 116. 12.
thy mercies? In an amazed astonishment, when I can give my self no
satisfactory answer, knowing, that all I can do, is less then nothing, in
comparison of what thou have done to me, or I should and would do to thee; yet
thinking Inuenit (...) aliquid. Aug.
that I find (as it were) something, I resolve to make some show of return at
least, and to take the Cup of salvation, or of health, and call upon the name
of (...), according to the custom of our Church and people, who for benefits
received, use to offer peace or thankeofferings, whereof they eat and rejoice
before the Lord, and at their banquets take up the Cup of wine, in their hands,
and bless God (called thereupon, The Cup of Blessing.)

When I seek seriously what I might render unto thee, I find nothing but what
is thine already, and therefore I must desire thee to give me, to give thee,
and when all is done, I must give thee of thine own, else I can give thee
nothing.

For who has prevented thee, or been aforehand with Job 22. 2.
thee? Who has given thee first? Wherefore, when 1 Cor. 4. 7.
the question is pursued and pressed yet further, who has given me this Cup of
salvation? I must ingeniously confess, that even thou have furnished me with
this kind of retribution, I cannot make this good without thy goodness; I
cannot praise thee, unless (...) open my lips with the key of thy grace, and
tune my tongue and voice to sing; Praise thou Psalm. 103.
the Lord, etc. O my soul.

I have nothing of mine own to give but my sin, and that may not be presented
unto thee. My sin is mine indeed, and not thine, (I have the full interest and
ownership thereof.) Whatsoever I have else is thine, and not mine, thou art the
sole Author and proprietary thereof. Mine is only the fruition and use by thy
permission, and as a Tenant at will. I am but instrumentum animatum, a mere
instrument, living by thy breath.

Thou must open my lips, else my mouth cannot utter thy praises. The very sound
and voice in me, is thine, I am but the Echo to resound and return it again.
As the Rivers flow from the the sea, and reflow back into it: so even thy
praises must come from thy (...), to set forth thy glory.

Thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it, or had given it.] In regard
of the heavy burden of many sins, oppressing my soul, and the fearful
apprehension of thy just indignation conceived against me, to ease and free my
self, to appease and please thee, what would I not do? what would I not
suffer? what would I not offer? But I have nothing whereby I might redeem thy
favor toward me. For if I had Mountains of Gold, if I had Rivers of Oil,
if I had ten thousand sacrifices to bestow upon thee, it booted me nothing;
they are all thine own already; and besides, thou make not account or
esteem of any of these things at all, which I do not deliver to disallow, or
altogether disualue all kind of (...), by slaughter of Beasts and Birds,
appointed by thee, and prescribed by thine own Law; but because these are
signs only, and representations to the weak capacities of mortal men, of
that real, effectual, renowned, and eternal sacrifice, once to be offered
for the redemptition of mankind. I know (O Lord) by the illumination of thy
holy Spirit, that it is an inward and internal, not an outward or external
sacrifice, which thou (being a spirit) delightest in: Thou look upon the
heart, and pious affections thereof alone.

I conceive, that to draw (...). cont. Mar cio.
thine own people from the superstitious Idolatry whereunto the Gentiles
(through the blindness of their understanding, and the delusions of Satan)
were so prone, and so much addicted, and to teach them to embrace such worship
of thee, as thou should prescribe, not themselves (...), thou have
instituted sundry kinds of sacrifices, upon several occasions to be offered
unto thee, with an indulgent respect to our infirmity, (who being carnal,
delight in outward shows, without which we cannot so easily comprehend those
inward services and spiritual duties, to be performed by us) and ever with
relation to the true substance of the hearts affections, to be erected, and
consecrated wholly to thine honor.

For thou have not (...) or (...) for thy self. (...) would not drink the
blood of Bulls and Goats. (...). 50.
The eternal God does neither hunger nor thirst, etc. But a single and sincere
mind fearing God, of those that offer such things as they have from thee, is a
sweet smelling and well-pleasing sacrisice to thee, by thy gracious
acceptance: who do not so much regard the thing that is done, in this kind,
as the mind where with it is done, and the end wherefore it is done, to wit,
thine own glory.

Thou do not respect the shadow, but the substance; not the shel, but the
kernel; not the chafe, but the corn; not the sign, but the thing signified.
At least thou doeft not esteem the type without the truth, nor the figure in
any degree of comparison, with that which is represented thereby, and therewith
to be presented unto thee, that is, a broken heart.

The sacrifices of God (in the plural number) because this one is many
sacrifices, this one is all the sacrifices that thou expectest at our hands.

A broken heart, a contrite spirit, (diverse words importing one and the same
thing) is a heart wounded, a spirit dejected and perplexed with the sight and
sense of sin committed, mourning and melting into tears, through the remorse
of conscience, grievously lamenting that it was so wretched and wicked, as
gracelesly and ungratefully to reject the just laws of so powerful a Judge,
and to neglect the kind inuitations of so pitiful a Father, and all for a
little vain, idle, foolish, frothy, and fruitless pleasure, which was mingled
with (...) in that little time, wherein it was so greedily (...), and
pleasingly (...).

Now, (...) does thy gracious goodness wonderfully show and (...) forth it
self, that thou not only (...) to teach us what to do, and what to say, how
to (...) our actions, and frame our supplications, that, both in word and deed,
we may please thee; but also when we have offended and displeased thee; to
tell us how to pacify and appease thee again; The Sacrifices of God are, etc.

Nay further, thou do not require such a sacrifice, as must be procured and
purchased from abroad, with much care and cost, far fetched and dear bought
(as they say) but such a sacrifice as we have, or may have, in our own
bosoms. (...) a te extra (...). PP.
to quaeritur: Thou requirest nothing from me, but what is within me.

Beyond all this, thou do us the honor, and trustest us, with the office of
Priests that we may be sure to see this Sacrifice duly performed. We must our
selnes, for our (...), offer up our (...), in humility and contrition (which is
(...) only (...) and unbloody (...)) (...) and (...) thee.

Every (...) as a (...) Priest, (...) a victime (...). Aug in (...).
within (...), to offer the franke-Incense that must be put upon the Altar, in
his own bowels; in his own heart, a Sacrifice, that is of force, to (...)
and win thee to compassion, he need not seek for a beast abroad to
slaughter, and burn to ashes, he has within himself, that he may and should
kill. He may slay sin, he may mortify his earthly members, he may strike with
the hammer of sound repentance, upon the hard Anuile of his stony heart, till
it be mollified, bruised, and brayed to pieces, and then it will be thy time
and turn (as it is thy greatest honor,) to bind up and heal the wounded and
broken hearted.) He may kill and sacrifice to thee, his Bull of pride, his
Goat of lasciviousness, his Ram of stubbornenes, his Birds of flying and
wandering imaginations, and so the rest of his carnal and sensual affections
which being beastly, do turn men into beasts, defacing that Image of thee,
wherein they were created to holiness, and righteousness; The moral whereof,
is this; He may, in a life of virtue and piety offer up, the death of his vices
and iniquities to thee.

He that repents his sins, Omnis que^ poenitet, rixatur secum. Aug. in Psalm. 33.
does chide and braule, quarrel and brabble, he does expostulate and fall out
with himself, in this tune; Oh unhappy wretch, why would, how could
thou, so basely stoop, to the lure of fleshly wantonness, of wordly profit,
of spiteful revenge, of treacherous infidelity? how could thou be induced to
sell thine inheritance for a mesle of Pottage, thy ever during treasure in
heaven, for a little flitting and unconstant trash of the world? What fruit
have thou now of (...) the forbidden fruit, of enjoying those sinful and
momentany pleasures, whereof thou art so much ashamed? was not the terrible
voice of the Law, thundering out hell and damnation, of power to fright thee
from rebellion, were not the sweet promises of the Gospel, of force to inuit
thee to the (...) and constant service of God?

Nay, beyond chiding and brauling, a true penitent, must chastise and punish
himself. Thy Lustice, O God, although it be fully satisfied, by that all
sufficient obedience and propitiatory Sacrifice of the Lamb, slain from the
beginning of the world, yet as a fruit of our repentance, expects from us a
holy revenge upon our selves. We must judge our Peccatores, vindica (...),
exige de te poenas, crucia teipsum, etc. Aug. in Psa. 140
selves, that we be not judged, and least our judgments become fruitless
and elusory, We must put them in execution, severely, without pity, or
partiality. Let us therefore prevent his face of Majesty, his countenance of
Authority, by confession, (which confession, is a profession of forsaking our
former faults.) The Judge Currat poenitentia (...) sententia. Cbrys.
we cannot, the judgment we may prevent, if we take the opportunity, and
repent truly and timely of our sins, thou will mercifully and graciously
repent thee of the judgments, denounced and doomed against us. Therefore it be
houeth every man, to keep a Court at home, and therein to sit, as chief
justice, to indict and arraigne himself at the bar of his own conscience,
and where he finds the fault, there to inflict punishment. In as much as at
these Assizes, the heart must needs be found the greatest offender, because
from the heart does flow, all vain and sinful imaginations, all idle and
wicked words, all lewd and scandalous actions; let him do Justice upon his
heart, in the first place, let him correct the pride of it, by humiliation, the
wantonness of it, by contrition, the iolity of it by sorrow, the stubornenesse
of it by weeping, the gluttony of it by fasting, the covetousness of it by
almes-giuing; and so according to the rule of Physic, cure each contrary by
his contrary affection.

The physic must be applied to that part of the body, which is ill affected,
the salve laid upon the place that is sore. Where the sin breeds and swells,
there must the sinner cut and lance. He must prick his heart to the quick,
and let out store of tears, as the former, and latter rain. As our hearts
have been fatted and pampered (as it were) with sin; so they should grow
lean and meagre again, by sorrow for sin.

Look how much the In quantu^ tibi non peperceris, in tantum tibi Deus parcet.
Tertul. de poenit.
less I spare my self, so much the more will thou spare me. My repentance
does in a sort execute thy vengeance, and with a temporal vexation, does
prevent and avoid thine eternal damnation, by casting me down, it lifts me
up, by making me ugly in mine own, it presents me pure in thine eyes, by
accusing, it does excuse, by condemning, it does acquit me.

It is a kind of unhappiness, to be seared and cauterized with an hot iron,
and fretted with an eating powder; but those means and medicines, which do
cure by sharpness and sowernesse, by the benefit which they procure, do
excuse their distastfulnes, and by the succeeding profit, do allay the present
pain.

By sin, thy spirit takes occasion to increase grace, not by the nature of
sin, but by the soueraignety of that spirit, which even of sins makes a
plaster against sin. For I being as sick of sorrow as of sin, may hopefully
resort to thee, the Physician of my soul, whose end of coming into the world
is, to cure the sick, especially such as feel themselves sick, enen at the
heart.

I must break my golden Exodus 32.
Calfe, that is, any idol of sin, which my corrupt heart does serve and
worship, I must burn it with zeal, and with contrition grind it to powder,
and then strowing it upon the water of tears, drink it up again. By this thy
gracious means, an Antidote will be drawn out of poison, the oil will cure
the bitings of Scorpions, the worm will gnaw the wood, the moth the cloth that
bred it, the very excrements of my sinful soul, like dung and manor, will
fatten and make it fruitful in goodness.

The hunted and wounded Tertul. de poeniten.
Heart, by eating of an herb knows how to help (...).
and heal himself, and to make the arrow that pierced his ribs, to fall to
the ground.

The Swallow when she has put out the eyes of her young ones; knows by an
herb of her own name, how to restore their sight again.

Thy herb of grace, the juice whereof, is our repentance, does expel the
fiery darts of Satan shot by sin into our souls, and this eye-salue does
cause us though never so much blinded with sin, to see, both our error, in
committing, and thy mercy in pardoning our offenses.

The most powerful rhetoric, to move thee to pity, is repentance, and the
most delightful Music in thine ears, is that doleful ditty, tuned to a
trembling tongue and a quauering voice, peccaui in coelum, etc. Against thee,
against thee only, I have offended.

The string bends the Nerve curuabitur arcus. Igne Chalibs.
strongest bow, the fire mollifies the hardest steel, the Goats blood breaks
Adamas, Sanguine, cord Deus. Mantuan.
even the Adamant; I hope my hearts humble and melting repentance, will appease
thy hottest and heauiest indignation conceived against me.

The most worn and torn linen, by contusion and grinding in the Mill, makes
smooth and white paper. Even so, my most base and rotten rags of vanity and
wickedness, by true contrition (with thy benediction) will produce a clean
heart, and renew a right spirit within me. The corruption and consumption of
the one, will prove the generation or regeneration of the other.

To sacrifice and to kill, are expressed by one and the same word, in holy
writ, because every sacrifice was slain in thy Leuiticall law, but this
breaking of my heart, and offering my body in sacrifice to thee, is an
Evangelical sacrifice, because therein (which may Hostia (...) ctatur and
viuit. Crysol. in 12. Romans
seem strange) the sacrifice is slain, and yet lives: For it is my faith,
not my death, which thou seek, thou thirstest for my holy desires, not my
polluted blood, thou art appeased with my willingness to renounce the world,
not with my departure out of the world. This was Abraham the Father of all thy
faithful ones, his sacrifice, which thou requiredst of him. For what did
Abraham, but offer his own body in his Son? What did thou require of him but
his Faith, who, as thou did command Sicut offerri iussit sic non (...)
occidi. Chrysol.
his Son to be offered, so thou would not suffer him to be killed. I hold
it a wise and an aduantageous course in any man, to dye to sin that he may
live to righteousness, to mortify the old man, that he may be quickened in
the new, to dye daily, that he may live eternally. Wherefore I will dye, that
I may not dye, I will wound my heart with temporary contrition, that I may
avoid the deadly wounds of (...), who desires my everlasting destruction. I
will live a dying life, that I may not dye a (...) death: For thy sake are we
killed all the day long, and right dear in thy sight is this death of thy
Saints. Here I can be contented to stir up an holy emulation between those
that thus dye, and such as are stoned, burned, or otherwise done to death for
defense of thine honor and testimony of thy truth, Cyprian. de dupl. (...).
who, by excellency are termed Martyrs. These dye but once, and at once, their
pain is soon past, but the other dye a lingering death, they dye daily and
continually. It is accounted Genus (...) cito occidere. Seneca.
a mittigation of cruelty, and a kind of mercy, to put men to death quickly.
This Martyrdom Morsque minus poena^ quam mora (...). Maxim Eleg.
of mortification, God does highly prize, without that other, which is by
effusion of blood; this must go before that, Non Mar (...) Sola sanguinis
effusio consummat nec solam dat Palmam, exustio illa (...). Multi ducunt (...),
in (...) Aug.
and that without this, is of no worth, nor deserves the name of Martyrdom at
all. Whose Martyrdom shall I dare to compare, with the various, hideous and
tedious sufferings of holy Job? The best is; this contention for immortality,
Auth. de dupl. Martyr.
will not only be mortal, but soon at an end. The Martyrs of both sorts (so
I term them, because they dye in, and for thee) shall have fullness of
felicity to satiate their largest desires, for they both shall have, both, joy
without measure, and life without end, they shall both enjoy abundance of
pleasures, at thy right hand for evermore.

The sum of all is, I must drench and drown my sins, and the corrupt
affections of my wicked heart, in the sea of sorrowful repentance, and then my
soul will nimbly and swiftly swim to the land of promise, and haven of
happiness.

They that will offer this sacrifice, their hearts must fall from the high
mountain of pride, down into the lowest valley of humiliation, and they must
be bruised with the fall, and pained with the bruise. I will present an
humble, bruised, and sorrowful heart unto thee.

Thou, O Lord, art nigh to them that are of a contrite Job. 30. 29.
spirit, who speak to thee, in bitterness their soul, who cry like the
Draggon and Ostriche, for grief of their sins committed. They who cry, De
profundis, out of the August. in Psalm.
deep, are not in the deep their very cry reares and raises them up. Thine
ear is within man's heart, thou perceiuest the hearts first relenting, before
it come to the tongues relating. I did purpose, and say, within my self, I
will confess my Psalm. 32.
sin; and thou tookest notice thereof, and forgauest the iniquity of my sin.

Thus says the High and Esaias 57.
lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is holy, (...) dwell in the
High and holy place, with whom? with him that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to what end? to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the
heart of the contrite ones.

Thou will not despise, nay, thou will highly prize, graciously receive, (...)
and comfort thou will give them beauty for Esaias 61. 3.
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness, for the spirit
of heaviness. As a bone in the arm, or leg once Firmior est fides quam
(...), (...) de (...). (...). 5.
broken, and being well set again, grows stronger then if it had never been
broken: so our hearts, being well and soundly healed by true repentance, of the
sores and bruises of sin, become more firm and stable then ever they were
before. Thus my foul fall becomes foelix culpa, I am after a sort happy in my
unhappiness, for out of my great misery, through thy greatest mercy, a greater
happiness does arise, then ever I felt before.

18 O be favorable to Sion, for thy good pleasure.
HE that prays to thee, must not pray for himself alone. Howsoever he
begin with prayer for himself (when he has gained some interest in thee for
himself, he may the sooner prevail for others) he must end with prayer for
thy Church, he must not end till he have recommended the whole Church in his
prayers unto thee. He that is a lively and feeling member of that mystical
body, whereof thy Christ is the head, must pray for the whole body. As in the
natural body the heart feels the akeing of the head, and the head the
oppression of the heart, the heart and head both do resent a fellon in one of
the fingers, and the gowt in one of the toes, the stomach simpathizeth with
the brain, and the brain with the stomach; so, and much more is it in the
mystical body. True Christians are like those Twynnes, who are reported to
have wept and laughed, slept and waked, lived and dyed together. They must
weep with them that weep, mourn with those that lament, suffer hunger,
thirst, nakedness, and imprisonment, with others their brethren afflicted with
such crosses, participate with them in all their miseries and adversities what
soever. Captain Vriah mine honest servant could say; The Arc, and Israel, and
Judah abide in Tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord are
encamped in the open field; and shall I then go into my house to eat and
drink, and lie with my Wife: While they are in ieopardy, I cannot be in
iollity; while they live in fear, I cannot enjoy security.

Wherefore be favorable to Sion, to thy Church and chosen; I being one of
them, must abide one and the same fortune and condition with them.

This is that union of the Saints in thy Christ, that communion of them among
themselves, which cannot easily be comprehended, much less fully expressed,
and yet must it be constantly believed, and will be in some measure
continually resented.

The Church is represented by the name of Sion. Sion the holy Mountain in
Jerusalem, which thou love, from whence thy law should come, and where thou will dwell for ever. Jehovah has chosen Sion, and desired it for his Psalm.
132. 14.
seat, and said, This is my rest, here will I sit, even to perpetuity.

But besides this general, I acknowledge my self tied by a special
obligation to pray for Sion: for there was no let, on my part, but that the
whole kingdom of thy Christ might have fallen to the ground; for, I being
raised from the dunghill, to the Diadem; from the Park, to the Palace; from
following the Ewes great with young, to feed thy people, and anointed King, to
the end I should gather thy Church together, by my Apostasy have scattered and
wasted it, so far forth as there is great cause to fear the utter ruin and
desolation thereof.

Wherefore by force, and in remorse of conscience, I beg for the sustentation
and preservation of thy Church, through thy free and undeserved mercy. Thou, O
Lord, art the only founder of this choice Company and corporation. As out of
thy love only thou did single and select them from other refuse people,
before the foundation of the world, as by the same love thou have supported and
preserved them (amids all dangers and disasters) ever sithence; so, I beseech
thee still to continue thine ancient, accustomed, and affectionate favor to
them. Let not my unhappiness impeach their happiness; let not the dark and
foggy mists of my wickedness, eclipse the light and luster of thy countenance
toward them; let them be still as dear unto thee as the apple of thine own
eye; do not spill them for my faults, but spare me and them for thine own
sake.

Thou do often, and may always punish the people for the sins of their
Princes. Wherefore I beseech thee not only to pardon my sins to my self, but
to be favorable to my people also, and not to suffer them to smart, and suffer
for my offenses.

It is I that have sinned and done evil indeed, but as for these sheep, what
have they done? let thine hand be on me, and my Fathers house, but not on thy
people, that they should be plagued. Let not the contagion of my corruption
spread unto them, let not the punishments which I (their head) have deserved,
fall upon their heads; be favorable to them, howsoever thou be displeased with
me.

I do acknowledge, that look how far Kings do exceed other men in place and
dignity; so far do their sins surpass other men's sins in quality. Their
sins, though less in their own nature, are greater by reason of their
persons, they are crying, capital, and sinning sins. Wherefore it behooues me
to repent more deeply to pray more earnestly, not only for my self, but for
my people also, whom I have scandalized by my ill example, and exposed, as much
as in me lay, to thy heauiest vengeance.

For thy good pleasure, in thy good pleasure, according to thy good pleasure. I
can propound no other motive, to induce thee, I can name no Saint, nor Angel
in heaven, for whose (...) I should entreat thee. Therefore for thy good
pleasure, be favorable to Sion. No sacrifice, either without or within me is
sacred enough, no sincerity in my thoughts, no holiness in my words, no
uprightness in my actions, is of power to merit the least grace from thee. I
for my self, and as Procurator for thy Church, do renounce all right,
disclaim all desert, by means of any (...) all of these. It is thine own
loving kindness that must over come thee. There is no reason of thy love, but
thy love, no reason of thy good will, but thy good pleasure. Stat pro ratione
voluntas. Saluian.
Thy will is perfect Saluian.
justice, and stands for a law. Thou art not only loving, but love it self,
for thou Non Elegit (...), sed etc. Aug.
did love thy Church and chosen first, thou did not choose them worthy, but
by choosing, did make them worthy to inherit thy Kingdom, thou did Quare
gratia? quia gratis datur. Quare gratis datur? quia merita tua non (...), sed
beneficia Dei te (...). Aug. in Psalm. 30.
love them gratis, freely. Grace is not grace any way, unless it be free and
gracious every way, without any precedent merit, or so much as love, on our
parts.

Build thou the walls of Jerusalem.] I pray as for thy Church, so for thy
Commonwealth, Sion, thy Chuch, Ierasalem, thy City, Sion, thy holy
habitation, Jerusalem, the mother City of the Kingdom of Israel. I have done
wrong to both, and therefore desire to make reparation, to both. That I can in
no wise make, but by thy gracious favor, upon mine humble and earnest
supplication. Jerusalem, though a City of peace (as the word Salem imports) yet
must be prepared and fortified for war, It must have Castles Towers, and
walls, to defend them against the encounters of their enemies, which are many
and mighty. There be walls of this City, which the world sees not, for thou, O
Lord) art a wall of brass about her, and a wall of fire, to consume her foes,
thine Angels pitch their tents about her Inhabitants. She has also visible
walls, framed of a number of lively stones, which being first rough, are hewne
by affliction, in the quarry of this world, squared by repentance, and cemented
by love, and so pollished and made fit for the heavenly Jerusalem, that truly
glorious City. But I will not pray only for the defense and safety, but also
for the peace and prosperity of the earthly Jerusalem. O pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love her, peace be within her walls, and
plenty within her palaces; because of my brethren, neighbors and companions,
for the love I bear them out of natural affection and civil respect I pray
for Jerusalem; but chiefly and mainely, for thy House sake, O Jehovah. This
house is the heart of this body, it puts life into all the outward parts and
members thereof and in a (...) relation (though not in like proportion) those
outward parts, do guard, and defend and cherish his heart.

Thine Israel must needs be in much affliction and reproach, whiles the walls
are vnbuilded. Thou have forbidden thy people to offer in every place. There
thou art well pleased to have thy name called upon.

I have much battered these walls, I have made large breaches in them, by my
heinous offenses, O Lord, I beseech thee who art the Arch-builder, to rerepaire
these breaches, to build up these walls, that Jerusalem may continue in
safety, and (...) in prosperity, not (...) a few months or (...), but even
till the coming of thy Christ.

Sion is the joy of the the whole earth; not only all the creatures, but all
other men also, are created, (...) and disposed for her good. For thy love of
them, I must love them, for I cannot love thee, unless I love thy spowse, in
whom thou delightest, which is mystically, yet really, one flesh with thee?

I pray for favor to Sion, in the first place, for building the walls of
Jerusalem, in the second place, for good to the Kingdom in regard of the good
that will thereby accrue to thy Church, the prosperity whereof, is the the
prime object, and last complement of my desires.

Then when thou art become favorable to Sion, thy Church and chosen, when the
place is builded, which thou have singled out for thy seat and service, then
will thou accept, and the people offer their sacrifices, inward and outward
unto thee. This correspondency, and restipulation, as it were, between thee
and thy people, that they shall offer cheerfully, and thou graciously
entertain their services, is the foundation and height of true felicity.

But they must be right sacrifices, or the sacrifices of righteousness, such
as are required by thee, and in faith tendered unto thee, else will they not hit
the mark whereat they aim. For it is not the deed done alone, that will
avail, or work any good effect: it is not enough that the thing that is done
be good, but it must be well done also. Bonum, been the Noune without the
Aducrbe, is of no value, or virtue at all.

The burnt offerings of beasts and birds and other things wholly given up, in
fire, by the Priests, and consumed to Ashes; the other oblations of peace and
thanksgiving, made by the Laity according to thy prescription, though thou do
not esteem them at all, when they are disioyned from an humble and penitent
heart, yet being happily conjoined and consorted together, will be most
grateful, and highly pleasing unto thee.

They shall offer Bullocks upon thine Altar, and there slay them (which is the
sign and figure) they shall withal, tender the calves of their lips, in
praises and prayers, which is the substance and body thereby repesented. Thy
Christ as their high Priest shall offer himself the sasacrifice, and upon him
as their Altar they shall put their Incense of hearty devotion, by that mean,
to become sweet smelling, in thy nostrils. He shall be the Priest, the
Sacrifice Altar, all in all, himself. To him and be all honor and glory, etc.

A SVMMARY PRAYER FRAMED OVT OF the Psalm, and Meditation together.
O Most powerful wise and merciful, God, who have created all things in
heaven, and earth for the service of man, and man for thy service, who have
disposed all things, in number, (...) and measure, who have caused all things
contained in holy Writ, to be recorded for the instruction and direction of thy
Church and chosen: give me grace so to behold this mirror of humane frailety,
and divine mercy, with the eye of true judgment, that I may not with the
Spider draw poison, to the destruction, but with the Be, suck such honey, as
may be gathered out of it, to the solace of my sinful soul.

Thou did permit David, being an holy Prophet as well as a mighty King,
advanced and anointed specially for the government of thy people, to fall
foully into the heinous and grievous sins of Adultery and Murder, that no man
might presume of thy favor or confide in his own strength; but evermore serve
thee in fear, and rejoice in thee, with reverence.

Thou did also endue him with grace after his fall, by humiliation and
repentance, to rise again and recover his former estate, notwithstanding his
long security and careless continuance, upon the dregs of his wickedness, (as
it were) in contempt of thy Justice; that no man might despair of thy rich and
tender mercy.

Thou did propound his fall, for caution; that all men might shun that
dangerous rack, whereon he suffered shipwreck: his repentance, for imitation;
that every man plunged into the sea of sin, might catch hold of the planke
of repentance, to save himself from drowning.

As thou did bring light out of darkness, and life out of death, so do
thou, in an incomprehensible manner draw good out of evil, and turn the very
sins of thy servants to thy glory, and their good.

Far be it from me, to vouch this example, by way of excuse, or defense,
much less warrant to offend, as he did, howbeit (...) hope confidently with
David, when and after I have offended (through thy gracious, goodness, and
free promise by the tears of mine eyes, the contrition of my heart, and prayer
of my spirit,) to obtain a full and gracious pardon, of all my offenses
whatsoever.

Thou can not, O Lord, but be highly displesed, when worms of the earth,
dust and ashes, rottenness and corruption, having, without any desert at all,
been adorned with thy gifts, and enlightened with thy graces, shall presume of
thy favor, so far, as ungraciously and ungratefully instead of thanks and
praises, to return contempts, and dishonours, to thy divine Majesty.

But on the other side, thou can in no wise endure, that ye most wretched
caitiffe, the most shameful and wilful sinner that Satan can furnish out of
hell, should despair of thine endless and bottomless mercy, wherein, above
all other things thou do so much delight and glory, and which does so far
surmount thy justice, as thou do continually woo, and inuit, thy greatest
enemies, to the participation thereof.

O Lord, being a sinner, as David was, I cannot but pray for mercy, as he did,
and because I have grieuosly sinned, pray for great mercy, and because I have
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, etc.
many times, and many ways, multiplied my sins, so as they are grown to a
number numberlesses, pray for a multitude of thy tender mercies, that the whole
debt-booke, wherein my sins are registered, may be quite crossed and defaced.

I must beg again and (...), etc.
again, that thou will wash me again and again, wash me thoroughly, from the
pollution and filth of my sin.

Give me grace, O Lord, I know my (...); (...), (...), etc.
to see my sins fully, to confess them freely, entirely to give thee the
glory to take the shame to my self deservedly.

Give me leave to lay open Behold, I was borne in iniquity, etc.
my festred wounds, and loathsome sores, to thy view, in abasement and
humiliation, to stir thy bowels of tender commiseration.

Make me to love in my Behold, thou love truth in the (...), etc.
self, what thou love inme, to wit, truth and sincerity of heart, accept, O
Lord, my honest study, and faithful endeavor, for true and full performance.
Let me solace my soul, in the conscience of my unfeigned sorrow, for my sins
past, and my true, though, weak, desires to serve thee And in the (...) of my
heart, etc.
better in time to come, for which purpose, enable me with wisdom, teach me
the art of godliness, and the mysteries thereof, in my hidden parts.

And because the Leprosy Purge me with Hysop, etc.
of sin, has infected me from top to toe; temper and prepare for me a
powerful purgation, with those ingredients, which are of strongest operation,
that is, (without shadows or figures) the blood of that Immaculate Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, applied by a lively faith, to my
diseased soul.

Be pleased to bathe my (...), and I (...) be (...), etc.
ugly soul in thy Lauer of Justification till I become white and bright, in
thy pure and piercing eyes.

Let me, when I am Make me to hear of joy, etc.
confounded in my self, and cast down into the Dungeon of Sorrow, through the
sight of my sins, yet hopefully and zealously seek joy and comfort, in thee,
and thy salvation.

Let me so place my (...) sins, etc.
sins, before mine own sorrowful face, that thou may hide thy face, at
least, thine angry face from them, or rather, so quite deface them, that they
may (...) be to be seen hereafter, that they may (...) rise up in judgment,
either to shame me in this, or condemn me, in the next world.

And because my justification, which consists in Create in me a clean heart,
etc.
thy free remission of my sins, cannot subsist without sanctification, and
holiness of conversation, as the light of that Lamp, and heat of that fire:
And because it is impossible to draw a clean out of an unclean thing; I
beseech thee, Lord, to work a wonder on me, that is, to create a clean heart
within me. Purge the fountain, and then the streams which (...) from it in my
thoughts, words and actions, will be clearer and purer.

Give me a (...) spirit, Renew a right spirit within me, etc.
that (...) carry my self (...) thee, and for (...) this spirit (...) becomes
decayed and distorted by the perverseness of my nature, and obliquity of my
transgressions; vouchsafe to renew it in me from time to time, by a continual
supply of thy heavenly grace.

Although I have many Cast me not away from thy presence etc.
ways and times deserved thy just indignation; yet for thy mercies sake
abandon me not from thy presence, banish me not from thy Courts; let me behold
thy face, though ouerclouded with a storm of displeasure.

Although I have grieved, Take not thy holy spirit from me etc.
yea, and despighted thy good spirit; when it endeavored my reformation,
direction, and consolation; yet I beseech thee, not to take it utterly from me,
let not that holy fire, though raked up under the ashes of my sins, be quite
extinguished.

When thou do for Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, etc.
my sins bereave me of the comfortable confidence I found in the assurance
of thy salvation, give me leave to claim still mine interest in it, even when
I tremble and quake at thy judgments: and thereby to crave a restitution of
that tranquillity of mind, and peace of conscience, which I formerly enjoyed
with contentment, make me by the want rightly to value the worth of so great a
favor, then which a greater cannot be bestowed upon the soul of man, whiles
it is confined within this valley of tears, enclosed within this body of
death.

And because through Uphold me with thy free, or firm spirit.
the frailty of my flesh, and the fraud of Satan, I am so prone to recidiuation
and back shding, so ready to fall away from thee, (even (...) many Apostasies
pardoned) unless I be still vpheld and supported: give me thy free spirit,
that (...) may cheerfully; thy firm spirit, that I may constantly accomplish
thy blessed will, and (...) in (...) good duties that (...) unto me.

And for that thankfulness Then will I teach (...), etc.
is the best return for benefits received, and the strongest means to
purchase new favors; give me grace, as to promise, so to perform gratitude
every way, and evermore highly to esteem, and zealously to affect the
reducing, reclaiming, and converting of sinners, and impious persons, those
that err in their religion, or conversation, or both, as the most acceptable
service that can be done unto thee upon earth.

Teach me to use all earnest Deliver me from blood, etc.
compellation, and powerful insinuation, to Thou, God, of my salvation, etc.
win thy favor again, when I have forfeited it by committing some grievous
sin, especially quicken me by faith, to make a particular application and
appropriation (as it were) of thy salvation to mine own soul; which pious
presumption and holy ambition thou art well pleased withal.

Give me grace with the I will sing aloud of thy righteousness, etc.
deepest strain of my heart, and the loudest tone and tune of my voice, to
magnify thy marvelous goodness. Though I be less then the least of thy
mercies; yet teach me in duty and discretion for more bountiful favors, to
return more plentiful praises. If I be delivered from a crying sin, I ought
(of congruence) to sing aloud of thy justice, which giving assurance of thy
mercy, by performance of thy covenant of grace, cannot but produce an
exultation of the heart, and an exaltation of the voice and tongue, in the
celebration of thy just praises.

But alas, how can I make that poor return for thy O Lord, open thou my lips,
etc.
rich mercies, which me thinks I ought to vow and promise? When all is done,
I must therein also crave thy blessed assistance, that thou will be pleased to
open my lips, and to untie my tongue strings, I must owe thee for that grace
also, and go on thy score even for those praises, which only by Echo I
resound unto (...).

Blessed be thy name, O The sacrifices of (...), etc.
Lord, who in my deepest distress, and heauiest condition for my sins, when
I seek for ease and relief, tellest me the means whereby thine anger may be
appeased, and thy favor redeemed. Thou requirest no sacrifice that with labor
and charge should be purchased abroad, but such as is or should be at home,
and within me; thou expectest no other satisfaction from me, but the
humiliation of my proud heart, and the sorrow of my rebellious soul, O
wonderful goodness! O unspeakable mercy! What more favorable terms, can
be devised, or propounded, then that thou will accept my submission, and
reconciliation? so as I will ask thee forgiveness humbly, and freely
profess, and express effectually mine hearty repentance, for the manifold
sins, I have committed against thy divine Majesty. Out of the the
apprehension of this loving kindness and tender compassion (if there A broken
and a contrite heart, etc.
were nothing else) I ought to melt into tears of grief, break my heard
heart, bruize my obstinate spirit, which have transported me, so far, and
plunged me so deep, into thy displeasure.

O Lord, enable me, whom thou have ordained a Priest, for this purpose, to
offer daily and duly, this acceptable sacrifice unto thee, which I should the
more willingly present, because it no way intends the destruction of my body,
but the correction of my soul. I am only to slay my sensuality, to quell my
unruly affections, and subdue them to thy holy will (for mine own good) not to
impech nature, but to increase grace; and for my better incourageme^t to this
mortification, thou art graciously pleased, to use this protestation, that If I
judge my self thou will not judge me, if I chastise my self, thou will not
condemn me, if I execute my own just and impartial sentence against mine
own heart (the capital offender) thou will favorably spare, and mercifully
pardon me, for ever.

O Lord, I pray not for my self alone, but for thy whole Church, wheresoever
dispersed, howsoever distressed, upon the face of the earth. As I pray that
thou will be merciful to me particularly; so I beg also, that thou will be
favorable Be favorable to Sion, etc.
to Sion universally. Being a member of that mystical body, whereof thy Christ
is the head, so long as I have spiritual life in me, I cannot but resent, such
afflictions, as any of thy chosen, do sustain: o Lord, I pray thee for
Jerusalem, the kingdom wherein I live, that peace may be within her walls,
prosperity Build (...) the walls (...) Jerusalem, etc.
in her palaces, I cannot but out of honest affection, wish well to my brethren
neighbors and companions, that their persons may be protected, their walls (of
wood or stone) reedifyed, fo often as need requires, and that not for
necessity only, but for comeliness also. But I must still profess, that I
regard the Case for the (...) sake, which is compassed therewith, the
Commonwealth for thy house, and that portion of thy Church, that is preserved
therein; I respect chiefly Sion, thy darling, and the joy of the whole earth.
My precious goods are imbarqued in that ship; What fortune betides them, I am
contented shall befall me; I will sympathise, rejoice, and mourn with them,
upon all occasions. I do acknowledge, no nearer affinity, no deerer
consanguinity, no better fraternity, then is Christianity, nay, my spiritual
kindred is of more esteem with me, (...) any natural or legal conjunction
whatsoever.

O Lord, show thy favor For thy good (...), etc.
to Sion, for thy good pleasures sake, she has no other motive to induce
thee, no other mediator to intercede with thee. Be gracious to her, for his
sake, in whom thou art well pleased. Be pleased of thy self, thine own
goodness; for thy self, thine own glory, to show this love, unto thy Spouse,
though foul in her own nature, yet fair, by thy gracious acceptance.

These graces, O Lord, Then (...) thou accept, etc.
which I beg zealously, for my self and others. I beseech thee to grant
mercifuly, that I may (...) thee with praise, and praise thee with love, that I
may thankefully acknowledge thy gracious goodness, and in testimony thereof,
render unto thee, all honor and glory, all manner of praises and thanks, all
the days of my life, even for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

