The praise of Folly.

MORIAE ENCOMIVM a book made in latin by that great clerk Erasmus Roterodame.

Englisshed by sir Thomas Chaloner knight.

ANNO. M. D. XLIX.

To the reader.
APOLIE IT MAY BE thought in me to have spent time in englisshyng of this
book, entitled the praise of Posie, whereas the name it self seems to set
forth no wisdom, or matter of grauitee: unless perhaps Erasmus, the
autour thereof, delited to mock men, in calling it one thing, and meaning an
other. To this I answer, that Folly in all poinctes is not (as I take it) so
strange unto us, but that her name may well be abidden, aslong as will we or
nill we, she will be sure to bear a stroke in most of our doings: how so
ever a certain sect of fault finders condemn all things, that fully square
not with their own rules, yea twyse blind in this, that among the commen
errors and infyrmitees of mortal men, they will bear nothing with their
brethren, as who says, they were demigoddes, and not more than one or two
ways lynked in Folies bands.

I have therefore bestowed an englisshe liuerey upon this latin book, as well
as I could: not so much to please all men, as rather to show how euin this
Folly touches all men. Wherein I would not be noted as a carper of any man
particulerly (for what more vnsittyng than in books or plays to touch men by
name?) nor that herein I seek to have any kind of men noted for their trade of
life, otherwise than the abuse thereof deserves, but only my meaning is
such, as Erasmus in this book shall express for us both. He of his modestee
is content to set no great face upon it, nor would be noted to have spent
great labor in making thereof: saving as in pastime to have essaied, whether
ought might be spoken in praise of Folly, whereas wisdom the virtue can praise
it self. And therefore he imagines, that Folly should be a Goddess, who
before all kinds of men assembled as to a sermon, should declare how many
benefits they receive at her hands: and how without her access, nothing in
this life is delectable, commodious, or tolerable unto us, no not our own
life.

This brave bost might well come from Folly: and seeing that wyser men are wont
to take in worth what is said by a fool, therefore is Erasmus also the bolder
to put that tale in Folies mouth, which under an other person he would have
made more courtesy to have spoken. So what excuse he makes the same I require
may serve for me: that things spoken foolisshely, by Folly, may be euin so
taken, and not wrested to any bitter sense or ernest applicacion. For surely if
the crabbedst men that be, are wont to take a fools words as in sport, for
fear lest others might reckon they would not wynche without a galled back:
Than how much more is a domme book written generally to be borne withal?
namely where the title pretends no grauitee, but rather a toye to stir
laughter, without offense in the book, if the reader bring none offense with
him. For than truly he may chance to see his own image more lively
described than in any peincted table.

But if that ways he mislike the deformitee of his countrefaicte, let him
much more mislyke to be such one in deed. And seeing the vices of our days
are such as can not enough be spoken against, what know we, if Erasmus in
this book thought good between game and ernest to rebuke the same? And
chiefly to persuade (if it might be) a certain contentacion in every man, to
hold him agreed with such lotte and state of living, as arises to him. For
which purpose was I also soonest moved to englisshe it, to the end that mean
men of baser wits and condition, might have a manner coumfort and satisfaction
in them selfs. In as much as the hie^^ god, who made us all of one earth,
has natheles ch^en some to rule, and more to serve. Whereat so much lacks
that the inferiors should repine, as rather set in the meaner degree, they
should thank god the more: without aspyryng to things above their reach,
which should draw more trouble and perilles, than if they absteigned therfro,
and gave place to others, who had greater gifts of God, and were called by
auctoritee of their prince or country to welde the same. For surely, if a man
of the poorer sort, whose eyes is dased in beholding the fair gloss of
wealth and felicitee, which the state of a great lord or counsailour in a
commen wealth does outwardly represent, did inwardly mark the travails,
cares, and anxietees, which such one is driven to susteigne (doing as he
ought to do) in seruyng his master and country, whereby he is nothing less
than his own man: now I believe he would not much envy his state, nor chose
to change conditions of life with him. But this were euin the chiefest poincte
of wisdom, though fools (as Folly calls them) that is to say vulgar
folk, are those, that unwitting of their treasure, do in deed enioie this
sweet quietness, and greatest good turn. And waiyng this foolish ^oke,
after this sense, I wene a profit also may arise therethrough to the readers,
besides the delectacion, being so pithilie pleasant as it is. For as Erasmus
in all his works sauoureth of a lively quickness, and spares not sometime
in grave mattiers to sprincle his style, where he may suache oportunitee with
meerie conceited sentences: so in this book, treatyng of such a Theme, and
under such a person, he opens all his ^owget: So farfoorth as by the
judgment of many learned men, he never showed more art, nor wit, in any the
grauest book he wrote, than in this his praise of Folly. Which the reader
having any considerance, shall soon epsy, how in every mattier, yea almost
every clause, is hidden besides the mirth, some deaper sense and purpose. In
deed I again say not, but he makes Folly to speak at randon, without
sparyng of any estate of men: but yet indifferent ears will hear their
faults patiently, as long as they may chose, whether they will take the
fault upon them or not: or be a known to be those, whom Folly notes. But
euin this frankenesse of Folies taunting I have presumed in some poinctes to
ytche to the best: namely in two or three places, which the learned reader
comparyng with the latin book, may easily perceive, how either I have slipped
over a line or two, or eased the sour sense of the latin with some manerlier
english word. Wherein I chose rather to be counted a skante true interpretour,
than otherwise to touch things, which were better vnsaied, as long as it
hurted not the grace of the book though they were omitted. Likewise in all my
translacion I have not peined my self to render word for word, nor proverb
for proverb, whereof many be greek, such as have no grace in our tongue: but
rather markyng the sense. I applied it to the phrase of our english. And where
the proverbs would take no english, I adventured to put englisshe proverbs
of like weight in their places, Which may be thought by some cunnyng
translatours a deadly sin. But I stick not for all that, in this foolish
book to use mine own foolish cast. And if it be misliked, I pass not
greatly though I lose the praise of my Folly.

MORIAE ENCOMIVM. Folly speaks.
How so euermen commonly talk of me (as pardie I am not ignorant what lewd
reports go on FOLLY, yea even among those that are veriest fools of all)
yet that I am she, I only (I say) who through mine influence do glad both
the Gods and men, by this it may appear sufficiently: that as soon as I
came forth to say my mind before this your so notable assembly, A fools
presence sterreth laughter.
by and by all your lokes began to clear up: vnbendyng the frounyng of your
brows, and laughyng upon me with so merry a countinaunce, as by my troth me
seems euin, that all ye (whom I see here present) do fare as if ye were well
whitled, and thoroughly moysted with the Nectar wine of the Homericall Gods,
not without a portion of the juice of that meruaillous herb Nepenthes, which
has force to put sadness and melancholy from the heart: Where as before ye
satte all heavy, and glommyng, as if ye had come lately from Trophonius cave,
or saint Patrikes purgatory. But like as when Phoebus displaieth his golden
bright rays upon the earth, or when after a sharp stormy winter, the new
primetyde flourissheth with his caulme sweet Western wyndes, than (lo) a new
likeness, a new hew, and a new youth (as it were) retourneth unto all
things: Even so, as soon as I appeared, ye all began to look up lustily.
So, what thing these cunnyng Rhetoriciens for all their long, and forepenned
oracions can hardly bring about (I mean to drive care, and pensiveness out
of the hearers minds) that have I with my only look, and presence
accomplisshed. And now ye shall wite, to what eutent at this time, in this so
strange an apparel, I am come forth among you: upon condition ye will not
think much to bestow on me your ears a while. To trifuls better ear given,
then to grauer matti^s.
I mean not those ears that ye carry with you to sermons, but those ye give
to plaiers, to iesters, and to fools. Yea those (hardly) wherewith my friend
Midas whilom herkened to the rural god Pan, in preferryng his rusticall song,
before Apollos far fyner Melody. For I purpose a season to become a
Sophiste, mistake me not I pray you, as if I said Sophistrer, such as now a
days drive into childers heads, certain tangled trifuls, with more than
women's stubbournesse and skoldyng in their disputacions. But I mean the other,
who to the end they might shonne that presumptuous name of Sophi or wysemen,
did rather take upon them to be called Sophistes: Whose study and profession it
was, to advance, and set forth in their writings the praises both of the
Gods, and of men also, such as were famous and worthies here in earth. Ye
shall hear therefore the praise set forth, not of Hercules, nor yet of Solon,
but rather of mine own self, That is to say of Folly. In which poinct, a
straw for all these cankerd philosophers, and sages, who say it is a most
outrageous folly and presumpcion, for one to praise him self. For truly let
them make it as foolisshe a part as they list, so long as they can not deny
it to be congruent. And what (I pray you) may be more apt or better sittyng,
than dame Folly to praise her self, and be her own trumpet? For who can
liuelier descriue me^ then I my self? Unles perhaps some be better acquainted
with me, then I my self am. Notwithstanding, even this myselfepraise (as me
seems) I may well take upon me with a more shamefast grace, than to do as
commenly these great, and learned men use, who suborne some glosyng orator,
Orators and poets
or vain spoken poet, hired also for mede, to dilate and blaste forth their
praises, or (rightlier to say) peincted lies. And yet shall one of those
shamefast, maidenly men not stick than to d^splaie his pecockes feathers, and
rowse him self, whiles such shameless flaterers do go about to make him,
being a man less worth tha^ naught, coequall yet unto the Gods, in blasonnyng
him for a paragonne, and absolute example of all manner virtues, from which he
knows him self to be as far wide, as from hence to the man in the moon.
Namely whiles those glorious glosers would deck the crow with other burds
feathers, or pain them to wash away a Morions blackenesse, or labor of a
sely fly to make an Elephant. For short, I follow in this poincte the common
proverb, which says, that he may rightly praise him self, whom none other
body will. All be it to say the truth, I can not but marvel at men's
ingratitude (should I call it) or negligence? that where with one assent they
all so frankely do observe me, and gladly peruse my commoditees, yet has not
one of them, now so many reuolucions of years passed, under taken with some
thankful oracion to set forth the praises of me Folly, where as some of
them have not wanted, who with solemn styles, and much loss of sleep and
candell, showed at lest their folly, what ever their mattier was, in
commendacion, some of this notable tyranne, some of that, some in praise of the
fever quartane, others in setting forth what commoditees be in a fly, in
baldness, or such like hateful things. But at my hand, ye shall hear an
unadvised, and sodeine tale told, though so much perhaps the truer, Which I
would not ye should think were said of me for a color, to advance thereby
the rypenesse of my wit, as commonly these learned men do. Who puttyng
forth (as ye know) some book more than whole.xxx. wynters had in cullyng,
The vain glory of l^arned me^.
ye and that sometimes none of their own doing, will swear yet, that they
made it but for a recreacion of their grauer studies, or rather as fast as
pen could run. For truly it has ever best lyked me to speak straight
what so ever lay on my tongues end. But this, to the end ye look not for it,
I do warn ye of before hand, that I in no wise will, according to these
common Sophisters and Rhetoriciens manner, go about to show by diffinicion what
I am, and much less use any division: In as much as I hold both the one,
and the other for unlucky tokens, either to comprehend her under a certain
end, or limite, whose influence stretches so universally, orels to divide
her, in whose obseruaunce all men do so wholly consent. And yet I can not tell
to what purpose it should serve, to represent a certain shadow, or image of
my self, where as presently ye may discern me with your eyes. For I am here
(as ye see) the distributrix and dealer of all felicitee, named (...) in
Greek, in Latin Stultitia, in English Folly. But aye, what neded me to utter
thus much? as if I bare not signs enough in my face, and countinance, what
manner person I am: Or as if some one contendyng that I were Minerua, or Sophia,
might not straight with my only look be confuted, though I held my talk,
which is no liyng myrrour of the minds disposicion. For in me (ye must
think) is no place for setting of colors as I can not say one thing, and
think an other: but on all sides I do resemble my self. Folly dissembled.
So that not so much as they can dissemble me, who take upon them most
semblant of wisdom, and walk like Asses in Lions skynnes. That although
they counterfeite what they can, yet on some side their long ears pearyng
forth, do discover them to come of Midas progeny. The vnkyndest kind of
men living, who being in deed the very standerd bearers of my band, would
seem yet before folk to be so ashamed of my name, as not seldom they cast it
in others teethe for a great reproach. Such men therefore, that in deed are
archdoltes, and would be taken yet for sages and philosophers, may I not
aptelie call them foolelosophers? For as in this behalf I have thought good
to borowe a littell of the Rethoriciens of these days, Obscur^^^ and
affe^^tacion of writers^
who plainly think them selfs demygodes, if like horsleches they can show
two tongues, I mean to mingle their writings with words sought out of
strange langages, as if it were alonely thing for them to poudre their books
with ynkehorne terms, although perchance as unaptly applied, as a gold ring
in a sowes nose. That and if they want such far fetched vocables, than
search they out of some rotten Pamphlet four or five disused words of
antiquitee, therewith to darken the sense unto the reader, to the end, that
who so understands them, may repute him self for more cunnyng, and
litterate: and who so does not, shall s^ much the rather yet esteem it to
be some high mattier, because it passes his learning. For this is truly not
the least of my pleasant propretees, to make men ever set most store by
strange and outlandisshe things. So that some be of such a
vaingloriousnesse, as when they can least skyll thereof, yet will they flire,
and nodde the head at it, and (as the Ass does) wagge their ears, to make
others believe that they are depely seen sherin. And this, is thus. But now I
return to my mattier. Ye have heard my name than (O my friends) what
addicion shall I give you? What? but my most foolisshe friends. For by what
more manerly surname may the Goddess Folly call her servants, and alies?
But now seeing all folks know not of what lynage I am descended, so healpe me
the Muses as I entende to declare the same unto you. Folies father.
My father therefore was neither Chaos, nor Orcus, nor Saturnus, nor any other
of that old and rustie race of Gods, but Plutus the golden god of riches, and
the only sire of Gods and men, though Hesiodus, Homere, yea and Jupiter him
self stand never so stiffly against me. At whose only beck as aforetymes, so
now also both holy, and unholy things be turned topset turuie. At whose
arbitrament, war, peace, kingdoms, counsels, judgments, assemblees,
marriages, couenauntes, leagues, laws, sciences, games, earnest mattiers (my
breath fails me) to be short, The force of money.
all public, and private doings of men are administered. Without whose aid,
the whole route of the poetical Gods, yea I will say further, those that be
the chosen Gods should either not be at all, or live else with a mess of
sklendre chere: That whom so he is agreued with, Pallas is not able to protecte
him. And who so has him on his side, may (if it like him) ^efie Jupiter, with
all his thunder.

And such a father (lo) do I glory in. Who neither begatte me of his
brain, Folies mother.
as Jupiter did that vnamiable, skowlyng Goddess Pallas, but of Youth, a
Nymph above all others most fair, and goodly. Neither was he (I warrant you)
at the time of my begettyng clogged with the heavy yoke of wedlock, wherein
Vulcane that lymphault smithe was borne, but rather mixed in love (as my Homere
says) which I take to be a copulacion not a little more pleasant than the
other is. Further, to the end that ye mistake nothing, I do ye to wite that
Plutus begatte me not in his old days, when he was blind, and skarce able to
go for age, and goutinesse, as the poet Aristophanes descriueth him: but in
his prime years, when as yet he was sound, and full of hot bloudde, but much
fuller of Nectar drink, which sittyng at bourde with the other Gods, he had
sipped than by chance somewhat more than enough. Now and if ye look to be
instructed also of my birth place, in so much as now a days men think how
the country where one is borne does not a little impo^te toward his
nobilitee, ye shall understand that I was brought forth neither in flotyng
Delos, as Apollo, nor among the wauing seas, where Venus took her beginning,
nor yet in holow rocks under ground, as was the great god Jupiter, but even
amiddes the Islands, Folies birth place.
which of their synguler fertilitee and fruitefulnesse, are called Fortunatae,
where as all things grow unsown and untilled. In which isles neither labor,
nor age, nor any manner sickness reigns, nor in the fields there do
either Nettles, Thistles, Mallows, Brambles, Cockle, or such like bagage
grow, Hereby is meant that those which ar born to most wealth prove many times
most fools
but in steed thereof Gylofloures, Roses, Lilies, Basile, Uiolettes, and such
sweet smellyng herbs, as whilom grew in Adonis gardens, do on all sides
satisfy both the sent, and the sight. Thus borne in these delites, I began
not my life with tears, but straightwaies smyled sweetly on my mother, an
evident argument and token of good luck as these byrthlotters say. Further as
concerning my bringynge up, I am not envious that Jupiter the great god had a
got to his fostresse, Folies nourses.
seeing two so pleasant Nymphs, as Dronkennes daughter unto Bacchus, and
Rudenes the daughter of Pan were my nourses. Whom ye may se here also among
my other women and handmaides about me. Folies hand maids.
Whose names in case ye list to know, I am very well content to rehearse them
unto you. For this maid truly, whom ye may behold with brows vpcast,
lokyng ever as if she wondered at somethyng, is called Selfloue. This next her
that fares as if she flired upon you, and clappeth her hands together, is
Adulacion. This slouggerd, and drowsy head, is named Oblivion. This than that
leans on her elbowes, claspyng her hands togethers, is called Lythernes.
This besides her with the Rose garlande on her head, and all to perfumed with
sweet savors, is cleped voluptuousnes. This with the rollyng and unsteadfast
eyes, is Madness. This other with the slicke skin, and fair fed body, is
called Delicacie. As for these two Gods, which ye may see also in the
fellowship of my other train, the one is named Belichere, the other Soundslepe.
Now if ye ask me, what stead these stand me to? I aunsweare, that through
the trusty aid of such a band as this is, I subdue all the world under my
dominion, bearyng empire over emperors them selves. Ye have heard me thus
declare unto you my lynage, Folies divine operacion.
my educacion, and my family. but least now I might causeless seem to
challenge the name of a Goddess, harken ye therefore attentively, with how
great commoditees I endue both gods and men, and how largely my power
stretches. For and if a certain autour wrote not much amiss, how this was
proprely the office of a God, to do benefit to mortal men: further, if such
have woorthily ben ascribed to the senate of the gods, as were first inuentours
of wine, of corn, and such ly^e commoditees for your living: why should not
I than rightfully be taken, and set tofore them all, who only am the geuer of
all things, to all men? For first (I axe) what may be sweter or more dearer
unto you, than is your life? but the original spring, and plantacion of the
same, whom should ye thank for, but me only? In as much as neither the
spear of Pallas, ne yet the shield of Jupiter called Aegis, is it, that
engenders mankind: but the self Jupiter, father of the Gods: and king of
kings, who with his only beck, can shake all heaven, must lay down his
threforked thunder, and also his grimme countinaunce, wherewith when him lists
he can make all the Gods to tremble, yea and like a plaier must disguise him
self into an other personage, in case he would do the thing, that almost he
always practices (which is) to get children. Again, among mortal men,
the Stoikes, count them selves to be next the Gods in perfection. Wisdom
and grauitee in children gettyng serve not to purpose.
But bring me one, admit he be four, or five, or (if you list) six hundred
times a Stoike, and yet must he lay down, if not his long berde, betokenyng
wisdom, which natheles gotes have also, at least (I say) lay aside his
grave, and frounyng look, he must caulme, and explane his forehead, he must
cast away those his yronlike lessons, and precepts of doctrine, it is I, it
is I (believe me) whom that wise and sage Stoike must have recourse unto, in
case he would be a father. And why should I not commen more familiarly with
you, according to my custom? I pray you, is it the head? the face? the
breast? the hands? or the ears? which parts of the body are named honest,
that engendre gods, and men? I trow no. Naie, it is euin that selie membre, so
fond, and foolisshe, as may not without laughter be spoken of, which is the
only planter of mankind. That, is the only fountain, whens all things
receive life, a great deal sooner than from Pythagoras quaternion. As
concerning the use whereof, who is he (suppose ye) would take in his mouth the
snaffle of wedlock, Marriage, to proceed of Folly.
if (according as these wisemen are wont to do) he should first cast and
reckon with him self ^he discommoditees of that trade of life? Or what woman
would yield unto a man, if she either knew, or thought upon the perilous
throws of childbearyng, or travail of their bringyng up? That and if ye owe
your lives to wedlock, and wedlock ye owe to my damoisell Madness, now ye may
soon guess, what ye owe, and should refer to me. Than, who is she, that
after one assaie, would eftesoones venture childebearyng, ^e were it not
through the encouragement of Oblivion. No not Venus her self (what ever
Lucretius writes) will deny, but that her might in engendrure remaigueth
void, and of small effect, without thaccesse of mine aid. So that to
conclude, I say how of this my dronken and ridiculous game, are procreate
(omittyng vulgar folk) both grave philosophers, whom such succeed now, as
ye call monks, and purpre princis, and holy priests, and thrice holy
bishops, at ones, all the whole route of the Poetical Gods, so swarmyng, as
skarce all heaven is able to contain the^, be it never so large of room.
Folly ground of the co^moditees of man's life.
But take it hardly for nothing that ye owe thus unto me the very fountain,
and spring of your life, in case what ever other commoditees ye have therein, I
do not prove them also to proceed of my goodness. For as touching this life
here, may it woorthily be called a life (I pray you) if ye take pleasure and
delight away? do you nodde upon me? well said: I wist there was none of you
all so wise, or rather so foolysshe, naie wise sooner, as would be of any other
opinion. How be it, even these sage Stoikes do not in deed, so greatly
despise pleasure, as outwardly they dissemble, and before folks do bait her
with a thousand repreues, to none other intent (I warrante you) save that when
others are rated therfro, they than may more at libertee enioie her, But I
would they should tell me, what any part of this life there is, not heavy, not
unpleasant, not vrkesome, not unsavory, unless ye put Pleasure, that is to
say, the Saulce of Folly unto it? for proof whereof as I could allege the
sufficient auctoritee of Sophocles, whose noble sentence in my favor, is never
enough praised, where he says, that In knowing least, the blisfulst life is
led. So I am content yet for your better instruction, to disclose every thing
more particularly unto you.

And first, Infancy, foolisshe.
who is he but will confess Childhode, the first age of man, to be most
gracious and acceptable unto all folks? for else, what is it in young babes
that we do kiss so, we do colle so, we do cherisshe so, that a very
enemy is moved to spare and succor this age, unless it be the allurement of
Folly? which, natures circumspection, euin purposedly, has adioigned to
children, to the end that with some reputacion of pleasure, they might supple
the travail of their bringers up, and provoke the benevolence of such as
tend unto them. The next age than that succedeth hereto, I mean Youth,
Youth.
how acceptable (I pray you) is it to all folks? how is each enelined to it?
how willyngly does every wight set it forward? how diligently do all men
put to their healpyng hands: And whereof (trow ye) proceeds this grace of
Youth, but of me only? through whose benefit, a young man knows least,
and therefore takes least thought. Take me for a lier, unless as soon as be
waxes elder, beginning through experience and disciplines to savor of
Manhood, than in continent the flower of his beauty decaieth, his mirth
fadethe, his grace waxes cold, his strength diminissheth, so that the
farther, and farther he is retired from me, the less, and less he lives,
until at last, tedious old age do crepe upon him, not only vrkesome to
others, but hateful also to him self: which Old age (on my conscience) no
mortal man would endure to bide out, if I again taking compassion at their so
great labors and encombrances, did not somewhat releue the same. That like as
these goods of the poets, are wont with some transformacion or likeness
tournyng, to succor men ready to perisshe, so I also (that in me lies) do
revoke such aged men as are at deaths door, and next the pit, back again
unto childhode? Whereupon, not causeles, folks call them twyse children.
Return of old age to Childhode.
Now and if some would ask me how I do transform them so, I will not hyde
so much as that from you. For I bring them to the fountain of my maiden
Oblivion, called Lethes, which springs in the Isles fortunate (for as for
the other that renneth through the fields Elisies, is but a small branche of
this former) to the end that as soon as they there have dronken long
forgetfulness of things passed, they may, by little and little, wasshyng
away all the troubles and carefulnesses of the mind, become chilhisshe
again. But some perhaps will obiecte to me, and say, that such old men do
dote now, and are paste their wits. Yea, be as be may, yet this is euin the
plain recourse unto childbode. For is the same ought else (suppose you) than
dotage, or ignorance? is it ought else in children that deliteth you, than their
indiscrecion? For who is he that would not eschew, and abhor, no less then a
monster, a child being endued with manlyke reason and capacitee? Whereunto
accords this common proverb, I hate the child, whose wit ripeneth before
the time. Or who would gladly sustain to haunt, or keep company with that old
man, who unto his so long practice, and experience in things, had added also
like quickness of the mind, and like sharpness of discourse? Conclude
therefore, that old age doteth thorough my benefit, and yet ye see how these
my good dotardes, shall in the mean while rest vacant and discharged of all
such cares and anxieties, wherewith wisemen of fressher sprites are wrongen
continually, and in the mean while become cherisshers each of other, Dotage in
elde men.
by neyghbourly gossippyng togethers, and table play, felyng no manner
tediousness of this life, which skarce a liuelier age suffers, yea and
sometime learn again to spell a, m, o, as the old man of Plautus does,
most wretched, in case one yntch of sound wit remained in them, and yet
through my procurement, most happy, being also dear, and welcome to their
friends, among other respects, for this, that commonly they are very
pleasant in company, and merrily bespoken. For in Homer ye may read, how out
of Nestors mouth there flowed words sweeter than honey, whereas Achilles
langage byted bitter. In Homer also, old men leaning over Troie walls put
forth a swetedelyuerid voice. As to which regard, theirs may be preferred
before the very grace of infancy, which sure is much gracious, but yet
partly disgraced, when it lacks speech, and chattyng, that are euin the
chiefest recreacions of man's life. Add hereto, that old age ioyeth much in
children, and children likewise will ever be about oldefolkes. Such is
nature, in couplyng like, and like together, for what other thing is there
unlike betwix them? save that Elde, is fuller of wrincles, and noumbreth more
years? Else, Old men like children.
their white hears, their totheles jaws, less proporcion of their bodies,
mylklongyng, fumblyng in the mouth, chattyng, fondness, forgetfulness,
rechelousnesse, for brief, all other conditions be of one degree, so that the
nearer men aproche to old age, the nearer return they to the form of
childhode, till at last, euin like children, no tediousness of life, nor
sense of death felt, they depart out of this world. Can any of you compare now
the other gods transformacions, with this of mine? who what they do i^ way
of displeasure, me lists not to rehearse: But whom they most favor, and are
pleased with, them (trow I) they are wont to change into trees, into fowls,
into grasshoppers, ye or sometime into serpents, as if it were not a certain
kind of perisshyng to be altered so into a new likeness: whereas I reduce the
self same man, to the best, and most pleasant part of all his life. That and
if men had the grace to forbear quite from medlyng with wisdom, leadyng
forth all their life in my service, now (I wene) there should be no old age
at all, but rather they should enioie a most happy, and continual youth.
Study and business have forward age.
For see you not (I pray you) how these wysemen, who are given to philosophy,
or some such ernest and grave study, do for the most part wax hoar,
before they be fully young men? which undoubtedly comes of cares, and
incessant sharp trauailyng of the brain, by little and little sokyng up the
lively juice of the sprites: whereas my fools on the other side, be slicke, and
smothe skinned, yea and well trussed together, like hoglynges of Acarnania:
such as never should feel (I warrant you) any discommoditee of age, ne were
it not that sometime by chance, thei^e infected with the contagious company of
wysemen. Such is the lotte of man's life, suffryng nothing on all parts to be
blisfull. And here I may bring in the approved auctoritee of the proverb,
which affirms Folly to be the only lynke, that staieth fletyng youth, and
keeps of combrous age. Like as not causeles men say by the Brabanters, that
whereas years make other people the wyser, they, the longer they live, are
rooted the deper in folly. Yet for all that, where find you any nation more
iocunde, or meter for the common trade of living, or that less feleth ages
weight, than this does? To whom as in country, so also in manners are my
Hollanders next neighbors. For why should I stick to call them mine? Seeing
they take my part so ernestly, as thereby they have gotten them my name for an
addicion, so little whereof they ar ashamed, as they pass not to boste them
selves in it. Let them that will now go, Folly the pror^ger and delaie of age.
and seek out, Medea, Circes, Venus, Aurora, or I wot never what manner
fountain, to have their youth restored, whereas I only am she that may, and
use to do it. It is I that have that marvelous juice, wherewith Memnous
daughter proroged the youth of her graundsire Tithonus. I am that Venus,
through whose favor Phaon waxed young again, whom therefore Sappho so much
loved. Mine be those herbs, if any such be, and mine be those charms, and
mine is that fountain, that not only call youth back again, ones being
vanisshed, but also (which is more desyrable) does conserve it everlasting.
That and if ye all do subscribe to this opinion, how nothing is more
pleasant than youth, and nothing more cumbresome than age, now (I trow) ye
perceive how much ye are beholding to me, seeing I uphold to you so great a
weal, so great an evil excluded. But what speak I yet of mortal men? search
ye (hardly) all heaven, and who that list than scorn be my name, in case he
find any of the gods not crabbed, and dispisable, unless my influence do
commend him. For why is my cosyn Bacchus ever like a striplyng, and fair
busshed? Folly commands the Gods also.
Forsouth because like a witles and dronken compaignion, passing his time in
bankettes, daunces, and places, he has never thus much to do with Pallas
goddess of wisdom. Finally, so little sette^o he to be holden wise, as the
obseruaunce that he requires at men's hands is naught but maygames,
shrouynges, and such like fantsies. Neither is he offended with the proverb,
calling him a fool, as, Foolissher than Morychus. For they call him Morychus
because vplandisshe hobbes in sport are wont at bringyng home of harvest, to
besmere his image set before temple doors, with must, and grene fygges. And
(lord) with what iestes the writers of the old Comedies do taunt him? O fond
God (say they) and worthy who should issue out of the grine of Jupiter: Yet
who would not rather chose, if choice were offered, to be such a fool, and
popie as he is, being ever merry conceited, ever younglyke, ever prouokyng men
to laughter with his sport and pleasantness, than Jupiter him self, withal
his deep dissembled chere, lokyng so sternly, as gives terror to the gods
also? Or Pan, who with his sudden fraimentes and tumultes, brings age over
all things? Or Vulcanus the lymphault smithe, full of smoke and embres, ever
filthy with the toil that he endures in his forge? Orels Pallas my great
adversary, being so much redoubted because she bears spear, and shield:
who ever shows a pair of skoulyng eyes? But why (I pray you) is Cupide
always like a young boie? why? but that he is a trifler, neither doing, nor
thynkyng any wise act, I warrant you. Why has Venus also her beauty ever
alyke flourisshyng? why? but that she is sybbe unto me? euin as her visage
resembles my fathers color, for Homer names her golden Aphroditis. So, she
is ever smilyng, if we credit the poets, or their cou^terfaitours the
peinters. Moreover, what god head did the Romans woorship ever more
religiously, than that of Flora the mother of all pleasures and solasses? How
be it on the othersyde, who so would narowlier search, and consider the manner
of living, euin of those sour and glommyng gods, either out of Homer, or other
poets, he should find them (no fail) as foolish, and dissolute, as these.
For what needs me to allege meaner Gods Folies? when all ye have at your
fingers ends, how great a lover thundering Jupiter is? Also how grave Dame
Diane forgettyng womanhode, does naught but hounte all day long, visityng
by startes yet her sweet heart Endymion? But as for me, I had lever they
should hear their faults told them of Momus the god of Rephrehension, at
whose hands so many times they have been taunted. Saving, that not long agone
they threw down him and Atis, headlong togethers to the earth, because that
ever with his wise sawes and admonicions he seemed out of season to far
against their felicitee. Poor Momus therefore wandreth about like a
vacabound, in as much as no mortal man will gladly vouchesaue him
herbourough, for fear of Jupiters displeasure, much less that he can be
received into princes courts, Flatery familier in princis courts.
for there my Adulacion bears the swinge, who agrees no more with Momus,
than lambs do with the woulfe. So that since he is ones removed, the gods
above may now much franklier, and at more libertee play their pageauntes,
leadyng forth an easy life (as Homer says) whereas no countroller dare call
them to accoumpte. For (Lord) the sport that Priapus the great tooled god
makes them? what pastyme have they at Mercurius, with his theft, and iuggling.
Not so much as Vulcane, but when the gods are set at bankette, he plaieth
the iester, now with his lymphaultyng, now with his skoffyng, and now with
his ouerthwarte words, to provoke them all to laughter. Than comes Silenus
that horeheadded lover, treadyng the hornepipe, with Poliphemus boisteously
stampyng, and the Nymphs trippyng barefooted, The Satyrs half gotes dauncyng
the Antikes, And Pan with his oten flute singyng some rural song, does
wonderously delight them, as whom, at that time, they had rather hear, than the
Muses them selves: chiefly, when they begin to be thoroughly chafed with
their Nectar drink but what should I tell you of that the gods do after
such compotacions? things so foolisshe, as I my self can scant refreine from
laughter. It is best therefore that herein I remember Harpocrares for his
silence, lest some euisdropper god, do harken me blabbyng forth such things
of them, as not Momus him self spoke ever unpunished. So now it is time,
that (following Homers example) I leave the gods above, and make return to
the earth, to discuss, how nothing here is either gladsome, or desirable, Folly
natural to man kind.
unless the same begin at me. For first, ye se with how great providence,
Nature the foundresse of mankind has forcast, that no where, in any part of
man's life the saulce of Folly should be wanted. For if wisdom, according to
the Stoikes diffinicion, is naught else, than to be ruled by reason: and folly,
to be led as affection will. Consider now (I pray you) how much more
Affection, than Reason, Jupiter has put in men, to the end their life should
not altogethers be heavy, and unpleasant. As if ye should compare an ounce to
a pound. Furthermore, he shut up Reason within the narowe compass of man's
head, leauyng all the rest of the body to affections: setting also, two most
violent tyrannes against her, that is to say, Anger, reigning in the fortress
of the heart: and concupiscence, which euin to the lowest part of the bealy,
does occupy a large possession. Against these two so strong champions, how
much Reason may resist, the commen trade of men's lives declares
sufficiently. That whereas Reason, as much as lies in her, does cry against
them, ^uin till she be hoarse, alleageyng what honesty will, and requires,
yet daigne not they to obey, but much more furiously done repyne at her, till
at last she also, being weried, is feign to yield for vanquisshed. But in so
much as to man, borne to govern, and rule, Jupiter thought it meat to
distribute Reason somewhat in a larger assise, to the end yet he might partly
alaie the excess, he called me (as he is wont) among the other gods to
counsel: Jupiter called Folly to cou^sail.
and by and by I gave him advise like my self, that a woman should be
associate unto him. Folly of women.
A creature (god knows) both foolisshe, and vnwittie, but natheles
pleasant, and gracious. To the end that through daiely company, and dwelling
together, she with her Folly might relesse, and make doulcet the sadness of
man's courage. For where Plato seems to doubt, whether he should put a
woman among reasonable, or unreasonable creatures, it was no more, but to
show and express the notable Folly of that sex: So that if any woman studieth
to be counted wise, she does naught else but labor to be twyse foolish, as
if ye would force a cow against her nature to escape through a hoope. For the
fault is doubled, when so ever one against kind, would counterfaite a gloss
of virtue, to writhe the mind otherwise than of nature it plieth. According as
the greek proverb says, An ape, is an ape, be she clothed in purpre, so a
woman is a woman (that is to say) a fool, what so ever part she play. Yet I
think not that women are so very fools, to be angry with me herefore, What
co^moditees women have by Folly,
that I being Folly her self, and a woman also, do arrect Folly unto them.
For and if they way all things indifferently, they shall soon perceive, how
much I am to be thanked, that for many respects they are far happier, than
men be. First, for their beauties sake, beauty (I say) which not without
good cause is had in so great price by them, as under whose shield and
protection, they do exercise tyranny, yea over tyrannes them selfs. For
else, whence comes to men that sternes of their visages, roughness of skin,
and thickenesse of their beardes, being a very representacion of oldnesse,
saving of the excess, or rather disease of wisdom? whereas women with their
smoth chekes, small voices, and five skins, do ever show a certain
youthlikenesse. Again, what is it in this life that women sooner coueite, than
to be belyked of men? Tend not (trow ye) to this effect, so many their
attyres? so many peinctynges, so many bathynges? so many hear curlynges, so
many glisshes? so many perfumes? so many ways of nyce simpring, nycer smilyng,
nycest going, be it but on an yntch of lether, and all to set them selfs
forth to the show? Further, what greatter privilege have women over men, than
their foolisshenesse? For what is it, that men permit not as leafull, or at
least to be borne with, in women? but under what other title, than of
delectacion? But how do they delight men, saving with their Folly? This to be
true, can not be denied, who so will consider with him self, what fond talk
and devises, a man is feign to find out, as often as he entendeth to take
fruicion and pleasure of a woman. And thus I have declared you from what
spring the first and chiefest recreacion of this your life is derived. Folly of
fea ^^les and bankettes.
But yet some persons there be, namely old men, rather good maltwormes, than
women haunters, who contrary to my supposicion will put their greatest
felicitee in tippling, and good fate. As touching which poincte, I refer it
to others judgment if any feast or banquet be made in the right kind, unless
women are at the same. But of this I am sure, how without the sauice of Folly,
no banquet can be to the sum. In sort that there want one, who with his own,
or counterfaite Folly, may stir the gestes to laughter, than straight is
some iester, or other mad knave sent for, with his bald and foolisshe
skoffes, to put away the sad stylnesse of the feast. For else, what booted so
many ionkettes, sweet meats, and daintries to balace the belie withal, unless
the eyes, the ears, and the whole mind, were also fed with laughter, sport,
and merry conceits? But of all such knackes I am the only deuisour, like as
this, that now is solemnly taken up at bankettes, to chose a king by lottes,
to play at tables, to bring good luck, to quasse about the bourde, to sing
carosses; with such like obseruances, was never ordeigned by the seuin sages
of Greece, but through mine inuencion, for the conseruacion, and avail of
mankind. Yet mark you the nature of all such devises, and ye shall see, that
the more folly they smell of, the more they do profit the life of mortal
men. Which life, in case it be ouerwaied with sadness, than sure it scantly
deserves the name of life. And sad must it needs be, vules with some kind
of pastyme ye wype away tediousness, next cosyn to the other. Folly an^our
of friendship;
Now some perchance there are, who little will esteem this kind of pleasure
also, but rather rest wholly on the league and acquaiutance of one friend with an
other. Affirmyng friendship to be the only thing, which should be sought and
embraced before all the other commodities of your life, being (say they) so
necessary, and behouablr, as neither air, not fire, nor water may be more
requisite unto men^ and thereto so appropriately annexed, as the sons heat
may as soon as friendship be spared among you: and besides this so honest a
thing (if honesty as you think make ought to purpose) as not the
philosophers them selves do stick to put friendship euin among the
chiefest weals of this life. But what will ye say now, if I can prove my
self to be both croppe, and root, of this so great a benefit? Prove it to
you (I say) neither with Barbara, nor Celerent, nor any such Dialectical
quaynt subtiltes, but euiu of the plainest and bluntest facion, poyncte you to
it, as it were with my finger? First therefore when you see a man flatter,
dissemble, or wynke at his friends faults, yea, and sometime owe favor, or
rather wonder at some great vices of his, taking them for virtues: do you not
count him (I pray you) next sybbe to a fool?

What if an other take some deformitee that his se^man has, for a great grace,
or a father, whose child is squynt eied, calls him natheles his pretty
pinkeied boie, is not this (trow ye) plain folly? Folly the glue of friendship.
Let sages cry again and again, that it is folly, yet this same folly is the
glue that souldreth, and interteigneth friends together. I speak of mortal
men, of whom none lives without some faults. So that, he may well be holden
for the best, that is combred with the smallest. Whereas among these Gods of
wisdom, either no friendship can fasten at all, or if it do, yet is it but a
frounyng, and an unpleasant friendship, and such, as takes place among
very few of them. for it were to sore to say among none, seeing the most
part of men do ouershote them selves: yea, if I said all, I might abide by
it, so many sundry ways is every wight subject unto Folly. And friendship is
never properly knitte, but between men of egall estate and condition. That
admit sometime a manner amity is so kyndled between these wysemen: god
knows yet how short a life, and continuance it shall be of, namely among so
wayward Waiwardnesse in friendship.
faultfinders, as commenly such sages are, being ever ready to find an hole,
and castyng as sharp an eye upon their friends faults, as an Egle does upon
her pray. But (Lord) for all that how poreblinde are they in their own? not
ones loking back at the sachell hangyng behind them. In as much than as the
nature of men is such, that no wit may be found, not lymed with some great
vices, in case ye add thereto the diuersnesse both of men's inclinacions, and
ages, together with so many ouersightes, so many errors, and chaungyng
chances, as this mortal life is disposed to, now I see not how the fruit of
friendships pleasantness should one half hour be conferued between so narow
discussers of things, unless the remedy of forbearyng Forbearyng.
one an other, which also in Greek, is as much to say, as Folly were added
for a stay and maintenance of the same. But what say ye? Cupide him self the
god of all love and friendship, The god of love blind.
is he not blind? to whom as oftentimes not fair things seem fair, so
likewise among you he brings to pass, that each does think his own
burde fairest, and like will ever eleue to like. Now though we see, how
commenly these things are done, and commenly laughed to shorn, yet such
fondness is it that souldreth, and holds a pleasant fellowship of life
atwixe you. Further, what I have said by friendship, much more may I say by
marriage. Which is to say, an inseparable conjunction of man and woman. But
(Lord) what diuorsementes, or inconveniences worse than diuorsementes would
not commenly happen, in case their daiely societee, and dwelling togethers,
were not now with flaterie, now with daliance, now with sport, with forbearyng,
with error, with dissemblyng (all of my guard I warrant you) boeth propped up,
and nourisshed? Good lord, how few spowsailes should go thorough, in case
the wower wisely before hand did boult out, what wanton parts the tender, and
to his semyng, shamefast maiden has played long before he knew hit? Further,
how few marriages ones solemnised, should continue in force: unless the most part
of the wives pageantes were cloked, either through her husbands negligence, or
doltisshenesse? All this, and woorthily, is arrected to Folly. Yet does this
folly make the wife to be cherisshed of her husband, the husband likewise of
his wife, their house to be quiet, and thaffinitee between their friends to
remain. The cokeholde witolde, or what other name ye list to give him, is
laughed to scorn, when with his lips he sucketh in the tears of his scant
honest wife. Yea good enough. How much better shall he find it to be deceived
so, than thoroughe jealousy to frette him self, and set all things on a rore.
For short conclusion (I say) so much lacks that any manner friendship,
society of life, No societee of life without Folly.
or companiyng together, may with out mine access be pleasant, or long
lifed, as not the people would long bear their ruler, nor a servant his
master, a maid her mastres, a scholar his teacher, a friend his friend, the
husband his wife, a lender the hirer, a chamberfelow his cha^berfelow, nor a
bourdmate, his bourdmate, unless by turns atwixe them selves they should
sometime err, sometime flatter, sometimes wincke for the nones, and now and
than coumfort their bittred taste with some honey of foolisshenesse. These
things (I wot well) seem right marvelous unto you, but give me leave a
little, and ye shall hear further.

I pray you, can he love any body, None acceptable to him self without Folly.
that loves not him self? can he agree with any body, that discordeth with
him self? May he please others, that is displeasant, and tedious to him
self? But setting me aside, so much lacks, that any man can abide or bear
what others do, as ye shall see him fallout with him self, mislyke what so
ever he does, and be his own hater. For nature not in few poinctes rather a
stepdame than a mother, has graffed this evil propretie in men's heads,
namely theirs that are skilfuller, that ever they despise what qualitee is
their own, and set more by that they see in others. Whereby it commes to
pass, that all the gifts, and graces, of this life, are quite lorne and
defaced. For what avails beautee? beauty (I say) the very chiefest gift
that the immortal Gods do give here, if he that has it, reketh not of it?
Or what avails youth? If it be drowned with the leuaine of hoar sadness.
Finally in any manner trade of life, what can a man go about to do semely,
and with a good grace, either by him self or before others (as in derde, to
express and set a thing forth lively, is not only the chiefest poincte of
cunnyng, but also the very head of any thing put in ure) if this my damoisell
Selfloue Selfloue.
be not his aduauncer, whom woorthily I hold therefore in steed of my sister:
so busely she trauaileth to my behalf in every place. And what can be more
folly, than one to like him self, and stand in his own conceit? but than
again, what thing can be propre, or becommyng, or well dooen, in case the doer
of the same mislyketh him self in it? So that take away this saulce of
Selflikyng, which is euin the very relesse of man's life and doings, and by
and by ye shall see the Orator cold in his mattier, the Musici^n mislyked
withal his discant, the Plaier hissed out of the place, the Poet and his
muses laughed to skorne, the Peincter and his art naught set by, the Phisicien
for all his medicines walk an hungered, briefly, this set a side, he that
seemed beautiful Nireus, shall appear to be more ugly and misfauoured than
Thersites, instead of fair Phaon, as hoar and wrincled as Nestor was, for
Minerua, a sow (as the proverb says) for an eloquent speaker, the fowlest
stammerer in a country, and for a courtlyke fellow, the rudest hobbe that may
be piked from the plough. So behouable is it (lo) that every man do clappe
him self on the back, and with some flattrie be commendable to him self, ere
he can be commended of others. Finally whereas it is the greattest part of
felicitee, for a man to desire to be, as he is in deed, that does Selfloue
procure you by a redier way. For no man, how ever vile he be, will so despair
in him self, Eacheman through Folly stands in selfconceite.
as utterly to mislyke either his wit, his kynred, dwelling place,
occupacion, or country. As an Irissheman would not change his nation with an
Italian, nor a Turk with an Athenyen, nor yet a Tartar with the very Isles of
Fortune: which so being, how singular than is natures providence (trow ye) in
so great varieree of things, to make them all yet of a like proporcion? as to
whom she has been somewhat skarce in other gifts, there she puts a little
more selflikyng, but this I spoke not very circumspectly, seeing the same
selflikyng, may woorthily be esteemed for the greattest gift of all. Folly
auto^ of all noble acts and artes^
Here now I recke not much, to pass over untouched, how no manner act, or
noble deed was ever attempted, nor any art or science invented, other, than
of which I might fully be holden first author. War.
For as touching war, the very head and spring of all great enterprises,
which so commenly ar praised, and enrolled by historiens, is it not (trow ye)
a foolisshe practice, to begin such variaunce, as ever both parties receive
more damage then profit by? (for of those that leave their carcasses in the
field, as did the Megarensiens, never count is made) But yet, when armies
ioigne together, and tru^pettes blow up blouddy notes, to what stead I pray
you can these good father Sages serve? who soked up with long study, lean,
and cold of bloudde, may scantly draw their wind? Naie than must fat and
Iustie blouddes do the feate, having boldness with the most, and wit with
the lest^ unless perchance some would chose such a soldier as was
Demosthenes, who following Archilocus the poets read, scarce lookynge his
enemies in the face, threw down his shield and tanne away, as cowardly a
warrior, as he was a wise orator. But Counsel in wars (say they) is of
great importance, and as for that I stick not much, that counsel in a
captain is requisite, so it be warlyke, and not philosophical. For commenly
they that bring any valiant feate to pass, are good blouddes, venturers,
compaignions, swasshes, dispatchers, bankrowtes, with such like, and none of
these Philosophers candel wasters. Who how unmeet they be to serve for any
commen affair, or purpose among men, we may be taught by the example of
Socrates him self, the only wiseman, but unwisely judged by Apollos oracle.
That whereas on a time he went about to have said his mind in a certain
mattier to the commens of Athenes, he left of sodeinly, being all to laughed to
scorn. How be it this Socrates, as in one poinct (me seems) was not all wide,
in that he would not take upon him the name of a wyseman, but rather ascribed
the same unto god only, and thought it best for a wyseman not to busy him
self or meddle with matters of the commen weal, unless perhaps he might have
said more rightly, that who so would be taken among the noumbre of men,
should not meddle to much with wisdom. For I pray you, what drove Socrates
upon his araignment, to drink poison, for the death he was condemned to,
saving only that his excellent, that his goodly qualitee of wisdom? Because,
whiles whole days together he trifled out the time, in disputacions upon the
clouds, upon Idees, and by geometry peyned him self to meat a flies fecte,
discussyng also how a gnatte, being so little a vermin, might yield so great a
sound, he never applied him self to learn things perteignyng to this commen
trade of life. But now comes Plato his disciple to defend his master at the
bar: a gaie Advocate (I promise you) who being offended with the noise of the
people throungyng about him, could scante make an end of the first clause of
his tale. And what say you by Theophrastus? who taking upon him to speak unto
a great assembly, Wysemen dastards, either to fight, or speak in a prease,
as soon as he stood up, by and by could say never a word, as if he had
seen a woulfe at unawares: and how should he than have encouraged soldiers to
fight? Or else Isocrates? Who of a certain natural timorousness, durst never
before audience open his lips? Marcus Tullius, the father of Roman
eloquence, ever with an unseemly tremblyng began his oracions, as it were a
sobbyng child, which Quintilian enterpreteth to be the sign of a ware and
wise Orator, who pondred well the waightinesse of his mattier. But when he
says so, does he not plainly confess, wisdom to be an obstacle against
any bold feate. For what will such shrimpys she bodies do (trow ye) when it
comes to handstrokes, that are almost dead for fear, when they strive but
with bare words? And yet after all this (on gods name) is that worthy saw
of Plato much commended, how those commonweals most happily should
flourishe, that were governed by philosophers, or whose governors applied them
selfs to philosophy. No no, if ye look in histories, ye shall find, no
rulers were euemore pestilent to a commen weal, than if the same at any time
fell into the hands of such one, as was given to any scet of philosophy. For
proof whereof, I allege unto you the two Catons, the one whereof, with his headie
and frantike accusacions, disturbed greatly the quiet of Rome city: the
other, in going about over wisely to protecte the same, did utterly subvert it.
And ioigne ye hardly to them both Brutus and Cassius, with the two Gracchi,
yea and Cicero him self, for as pestilent a citesein among the Romans, as
Demosthenes was to the Atheniens commen weal.

Likewise, whattrowye by Marcus Aurelius? I admit he was a good emperor, and
yet could I wrest that praise also from him, because his to much
philosophership made him odious and hateful to the people. But admit (I
say) he was good, yet truly more peruicious was he to the commen weal, in
leauyng so ungracious an ympe, as Comodus was, for successor in his state,
than ever he was profitable through his own good wealdyng of the same.
Wiseme^s children commenly ^ooles.
For commenly this kind of men, that are bookisshe, and give them selfs to
such peuisshe disciplines, like as in other things, so also in childer
gettyng have very ill luck, as if nature of piety (I wene) provided that this
plage, this disease (I say) of wisdom, should not sprede over largely
among men. So Cicero had a soonne, far unlike him in conditions. And
Socrates, that wise wiseman had children, lyker to their mother than their
father, As one writes merrily, that is to say, they were fools. Now though
these wysemen be as unapt for all public offices and affairs, Wysemen
unfit for any function of this life.
as an ass is to finger an harp, yet might it soso be abidden, if they were
not also as untoward in any private duty perteignyng to this life. For bid
ones one of these sages to diner, and either with his silent glommyng, or his
dark and eluisshe problemes he will trouble all the bourde. Desire him to take
hands in a bralle, ye will safe a Camel daunceth. Bring him to a Mydsomer
watch, or a stage play, and euin with his very look he will seem to
disdeine the peoples pastyme, so that wise dan Cato must be feign to avoid the
place, because he can not forbear his frownyng. Let him light on a knotte of
good company talkyng merrily, and by and by every might holds his peace. If he
must bie any thing, make a bargain, or briefly do ought of those things,
without which this commen life can not be led, then sooner will ye take him
for a block, than a reasonable creature. So much lacks (^oe) that he may
stand his countrei, or his friends in profitable steed, who neither is
skilled in things daiely enured, and much differs from the commen opinion,
and manners of the other people. Per consequent whereof, Wisdom bredeth hatred.
he must needs deserve their hatred and displeasure, through the great
diuersitee of livings, and disposicions at wixe them. For and if ye list to
judge indifferently, is there ought done here among mortal men not full of
folly, both by fools, and before fools? So that if one only wight would take
upon him to kick against all the rest, him would I advise, that (as Timon did)
he should shrincke into some desert, there to enioie his wisdom to him self.

But to return to my former purpose (I axe you) what manner charm it was,
Folly the founder of states and commonweals.
that enduced those ancient sto^y, wooden, and rude men in the worlds first
age (as poets feigue) dispersed so a broad, to live together in citees, but
only Adulacion Adulacion.
or glosyng speech? For what do poets else signify by that sweetetuned harp
of Amphion and Orpheus? What thing also revoked the comminaltee of Rome,
rebellyng against the Senate, to agreement? was it any Philosophical oracion?
No forsouth. What than? Euin a foolisshe Aesopes fable feigned of the beasie,
and the other lymmes of man's body.

Like as Themistocles persuaded the Atheniens by his tale of the fox and the
hedgehogge: Could any wise man's oracion (trow ye) have enduced those wild and
Saluage Spaniardes to such a conformitee, and obedience, as did Sertorius
their wily captain, under color of Religion, and that devise of his white
hynde? Or as Licurgus allured the Spartanes through the example showed them of
the two dogs? with also that other fond devise of Sertorius making two
horse tails to be plucked at? I let pass Minos, and Numa, each of whom with
feigned fayrie inuencions bleared the gross multitudes eyes: For ye must
think that such like toies as these, are the liueliest and most pithie
persuasions, that the myghtie madbeast the communaltee can be moved with:
Whereas hitherto was never city or commen weal, that would be governed by
Platos or Aristotle's laws, no more than any nation has followed those glorious
rules and institutes of living, that Socrates set forth. But I pray you, what
provoked both the Decians willingly to bequethe the^ selfs to the Infernal
Gods? And likewise egged Quint Curtius to cast him self into the great cave
and swalowe of the ground, that whilom opened in the marcatsteede of Rome,
Mainglory
saving only Vainglorie? Vainglorie (I say) that most fair, and sweet
bayted Mermaide, but (lord) how wonderously yet condemned by these sages? For
what can be a more fond part (say they) than ambiciously, as in commonweals
is used, A man to go, and faune on him, and him, for their voices? or with
making commen gifts and distribucions to bie the peoples favor? hyghly
magnifiyng him self, when the people cries a larges on him? When also like a
pageant, or spectacle prepared for the peoples eyes, he rides about in triumph,
crowned with sawrer? having his image for a memory of the fact set up in
the marcatsteede, with much curious entitlyng of his names, surnames, bynames,
and office names, besides the immortal, and godly honors, that are thereupon
decreed, to so mean and poor a caitiue as he is, least deseruyng the^, as not
seldom the veriest tirannes that ever reigned, have natheles with public
ceremonies been cannonised into the noumbre of the gods. These are things as
foolisshe as can be, to laugh whereat one Democritus suffisethe not. And yet,
euin of this spring of Vainglorie come all your worthy conquerours acts, and
famous feats, which with the style of so many eloquent writers are extolled up
to heaven. This very branche of Folly builds citees, foundeth states,
headrulers, religions, counsel mates, judgments, and briefly all the
deeds and life of mortal men, is naught else than a certain great play of
Folly. How what I have said hereby, Folly inuen tresse of sciences.
as well I may say by arts and sciences. For whatels has provoked men's
wits to seek out and disclose to their posteriours so many goodly disciplines
(as they take them) saving only an ardent thurst of glory? Such is the
apetite of foolish men, with so great travails, watchyng, and sweetyng at the
brows, to recover a little, I worre nere what Fame, which either is nothing,
or nothing is more vain than it. But in the mean while, ye ought to conne me
thank, for such, and so many commoditees, as they have found out toward the
better state of your life. And that (which is most sweet of all) ye do
peruse the fruit of other men's madness: Than sir, seeing I have this challenged
unto me the praise of fortitude, and of industriousnesse, what if I claim
Prudence also? ^^rie prudence to come of fo^e,
perhaps some will say, as soon might I go about to mingle fire and water.
But for all that I hope to bring it to pass, if as hitherto you have dooen,
ye vouchesaue me your ears, and attentiveness. And first of all, if Prudence
consists in long practice and experience of things. unto whether of these
may the honor of that name better square? Either to this wyseman, who partly
for shame, and partly for dastardness of heart, attempteth nothing, or else
that fool, whom neither shame, being shameless, nor petill, being reckeles,
may fear from prouyng any thing. A wyseman reports him self to his books,
and there learneth naught but mere triflyng distinctions of words. A tool in
ieopardyng, and going presently where things are to be known, Fools judge
right lier than wisemen.
gathers (unless I am deceived) the perfect true prudence. Which Homer
seems, notwithstanding his blindness to have seen, when he said thus, A
fool knows the thing, that is ones dooen. For there be two strong lettes
against such knowlage of things to be gathered, that is to say, shame and
dread: shame, that castes a mist before men's minds: and dread, that showing
the pertiles, discounsaileth men from ventryng any enterprises. But I Folly
may, and am wont to wype those lettes clean away. Yea, few men consider,
how many ways else it avails to blousshe at nothing, and dare do^e every
thing. But now (lo) and if ye take prudence after the rate, as when it testeth
in judgment and discourse of things, harken ye (I pray you) how far they
are wide thereof, who do make it their chiefest profession. For first it is
not unknown, how all human things like the Silenes or duble images of
Ascibiades, have two faces much unlike and dissemblable, The S^^nes of
Alcibiades.
that what outwardly seemed death, yet lokyng within ye should find it life:
and on the other side what seemed life, to be death: what fair, to be foul:
what rich, beggarly: what cunnyng, rude: what strong, feable: what noble,
vile: what gladsome, sad: what happy, unlucky: what friendly, unfriendly:
what health some, noisome. Briefly the Silene ones being undone and disclosed,
ye shall find all things turned into a new semblance. If these words to
some seem spoken to clerkly, go to, I will expound them more plainly. I
pray you, who is he that confesses not a prince to be both rich, and a
great lord? but set case he has no good qualitees of the mind, nor with all
those gooddes he has, can be satisfied: now is he not rich, but poorst than
the poorest. Than again admit he begeuin to sundry vices: now is he no lord,
but more subject than a servant: and after this rate may ye skanne also the
others. But this is enough for exemple. Now it may be, ye muse what I mean
hereby, but give me leave yet a little further. If one at a solemn stage
play, would take upon him to pluck of the plaiers garments, whiles they
were saying their parts, and so disciphre unto the lokers on, the true and
native faces of each of the plaiers, should he not (trow ye) mar all the
mattier? and well deserve for a madman to be peltid out of the place with
stones? ye should see yet straightwaies a new transmutacion in things: that
who before played the woman, should than appear to be a man: who seemed
youth, should, show his hoar hears: who countrefaited the king, should turn
to a rascal, and who played god almighty, Error auailyng.
should become a cobbler as he was before. Yet take away this error, and as
soon take away all togethers, in as much as the feignyng and counterfaityng
is it, that so delights the beholders. So likewise, all this life of mortal
men, This world a stage play of Folly.
what is it else, but a certain kind of stage play? whereas men come forth
disguised one in one arraie, an other in an other, each plaiyng his part, till
at last the maker of the play, or bokebearer causes them to avoid the
skaffolde, and yet sometime makes one man come in, two or three times, with
sundry parts and appara^e, as who before represented a king, being clothed
al^^t purpre, having no more but shyfted him self a little, should show him
self again like an woobegon myser. And all this is dooen under a certain
veil or shadow, which taken away ones, the play can no more be played. Here
now if one of these wisemen, come (A we^e) from heaven, did sodeinly appear,
and say, frowe euin this great prince, whom all men honor as their god and
sovereign, deserves skarce to be called man, seeing like the brute beasts, be
is trained by affections, and is none other than a servant of the basest sort,
seeing willyngly he obeith so many, and so vise vices his masters. Or than
again, would bid some other, who mourned for his fathers or friends
decease, rather to laughe, and he merry, because such diyng to this world is
the beginning of a better life, whereas this here, is but a manner death as it
were. Furthermore, would call an other gloriyng in his arms and aun^estrie,
both a villain, and a bastard, because he is so many discentes disalied from
virtue, which is the only root of true nobilitee. And in such like sort
would rail upon all the rest. I pray you, what should he prevail thereby,
but make men take him for frantike and distraught? For surely as nothing can be
more foolisshe than wisdom out of place, so is nothing more fond than
prudence out of season. And does he not out of season (trow ye) that plieth
not him self as the world goes? nor will not take the market as it ryseth?
nor at least remember the law of quassyng, Other drink thy drink, or rise,
and go thy way? On the other side, it is a very wysemans part to coueite to
know nothing beyond his bands, and either as the whole multitude of other men
do, to dissemble gladly, or to err, and be deceived with the most. But euin
this is Folly (say they). And in good faieth I will not much deny it, upon
condition again they grant me, that to dissemble, or err so, is the right
plaiyng of the pageantes of this life.

But (Lord) a thing now is come to my remembrance, shall I speak it, or keep
it in? and why should I keep it in, syns it is truer than truth it self? but
it is best for me in so weighty a mattier as it is, to pray the Muses in mine
aid, whom poets call upon oftentimes for the veriest trifles they write.
Come ye bithes therefore a little ye ^oues daughters, Folly the guide unto
Sapience.
whiles I prove that no man can attain unto that excellent. Sapience, the
very castle (as they name it) of felicitee, unless I Folly be their guide and
leader. Inprimis, I take it for all ready granted, that all the affections of
man, pertain unto Folly. In as much as philosophers put this distinction
between a myseman, and a fool, that the one is led by reason, The dissetence
between a fool and a wyseman.
the other by sensualitee. and therefore do the Stoikes seclude all affections
from a wyseman, as so many diseases of the mind. But that notwithstanding,
these affections are not only set in steed of pilottes to such as would
recover the port of wisdom, but also in any act of virtue, are like
certain pricks, or incitacions prouokyng a man to do well. How ever in this
poinct the Archestoike Seneca strongly againsaieth me, who in no wise will a
wyseman should have any manner affection in him, but when he takes that away,
he leaves man, no man, but rather a newfounde god without bodily sense, such
as never was, nor never shall be. Yea, to speak plain^ier, he does naught
else than form a stone image of a man, without fealyng, or any manner
inclinacion perteinyng to a man in deed. Let the Stoikes therefore (if they
list) take their wyseman to them selfs, and make much on him alone, or (if
they think good) go and dwell with him in Platos city, or in the land of
Fairie, or Vtopia. For which of you would not loathe, and bliss you from the
company of such mance a man, as were mortified, and benumbed in all those
sensis and understandings, that naturally other men are led by? that had no
affections reignyng in him? nor would no more be sterred with love, or
compassion, than if he were a flint stone? that in nothing could euershoote him
self, but rather like Argus see, and cast all things to the uttermost?
Forgive no man? be only pleased with him self? The descripcion of a wyseman.
esteem him self only to be rich? only to be a king? only to be a
freeman? briefly, only all things, but in his own conceit only? that cared
for no friends? friend him self to no man? Would not stick to defy the
Gods? and what so ever is dooen of other men in this present life, to laugh at
it and despise it, as a very madness? Yet such a manner quaynt beast is this
complete wyseman of theirs. I pray you, if the choice went by voices, what
city would have such a governor? What army such a captain? naie what
woman would desire such an husband? or who would bydde such a gest to his
house? or what servant pike him out, or continue with a master of so
monstrous conditions? On the other side, who would not sooner prefer any
one chosen euin among the thickest of the people? who being a fool, could
aptly either govern, or obey fools, please the minds of such as be like
unto him, which is the most part, be treatable to his wife, gladly seen of
his friends, mearie in company, and lastly would think nothing vnbecomyng
him, that other men use commenly to do. But I wene, ye be werie now of this
their wyseman, as I, for my part, was a good while ago. Let us pass therefore
over to some other mattier. Admit than, some one, Only Folly releueth the
miseries of this life.
(as the Poets feign by Jupiter) should out of an high high place behold and
see in how many miseries man's life is wrapped, how wretched and vile his birth
is, how hard his bringyng up, how weak and pewlyng his childhode, how
trauailsome his youth, how heavy his age, and last how fearful his death
were. Further, during all his life, what bands of sickenesses do assail him,
what narow chances hang over his head, what displeasures come upon him, how
in all things he fyndeth more galle than honey, besides the miuries which one
of you scourges an other withal, as pouertee, enprisonment, worldely shame,
rebukyng, rackyng, gyle, treason, sklaunder, discencion, disceite (but now I
go about to tell the gravel of the sea) that for what offenses men deserved
such miseries, or what god being their heavy lord, condemned them to lead
their lives so pestred and plonged in the same, ye shall perdon me, from
expressing, as not leeful for me at this present to utter unto you. but who so
should (I say) consider all these things accordyngly, might it not move him
to approve the example, and deed of the virgins of Milesia, be it never so
piteous to rehearse? For ye shall understand, that willyngly, upon no apparent
cause why, they all hunge them selves. But seeing we chance to speak of
voluntary death, I axe you, who were those, that for tediousness of this
life, did rathest prevent death with their own hands?

Were they not such as bordred nearest upon wisdom? among whom (to let
pass Diogenes, Xenocrates, Cato, Cassius, Brutus, and such like) Chiron, the
wise Centaure, having grant of the gods, to live ever (so lykyng him) in
their state of immortalitee, would none of it, but chose rather to die. Ye
may see therefore what inconvenience should ensue, if men were commenly wise.
So that we had need of a new Prometheus, a new mowld, and a new earth, to make
men of, unless I partly through ignorance, partly through vnreckefulnesse, not
seeldome through oblivion of peines passed, sometime through hope of better
fortune, yea and now and than sauouryng their bittred taste with a little honey
of pleasure, did not in so manyfolde euilles releue and succor them. In sort,
that loathe they are to die yet, Old men desirous to live yet.
though the fatal spyndell of their life being tonne out and expyred, Charons
bote has more than quarter ebb tarried for their passage hence. So that how
less cause they have, why they should live, yet so much leefer is life unto
them, not that they feel any combraunce of the same. For it proceeds of my
goodness (I warrant you) that commenly ye see old men, of so hoar and
tremblyng age, as scant the figure of a man remains unto them, being both
fumblers, dotardes, totheles, griselles, bald, (or rather to descriue them by
Aristophanes terms) Nastie, crokebackt, wrincled, totheshaken, and lame of
their best limme (which for womanhode ^ name not) so desirous yet of life, and
so coltishe, as some one of them will die his white hears, and shave him
self twice a day: an other will deck his bald crown with a peruke: an other
set new tethe in his head, taken perhaps out of some hogs chappes: an other
fall in love with some young pygesnie, vsyng more fondness in such kind of
daliaunce than any youngman would. For as touching such Deaths dettours, and
veraie Graueporers, as euin at their last cast wedde young wenches vndowed,
but meter to serve other men's turns than theyrs, that is a thing so commenly
had in use, as in a manner now it is arrected for a great praise and charitable
kyndnesse unto them. But this is nothing, in comparison of the pleasant
spectacle, which ye may have at many of these old women, Oldwome^
who being never so much palled with long age, yea and so carcaslyke, as if
they had lately come from deaths Court, will ever yet have this proverb in
their mouths (life is life) still play the wantons, and still be tuppyng. Or
at lest hyre some young Phaon for mede to do the thing, still daube their
lither chekes with peiutyng, never go from the glass, show out their flaggie
and pendant dugges, provoke their stay nature with hot restoritiues, sit up
at bankettes, dance gali^^des write loueletters. etc. These things are mocked
commenly, for the greattest folies (without question) that may be. But yet
do these my oldgurles not a little like them selves herein, taking it for a
singular and only delight, as if they swamme up to the chinnes in a sea of
honey, wherein who but I does uphold them? and yet these deinty wisemen for all
their scornefulnes, I would they should no more but perpend thus with them
selves, whither it be better through such folly to lead a sugared life, or
else standing ever upon narow poynctes of wisdom, to seek (as a man would
say) an halter to hang withal? For how so ever such foolisshe pranckes are
thought to bread an evil name, I pray you, what mattier is that to my fools,
who either feel not what the inconvenience of an ill report means, or if
they feel it can so little set by it, and easily pass it over? If a Mylstone
fall upon thy head, that is an evil in deed; but as for shame, reproach,
loss of reputacion, or evil speech, these may do the as much hurt as thou
felist them: that and if thou felist them not, than are they no evils at all.
For what hurts the, the proples hissing, as long as thou clappest thy self
on the back? yet who has the grace to do so unless I Folly do arm him
thereto? But now (me thinks) I have the philosophers ones more in my top. For
that is (say they) euin the greattest misery of all, to be blinded so with
Folly, to err so, to be deceived so, to be ignorant so. Naie verilier, that is
it to be a man. And yet I see not why they should call you miserable therefore,
in as much as ye be borne so, ye be ordeigned so, and made so, and such is the
commen destiney lotted to every of you. For nothing may proprely be called
miserable Miserable it is not that agreth with Nature.
that agrees with the kind it comes of, unless perchance some would think a
man's nature were to be lamented, because he can not fly as burdes do, nor
go on all four as other beasts do, nor fence him with his horns as bulls
do. But than by like argument, why call they not a fair horse miserable:
because he never learned grammar? or eats no rostmeate? or else a buile
unhappy, because he is not shapen to throw the bar? Ergo, as an horse, who
can not his grammar, is not wretched, no more a man for his Folly is miserable,
because it agrees so aptly with his nature. But ones again these cluishe
Sophistrers heave at me. The knowlage (say they) of disciplines, is peculierly
geuin to man, through help whereof, what he lacks b^ nature, he may supply
with his wit and learning. A gaie mattier, as who says nature, which in
gnattes, yea and in herbs, and trees, has so diligently dooen bir part, in
man only should have showed her self defective, and a niggard, where through
he neded to make recourse for aid unto disciplines. Which disciplines Theutus
that dismal sprite, Disciplines unprofitable or rather hurt full to man.
who never willed good to mankind, did first find out, for your utter
destruction, so little auailyng toward felicitee, as rather they do hinder
you from it, for which purpose they were chiefly ordained, as Plato very
elegantly induces that wise Aegyptien king to argue, disputyng upon the first
inuencion of writing. So therefore, sciences came in first, with the residue of
the plages of man's life, and found out by the very same authors, who
likewise are authors of all mischief, that is to say, by diuelles: whereupon
also they have their name grounded. for Demon, signifies cunnyng, or a
knower. But the good simple people of the old golden world, without any
disciplines at all, lived only as Nature taught, and instincted them.

For what neded they any grammar, when all the world used but one speech?
which made also to none other purpose, save that one might understand an
other? Or whereto served Logike, when no controversy of words might make a
double meaning? Or, what place had Rhetorike, when none contended with others?
Or to what effect stood Law, seeing as yet evil manners reigned not, whereupon
good laws (no doubt) were first grounded? Further, they were more religious,
and godly, than with an ungodly curiositee to ensearche the secrets of Nature,
the ^uantitee of the sterres, their courses, or influences, or the hydden
causes of things, supposyng it against gods forbode, that they being mortal
and erthly men, should struggle to know beyond their degrees. Much less
that ever any such madness came in their brains, as ones to think upon the
inquirey of things set above the sterres. But when by little and little the
pureness of the golden age decaced, than were sciences invented (as I said)
by wicked sprites, but right few as yet, and practiced by as few. Than
afterward, the supersticion of the Chaldees, and idle newfanglednesse of the
Greeks added (I wene) more than six hundred others, being mere vexacions of
men's brains, in so much as Grammar alone, is hable to keep a man task whiles
he lives. And yet (lo) euin among such sciences, those we see had in most
price, than draw nearest to the commen sense and capacitee of all men (that is
to say) to Folly. For as for Divines, they may well enough walk an hungered:
Mathematical professors blow their nails: Astronomers are laughed to scorn:
Sophistrers are naught set by: Only a Physician (as Homer says) is more
worth than twenty of the rest. Yea and commenly the rassher, the vncunnynger,
and less circumspect the undertaker of any of those usual sciences is, the
more yet is he regarded and allowed euin among great men also. Like as
Phisike, according as many now a days do wrest it, is naught else than a
membre of Adulacion, as well as Rhetorike: Next place whereunto is geuin to
Ciuilians and Lawiers: but I am in doubt, whether it be the second, or the
first, by the rules and ^statutes of the vniuerfitee: of whose profession as I
will say nothing, so other men are went with one consent to have it in
derision, as a certain kind of Asselyke philosophy: but yet these Asseheades
be they, that rule all the roast, and enlarge their possessions, whereas a Divine
in the mean while lookyng over all his books of diuinitee, can hardly pyke
him out a radisshe root for his diner, doing battle continually with gnattes
and lyse. And therefore like as sciences are the more happy, and auailable, the
nearer affinitee they have with Folly. So are those men most happy, who
altogethers may abstain from medlyng with any sciences, and follow Nature
only for their guide and maistres, who in no part of her is lame, or
insufficient, as long as it suffiseth us to keep our selves within her bands.
For Nature abhors counterfeityng, Things without art the morehappely
flourish.
and far more towardly does it flourisshe, that with least art and cure is
tended to. For see you not how among brute beasts, and burdes also, those
live most wealthily, that have least to do with disciplines? nor are subject
to any others government, saving Natures? The very Bees (trow ye) how happy
and merueilous is their propretee? and yet (pardic) they have not all their
senses. What housewright by Geometry found ever out such manner buildyng, as
their commes are of? What Philosopher did ever form such a commen weal as
theyrs is? Contrary, an horse because he draws nerest to man's sense, and is
conversant among men, is therefore pertaker also of such miseries as men are
subject to. As who not seeldome, whiles he is ashamed to be over run for the
belle, does ryre him self, and in battle whiles he seeks victory, does
oftentimes draw his guts after him. Besides the snafles and bittes, he is
broken with, the spurs he is gyrded with, the stables enprisonment he is
hampred with, the whippes he is lasshed with, the cogilles he is ^asted with,
the halters he is tied with, the ryders he is laden with, and briefly, all that
tragedy of his bondage, which willingly in a manner he took upon him (if we
give credit to Aesopes fables) whiles (as these valiant men do) his desire
was to be wroken on the heart his enemy. Now bow much leefer is the life of
these pretty small burdes? who only as Nature pricketh them, live from hand
to mouth, in deep quietness, as long as men will let them alone? That and if
they fortune to be taken, and made to sing in a cage, yet (lord) how much they
want than of their native grace, and properuesse? So far more lively ye shall
find it, that rather nature induces, than that art constreigneth. I can
never therefore fully commend Pythagoras, Pythagoras counted any brute creature
to be happier than man.
who when under diverse bodies and likenesses he had been all things, a
Philosopher, a man, a woman, a king, a private person, a fisshe, an horse, a
frogge, yea (I wene) a sponge also, judged yet no kind of creature more
miserable than man, because all the rest were content to live as Nature had
limited them. Only man would preasse to pass his bands. Yea and therefore
among men, he preferred also the Ideote, and simple vulgars, before other
learned and reputed persons. So Grillus (I think) was better advised, than
Ulysses, for all his deep wit, in that he had rather grunt still in the
stie, being cha^nged into a hog through Circes sorceries, than waifaryng with
him, to suffer so many wretched, and greenous chances. In which poinct I take
it, that Homer also the father of fables, does consent with me: that where in
many places he calls all mortal men both woeful, and wretched. and than
again speaking of Ulysses, the exemple (as he makes him) of a perfect wyseman,
gives him the addicion of sighyng, or pensive, which in no place ye find
attributed to Paris, or Ajax, or Achilles. But wherefore trow ye does he so?
Save for that Ulysses being double, and crafty, used Pallas advise in all his
procedynges, and was ouerwyse, as he that took the fa^dest drifte he might from
Natures course. Wherefore like as among mortal men they are fardest removed
from blissfulness, that give them selves to the study of wisdom, yea, twyse
foolish in this, that being borne men, they would possibly if they could,
usurp the state of the immortal Gods, and (as poets feign the Geantes did)
with their engines of sciences move war against Nature. So they on the other
side seem least miserable, and wretched, who draw nearest to the bluntness
of brute beasts, and attempt nothing beyond man's degree. For proof whereof I
will not blind you with these Stoikes Syllogismes, but rather induce you by
some familiar exemple. And by the faieth ye owe to the immortal gods, may
any thing to an indifferent considrer be deemed more happy, and blisfull, than
is this kind of men, Natural ^^oles the happiest of all men.
whom commenly ye call fools, doltes, ideotes, and paches? by most fair and
goodly names as I take them? Peradventure I move a thing without purpose, and
very fond at the first sight, but ere I have dooen, ye will grant I have
cause to say it. Seeing first such ideotes are free, and exempt from all
fear of death, which fear is no small corrosiue, to a mind that minds it I
warrant you. Like as they feel not what a twitching turment it is, to have a
grudged conscience, and shrink as little at these old wives tales of sprites,
of diuelles, of hobgoblyne and the fayries, neither mournyng to them selves
for fear of euilles and aduersitees impendyng, nor braggyng ouermuche upon
hope of any good luck coming. To be brief, they are not tawed, nor plucht a
sunder with a thousand thousand cares, wherewith other men are oppressed. They
blushe at nothing, they doubt nothing, they coueite no dignitee, they envy ^o
man's fortune, they love not peramours: and lastly if they be veraie brute
Naturalles, now they sin not, as doctors do affirm. Here, I would my
Masters of sapience, naie rather Master fools, should repute with them
selves, how on all sides their minds are vexed continually. Yea let them
but gather to account, to what a noumbre of discommoditees, inconveniences, and
difficulties the state of their life is endebted, and so they shall soon sum
up, from how many, and how great euilles I have subtraied these my self
paches. Who not only them selves are ever merry, plaiyng, singyng, and
laughyng: but also what ever they do, are prouokers of others likewise to
pleasure, sport, and laughter, as who says, ordained herefore by the gods
of their be^euolence, to recreate the sadness of men's lives.

That whereas diverse among them selves are diversely inclined, yet do all
men generally with one assent owe favor to these poor fools, coueit them,
feed the^, stroke them embrace them, yea so much lacks that auy wight of
reason will do them any great injury, as the very wildbeastes (experience
teaches) have been seen to spare and forbear from hurtyng of them, thorough
a certain natural sense of their innocence.

For such Naturals are holy, and consecrate unto the gods, specially to me:
and not without cause therefore do folk so esteem them. Like as many great
lords there be, Great lords delight in fools.
who set so much by them, as scant they can eat their meat, or bide a
minute without them, cherisshyng them (by iysse) a little better, than they
are went to do these frounyng philosophers. A few of which sort also for
honors sake, and furniture of their court, they vouchesaue to enterteine. But
why they use to make more of the other, I think it soon gessed, and ought not
to be meruailed at. For these waiwarde wysemen never come forth but with
admonicions, and book lessons, yea and through confidence of their learning,
are not sometime ashamed to say the troth: whereas my fools supply a far
more gracious and acceptable office, to delight men with their plaiyng, daliyng,
fond talk, and devises. Yea and above all this, have a marvelous propretee,
in that they only are plainsaiers, and south speakers. And what is more
laudable (at least as outwardely ye commend it) than plainness of speech? For
although Alcibiades proverb in Plato ascribes troth to children and
dronkennes, yet may all the praise thereof be chiefly appended to me, as
Euripides can well testify, who wrote thus: A fool speaks like a fool (id
est) plainly. For what soever he has in his thought, that shows he also in
his countinaunce, and expresses it in his talk.

Whereas these wisemen are they, that are double tounged, as the aforesaied
Euripides tells us, with the one of which they speak the truth, with the
other, things mete for the time and audience. Their propretee it is to change
black into white, and out of one mouth to blow both hot and cold: and
think vnhappeliest in their hertes, when they speak smotheliest with their
tounges. How be it me seems that princes, how ever the haboundant felicitee
of their estate is wont to ^ase mean folks etes, may yet as to this respect
be counted right miserable, because they want, of whom to here the truth, and
are faiue therefore to take flattrers for their friends. But some will say,
troth may not at all times be spoken, and therefore are these wysemen so
eschewed, because without respect they speak frankly. Now so it is in deed,
truth (for the most part) is hateful to princes. And yet we see, that of
fools oftetymes, True talk of fools unpunished.
not only true tales, but euin open rebukes are with pleasure declared. That
what word coming out of a wisemans mouth were an hangyng mattier, the same
yet spoken by a fool shall much delight euin him that is touched therewith.
Such a lively grace to content men has veritee, as long as it be mixed with
naught else that may offend. But without offense to do the same the gods
have granted to fools only. Women delight in fools.
And so in a manner upon like causes, have women like pleasure in them, in as
much as naturally the Feminine Sex is bended all to pleasure, and trifles.
That what so ever they do with these fools, although sometime (may chance)
it be past sport, yet have they the easy to expound it to be nothing but a
plaiyng toy, or a thing to make daliance, as ever women be ready witted to
turn and excuse the mattier. But now to return to my purpose, my Ideotes
having thus led forth their time, in much triumph, and solace, at last
without any fear or sense of death, do pass hence the right way to
paradise, there also to disporte their quiet and innocent souls in continual
play. Now go to if ye list, and confer any wyseman of them all, with these
my simple, and least regarded fools, as touching their state of blissfulness.
Or rather let us draw on the other side, for a comparison betwixe them, the
extract of a man of wisdom. For exemples sake, a caitiue (so I may call him)
that has worn out all his childhode, The image of an absolute wiseman.
and youthful years in learning of disciplines, having lost so the swetest
part of his life in continual watches, cares, and travails, nor in all the
residew that ever tasted one dram of pleasure, being ever niggardly, ever
poor, melancholic, and frounyng: as hard and wrongful to him self, as
insupportable and odious to others, pale, meigre, sikely, and blereyed, wasted
away with elde, and horenes, which his own wilful study auaunced to him
before his time: yea and before his time postyng (as it were) out of life,
although it skilleth not how soon he dies, who never yet lived.

And this (lo) is that goodly image of their wyseman. But ones again these
Philosophers, or verelier (Soike frogs do crocke at me), For nothing (say
they) is more miserable than madness: but a notable folly is next sybbe unto
madness, or ratber madness it self. For what is madness else, saving a
general error and abusion of the mind?

Tusshe, tusshe, these calves are ever in a wrong box: but let us prove yet,
by the Muses leave, how we can refelle this Syllogism of theyrs, which (in
deed) they have subtly knit togethers, but as in Plato, Socrates teaches
us, to divide one venus into two, and one Cupide, into two Cupides. So likewise
these Logiciens, if they had dooen right, should have divided or distingued one
kind of madness from an other. In as much as every madness, Every error of
the mind is not madness.
is not straight therefore miserable. For than Horace would not have said, Is
it not a sweet, and pleasant madness that deceives me? Nor Plato likewise
would have put the rauyng of poets, prophets, and lovers, among the
principal weals, and benefits of this life. Nor yet the prophetess in
Virgise would have called the long wandryng, and peregrinacion of Aeneas, a
mad labor. But ye must understand, that there be two kinds of madness.
Two kinds of madness.
One is that rage, which the Furies of hell, being punisshers of the wicked,
do bring with them, as often as they graffe, and fasten in the minds of
mortal men, either feruente desire of an unjust reuengement, or vnsaciate
covetousness of gold, or cursed and vnleefull love, or parent slaughter, or
treason, with such other plages sent by the just judgment of the gods, for
the punisshyng of misdooers. Or when those Furies do trouble, and vex the
guilty conscience of a man, with the prick of dredefull furiousness. But
there is an other kind of madness, far unlike the former, which proceeds
from me wholly, and most is to be embraced. As often as a certain pleasant
rauing, or error of the mind, delivers the heart of that man, whom it
possesses, from all wonted carfulness, and renders it diverse ways, much
recreated with new delectacion. Now this said Error of the mind, as a
special jewel, and benefit of the gods, was wisshed after, euin of Cicero
him self, in a certain epistle he wrote to Atticus, to the end he might have
no sense, nor understanding of so great evils, as at those days oppressed his
country. Likewise Argiuus, he whom Horace writes of, judged not much amysse.
Who this far^oorth raued, that whole days togethers he would sit alone in
the Theater (a place where the commen plays were played) laughyng, and
clappyng his hands, and reioysyng much to him self, because him seemed
verily that some excellent Tragedies were in plaiyng there, whereas in deed he
saw nothing at all. When yet for all that as to other respects, he behaved
him self wisely enough, being well-beloved of his friends, gentill to his wife,
and easy to his servants, without falling in any rage with them, when he
found a back faulset set in his wine vessel. Now when his kinsfolks
procurement, geuyng him medecines therefore, had healed his disease, and
restored him to his former wits, mark ye, how he fell out with them, in
blamyng their thanklesse and double diligence. Ye have slain, and not saved
me; o my friends (quod he) in wrestyng my pleasure from me in this sort, and
by force bereuyn gme such a most delectable error of my mind. And well
might thou say it (good Argiue). For it was they that raued, and had more
need than thou of Elleborus to purge them, who took in hand to drive and
expel out of the, so pleasant, and happy a madness, instead of a great
disease, as they took it. How be it, I am in doubt yet, whether every Error
of the mind and senses, deserves to be called madness. Every error is not
madness.
For if one that is ^andblynde would take an ass, for a moyle, or an other
praise a rhyme of Robyn hode, for as excellent a making, as Troilus of Chaucer,
yet should they not straightwaies be counted mad therefore. But he that not
only erreth in his senses, but is deceived also in judgment of the mind, and
that extraordinarely, and of custom, he (I say) may well be bolden mad,
and out of his right mind. As if some man so often as he heard an ass rore,
did persuade him self, he heard marvelous chauntyng of the Chapel: or a
poor cai^iue borne of beggars, believed he were Cresus the rich king of Lidia.
And yet, cum this platte kind of madness, so it tend (as for the most part
it does) unto pleasure, than brings it no small delectacion, as well to
them that are detained therewith, as those also that perceive it to be in
others, having them selves no espece thereof. For this manner madness is
largelier sprede abroad, thau most folk wene it is. But in the mean while one
mad man mocketh an other, and not seeldome you shall see the more madman, the
lowdelier laugh the less to scorn. Yet for all that, so much is each of
them the more happy, No man void of madness.
the more diverse ways he is deceived, so in his own foolisshe judgment, as
long as he continues still in that kind of madness, that is peculier to me,
which surely is so largely divided, as I doubt whether of the whole multitude
of mortal m^n, ye can pyke me out one only, who at all times may auant him
self to do wisely, and not to be grudged with some spece of madness. Albeit
this is the difference, that who so sees a Goorde, and believes it is a woman,
him do men give the name of a mad man, because few are accustomed to err so
outtakyngly.

But when we see an husband take his wife, in whom he has many Coparteners,
to be chaster yet than ever was Penelope, much reioysyng in his good hap,
but right happily mistakyng the mattier, him now does no man call mad,
because that married men are commenly disposed to such diseases. Folly of
hunters.
Much after which rate do such folks also rave pleasantly, as prefer
huntyng before all other pastimes, protesting what an incredible pleasure they
conceive, so often as they here that foul music, which a horn makes, being
touted in, or the howlyng of a meny of dogs. yea I think the very stenche
of the hounds kenuell, senteth musk unto their noses. For as touching the
death of a dear, or other wild beast, ye know your selves, what ceremonies
they use about the same. Every poor man may cut out an ox, or a sheep,
whereas such benaison may not be dismembered but of a gentilman: who
bareheadded, and set on knees, with a knife prepared proprely to that use, (for
every kind of knife is not allowable) also with certain iestures, cuttes a
sunder certain parts of the wildbeast, in a certain order very
circumstantly. Which during, the standers by, not speaking a word, behold it
solemnly, as if it were some holy Mystery, having seen the like yet more than
a hundred times before. Than (sir) whose hap it be to eat part of the
flesh, marie he thynkes verily to be made thereby half a gentilman. So
therefore whereas these hunters through continual chasyng and catyng of their
venerie, gain nothing, but in a manner do them selfs also degenerate into
wild and saluage propretees, ye may see yet, how through this error of mine,
they repute their lives led in more than princely pleasure. And likewise, are
not they most madly, but natheles pleasantly occupied, Builders.
that wholly set their study on buildyng? to set up, and pluck down again,
now square, now round, now of this cast, now of that, never making end, till
brought at last thereby to extreme pouertee, they have not so much left them
as a cotage, where to put in their heads, nor one cross of comfort, to bie
them breadde withal. But what thereof? forsouth a few years have they spent
yet, in great wanhope, and pleasure. Not far unlike these Alcumistes, or
multipliers, Multipliers,
who by their newfound secret science, go about to change metal into metal,
serchyng both by sea and by land, a certain Quintessence. These men are so
enticed by an hope they have to bring their feate to pass, as neither labor,
nor cost may withdraw them from the same, but wittily ever they do devise
some new thing, wherewith to begyle them selves again, till at last, having
spent all they could make, there remains not to them so much silver, as
wherewith to bie bechen coals for their furnace. Natheles they leave not to
dream still of wondrous pleasant inuencions, encourageyng others, as much as
in them lies, to the same trade of felicitee. That when at last all hope
forsakes them, yet have they this proverb in their mouths, in steed of a
great comfort and recompense, Saying, how in hiegh enterprises, euin the good
will alone is sufficient. And than (lo) in their excuse, accuse they the
shortness of man's life, which suffiseth not for the great weight of so deep a
cunnyng to be fully serched out. Moreover these dyse plaiers, Dyse plaiers,
though I doubt whether their madness be foolisshe, or furious, yet surely it
is a foolissh, and ridiculous sight, to behold many of them so geuin to the
play, that as soon as they but here ones the sound of the dysespringyng upon
the boorde. (Lord) how by and by their hertes begin to lepe and throbbe in
their belies. Further, through a certain suckling hope of gain, having made
shipwrcke of all their goods, when their ship strikes upon the Dyserocke, (a
danger far more perilous, than is the race of Britain) them selves hardely
escaryng in their hose and their doubletes, yet sooner will they begyle their
own brother, than him that nycked them of their money, lest else perchance
they might be counted foul gamesters. Yea, and being old now, and almost
blind, yet play they still with glasen eres: and lastly having their fyngers
so knobbed with the gout, as renders them impotent, yet hyre they some other
to cast the dyse for them. In which kind of madness (I wen^) they might
pass their times right pleasantly, if it did not for the most part burst into
a rage, and so pertain rather to the Furies of hell, than to me. But those men
(no question) are wholly of my retinew, that put their sole delight in tellyng or
hearing of these feigned miracles, lnuentors of old wives tales and feigned
miracles,
or verilier monstrous lies, being never satisfied therewith, as when they
feign certain terrible tales of gostes, sprites, fairies, and dinels, with
thousand such other old wives inuencions, which the further they sound from
truth, are the gladlier believed, and more pleasantly do feed men's ears. For
surely such fables are not only doulcet to pass the time withal, but
gainful also to their practisers, such as perdoners and limittours be. Than
again next neighbors to these, are such as have a foolisshe, but yet a
pleasant persuasion to them selves, that what day they see a wooden or a
peincted image of the geant saint Christopher, no nuschaunce shall betide
them. Or if they great the graven image of saint Barbara, with some prayer
prescribed for that use, they can not but return hurtelesse from the wars.
Or if upon the sondaies they woorship saint Erasmus, with certain tapers and
Paternosters, they shall in short space become rich men. For what speak I of
others, who with feigned Perdones, Perdones,
and remissions of sins do pleasantly flattre them selves, taking upon
them to measure the space and continuance of souls abode in Purgatory, as it
were by houreglasses, setting out, both the years, the months, the d^^es, the
hours, and the lest minutes, without missyng, as if they had cast it by
Algrysme? Or what of those, that under confidence of certain Magike prayers,
and charmelyke Rosaries, Rosar^es,
which some devout deceiuour invented first, either for his pleasure, or his
profit, do promise them selves all glad things, richesse, honor,
pleasure, good fare, long health, longer life, green age, yea, and the next
seat in heaven to ged almighty, which seat yet by their wills they would
not possess to timely, I mean, that when the pleasures of this life have
left them much against their wills, yea holdyng them back as it were by
the teeth, than are they at last content, to have those heavenly ioies succeed
in the others places. And here now I may bring in the foolisshe wanhope
(imagine we) of some usurer, or man of war, or corrupt judge, who castyng
forth one halfpenie of all his evil gotten goods, will straight think that
the whole hoorde of his former mislife, is at ones forgeuin him, and that his
periuries, his lecheries, his drunkennesses, braulynges, deceites, trumperies,
and treasons, which infinitely he by all his life committed, are thereby as
upon a Quites est redeemed, yea and so redeemed, as it may be leefull for him,
thereupon to return a fresh to a new world of vices. Further, how foolisshe,
naie rather how happy are those good souls? which in saying daily the.vii.
verses pyked out of the whole Psaltier, believe they can not mysse of too too
great a good turn at gods hands? Which verses (it is said) Saint
Bernard learned first of a certain merry conceited devil, yet longer tounged,
than crafty, for the poor wretch let Saint Bernard begyle him. But as for
the verses, being in deed so balde, and nothing correspondent to the brave
title they bear, as welnere I my self am ashamed of them, yet are they
allowed, not only of the people, but also of my great presidentes of religion.
Moreover, Supersticious worshipping of saints,
sauoureth it not of the same saulce (trow ye) when every country chalengeth
a several saint for their patron, assignyng further to each saint a
peculier cure and office, with also sundry ways of woorshippynge? as, this
saint helps for the totheache: that socoureth in childbyrth: she restores
stolen goods: an other aydeth shipmen in tempests: an other takes charge of
husband men's hogs: and so of the rest: for to long were it to rehearse all.
Than some saints there be, that are generally sued to for many things:
among whom chiefly is the virgin mother of god: in whom vulgar folk have an
especial confidence, yea almost more tha^ in her son. Uulgar folk pray not
to saints for wisdom.
But what is it (I pray you) that men make peticion for unto these saints?
saving for things perteinyng rather to Folly, than ought else? Or among so
many peincted tables, images of wax, and other offringes, wherewith all the
walls, and roofes of some pylgrimage chapels are decked, in token of dangers
escaped, saw ye ever any man yet escape folly, or made one hear the wyser?
Some one (perchance) was saved from drowning: an other stricken through with a
pot gonne, recovered: an other, whiles both parts were together by the ears,
no less happily, than manfully, fled from the battle: an other, being
hanged on the galowes, through the favor of some saint, good master to
thenes, brake the haulter and ran his way, to the end he might ones more
help to discharge such, as are ouercharged with their money bags: An other,
breakyng prison escaped: An other in spyte of the physician waxed whole of his
long botched sickness: An other, that drank two sorts of poison at ones,
through the conflict of their contrary operacions, being driven into a laxe,
found them rather medicinable, than deadly, unto him, full sore against his
wives will, who lost bother her labor and cost about it: An other, when his
carte ouertourned, brought his horses home in sauetie: An other, being passhed
with the fall of an house, lost not (thanks be to the saint) his life: An
other, found a bed with a man's wife, had the grace yet to shifte from her
husband. But none of all these (I warrant you) yeldeth thanks for his folly
laid aside. So sweet a thing is it, to be cumbred with no wisdom, as men
had rather axe perdone of any other thing, than that. But how am I entered thus
far, into this Sea of supersticions? That if I had an hundred tounges, as
many mouths, and a voice thereto of iron, yet could I never des^iue half the
kinds of fools, nor reckon up half the names of their folies. So swarmeth on
all sides the life of christen men, with this blindness: which natheles
priests not only do admit gladly, but also set it forwards, because they
know well enough on which side their bread is buttred. But now, if some one
of these cumbrous wysemen should rise up, and say (and say truly) thou
shall never die ill, as long as thou live well: Thou redeemest thy sins,
in case to one halfpennie geuin to the poor, thou addest repentance of thy
misdeedes, together with tears, prayer, and fasting: and changest all the
trade of thy syfe: this saint will help the, if thou live as he did. These
aduertisementes, and such semblable, if this wyseman (I say) should bark
unto the people: See than straight from how sweet a felicitee, into how
great a trouble and confusion, he should pluck back the minds of mortal
men. To this college do they also pertain, Funeral ^ompes.
who by their live days, do seriously enacte, with what pomp and order they
would be buried. So farfoorth as by tale also they express the noumbre of the
torches, tapers, mourners, priests, and orders of friars to sing at their
funeralles: And than, how many hired for money must lament and howl for them.
As who says, any manner sense of this spectacle should redounde unto the
dead. Or as if they, should blusshe and be ashamed, unless the corpse were
woorshipfully enterred, with none other desire in this poyncte, than if being
made majors or sheriues they should ordeine a midsomer sight. And truly, make
I never so much haste, yet I can not pass over in silence those pecockes,
which in deed are nothing different from the poorest cobblers that clowte
shoone, and yet under a vain title of nobilitee do wondersly stand in their
own conceits. One of them bringes his petigrew from Aeneas, an other from
Brutus, an other from Arthur: They show the graven and peincted arms of their
ancestors: they speak of their graundfathers, great graundfathers,
belgraundfathers, and great belgraundfathers, whereas they them selves stand
like blocks, in a manner less worth, than those peincted signs, which they
glory in. And yet, through this sweet persuasion of Selflykyng, they lead a
golden life: namely since such there want not, as very fools as the other,
that have these kind of calves in veneracion, as if they were gods. But what
speak I now of one, or two exemples? as though this Selflykyng made not most
men, manifoldly, by wondrous means, most happy in their own opinion: as
when one fowler than any marmoset, Every wight lyketh best him self.
thynkes him self to be goodlier than Absalon. Or some other, as soon as he
can draw three lines with a compass, takes him self to be as good in
Geometry as ever was Euclides. An other like an ass to the harp, though he
sing no better than a Gynee cock, weneth yet to be Hermogenes, that excellent
musicien. Than again, this (no fail) is a sweet kind of madness, which we
see in diue^s fools, who what ever qualitee their friends, or servants
have, do glory as much therein, as if they could do it them selves. Not
much unlike that wealthy richeman, whom Seneke writes of, Who taking upon
him to tell a tale, had ever his servants at hand to prompt him where he
missed: and being him self so feeble, as scantly he could stand on his
legs, would not fear yet upon confidence of so many poudredbefe lubbers, as
he fed at home, to make a mache with any man at footeball. Furthermore I
think in nedelesse for me, Graduates of arts.
to touch any whit these graduates of arts, and sciences. Seeing that Self
love is altogethers so much their alie, as any of them will sooner be driven
from the enheritance his father left him, than give place in cunnyng to any
others: but chiefly these Syngyng men, Sophistrers, Rhetoriciens, and poets
do excel therein: among whom, the vncunnynger, the more lyketh him self,
and the franklier bosteth what he can do. And like setuce, like lips: for
the balder the thing be, the more are men wont to be in love with it: as
commenly the woorst things are best fantesied, because (as before I said) the
most part of men are subject unto Folly. And therefore, if so be that a man
the vncunnynger he is, the deeper yet stands in his own conceit, and is of
most men the more accepted, now I see not to what intent he should rather
coueite the true and perfect knowlage of the thing that he professes, which
first should cost him long labor and expense before he atteine it, and being
ones had, should make him the less understood, the more fearful to miss
in vttryng of it, and lastly commended of a far fewer noumbre, because most
men's rudeness can not reche to the fines of the same. Moreover, we see how
nature as in singular men, The commen self likyng of each Nation.
so also in each Nation, and almost in each city, has graffed a certain
commen selflikyng. And so it commes to pass, that Englisshemen peculierly
before all other things, do vindicate unto them fair shape of the body,
music, and well farsed tables. Scotts, do bost them selves in their
nobilitee, and nerenesse of bloudde to their prince, not a little also
flattryng them selves in their Duns doctrine. Frenchemen, would be counted
civil, and curteis of manners. Parisiens, all other names set aside, desire yet
that the science of Theologi^ be peculierly annexed to their vniuersitee.
Italians, above all men count them selves learned in humanitee and eloquence,
chiefly gloriyng in this, that among all other nations, they be not
Barbarous. In which kind of felicitee the Romans are principal, who euin
yet, dream pleasauntly of the triumphs of their old Rome. Venecians, put
great confidence in their nobilitee. Greeks, as authors of all sciences, do
magnify them selves in so many famous men, as whilom flourished in their
country. Turks, and all that frothe of the very Barbariens, would be
commended yet euin for their religion, laughyng christen men to scorn, as
rather full of supersticions. But much more sweetly are the Jews deceived,
who constantly look yet after their Messiah, and euin till this day stand
obstinately by their Moses law. Hispanierdes, would be taken for good men of
war. Allemaignes, do faune upon them selves for their tallness, and
knowlage in artmagike. Thus, as it were to long to repete all, so you see (I
trow) how much this arrogance of Self love does delight all men, in all
places. With whom in a manner her sister Adulacion may compare. For Self love is
naught else, but when a man fauneth on him self. Which if thou dooest to an
other, than is it Adulacion, or flaterie. But now a days Flaterie (on gods
name) is taken for a vite fault, but of such as are moved rather with the
name, Flaterie a most requisite and commodious thing to man's conversation.
than with the thing it self. They think how faieth, may evil ioygne with
flaterie, which to be otherwise, we may learn through the exemple of brute
beasts. For what can be more faunyng, and flattryng to a man, than a dog?
but than again, what is more faiethful? What is fuller of daliance than a
squyrell? but than again what is less hurtful? Unless perchance ye will
say, that Lions, Tygres, or Leoperdes are meter for man's recreacion. How be it
there is in deed a certain kind of flaterie, whereby some traitors and
deceitful villains, do train simple folks oftentimes to their undoing.
But this Adulacion of mine proceeds wholly from a certain gentilnesse, and
easy whiteness (as it were) of a friendly good will, and draws much nearer
to a virtue, than does her contrary, that is to say, a roughe plainness, or
unmannerly crabbednesse, to bear with no man. This Adulacion encourages a
weak sprite, comfort one droupyng in sadness, quickens a langwisshyng
thought, wakeneth a dulle head, reiseth up a sick mind, mollifieth a
stubbourne heart, gets love, and ones gotten, reteineth it still, enticeth
children with a good will to learn their books, gladdeth old folks, teaches,
and admonissheth princes of their duities, under color of praise, without
offendyng, briefly, it makes that each man to him self is both dearer, and
more acceptable: which effect may well be taken for the chiefest membre of
felicitee. And what can be more faunyng, than when one man praises an other?
like moyles clawyng each others back? Or what needs me to allege unto you,
how this flaterie supplieth a great good portion of that famous Eloquence,
greatter percell of Philike, and greatest of Poetry? at ones, that she is euin
the very honey, and conserve of man's societee and companiyng togethers? But
Philosophers say it is a miserable thing to be begyled, and err so. Naie,
most miserable is it (I say) not to err, Man's life depends upon opinions of
things,
and not to be deceived. For too too are they deceived, who wene that man's
felicitee consists in things self, and not rather in the opinion how the
same are taken. In as much as in all human things, there is so great
darkness and diuersnesse, as nothing may be clearly known out, nor
discovered: like as truly was affirmed by my Academicall philosophers, the
lest arrogant among all their Sects. Or if that ought may be known, the
same yet not seeldome disauaileth to the gladsomenesse and pleasure of the
life. Lastly, so is man's mind framed, as much more it deliteth in things to
the show, than in such as are in deed. Whereof who so list to have a lively
prouffe, let him no more but go to a sermon, wherein if ought be said gravely,
and to the mattier, he shall see straight all the audience, other sleep, or
gasp, or be vrkesome. But and if the skreker (the preacher I would have
said) falls out of his purpose, as commenly their usage is, into some tale
of Gesta Romanoru^, or such like, than by and by they lift up their heads,
they stand up, and give good care. Also if any saint among other, seems
rathest to be newfounde or poetical, admit it be saint Brandon, saint
Christophre, or saint Barbara, the same yet shall ye see more devoutly
woorshipped, and vowed to of the people, than Peter, or Paul, yea or Christ
him self. But these mattiers perteine not to this place.

Consider you therefore, how much less costeth the acquirey of this felicitee,
which depends on the semblance and opinion of a thing, as if it were had,
than that other of the thing self, being had in deed, which be it of never
so small value and estimacion, as Grammar, yet you see how long a man must
sweat ere he get it, whereas the semblaunce of the same ye may easelie
conceive, and come by, through your own persuasion: and yet shall that
conceipte as much, or more avail you toward felicitee. For admit that one
eats stinkyng saltfisshe, whereof some other could scant bide the smelle, and
yet to his mouth it tastes sweeter than a partrich, now (I pray you) what
difference is there, as touching the felicitee he takes therein? Or an other
abhorred to eat of a Carpe, or some other delicate kind of fisshe, did that
any thing hyndre the blisfull state of his life? If a man has a wife as ugly
as may be, who yet in his conceit may compare in beauty with Venus, is it
not all one now unto him, as if she were fair in deed? If he that beholds a
table daubed with a little dirt and read Okre, did persuade him self it were
a piece of Apelles or Hans Holbyns peinctyng, is he not happier (trow ye) than
some other, who at great price have bought some of those woorkmens works? and
peradventure take less pleasure in regardyng of the same, than he does of
his? I know a gentilman, that presented his new wedded wife with certain
counterfeict stones set in ringes, perswadyng her (as he could do finely
enough) that not only they were true, and orient, but also of great value. Now
I pray you, what skilled that to her? Seeing she contented both her eyes and
fantesie with those counterfeictes, keeping them for a great treasure, whereas
the housbande in the mean season both spared cost, and took pleasure at his
wynes error, who natheles conned him as great thank, as if they had been
right jewels. Is there any difference (trow ye) between such as Plato
feigneth sittyng in a cave under the ground, to see nothing but shadows and
representacions of things, so that they do coueite naught else, and content
them selves therewith, and that wyseman, he imagines should come out of the
cave, and so see very things as they are in deed? That and if Micillus in
Lucians dialogues had evermore dreamed that his golden and rich dream, than
neded he not to have wisshed for any other felicitee. Conclude therefore, that
no difference is between a thing it self, and the opinion or semblaunce of the
same: or if there be, than are my fools yet in the happier trade. First
because their felicitee costeth them as little as can be, as only an easy
persuasion and belefe that they have, or can do a thing. Next than, for that
they eni^ie their felicitee in commen with many others, and pardie ye know,
how unpleasant the possession of any weal is, without fellowship, as if a man
dwelled without company in the fairest platte of the whole earth. Whereunto I
may lyken these wisemen. For who is he that knows not how scarce the^ are to
find, in case ye find any at all? In deed the Greeks in so many hundred
years could pyke out but seu^n of them: and yet if ye siphte those well, I
re^y my self, and ye find one half, yea or the third part of a wiseman
among them all. Therefore, if among many commoditees which my cosyn
Bacchus does endue you with, Drunkenness.
this (and woorthily) is reputed the chiefest, that through drunkenness he
wypeth all cares, and anxietees from the mind, but for a season only, (for as
soon as one has slept a while upon his drink, and tempred so his brains,
than return in post haste his former troubles and vexacions). How far more
ample, and ready than is my benefit of Folly unto you? Folly a continual
drunkenness.
when thorough a continual drunkenness (as it were) I replenishe your minds,
with much joy, delight, and pleasure, yea and that so easelie brought about?
Which benefit of mine I do distribute to all men, whereas other Gods
gifts are derived sundrely upon sundry men. Pardie, these noble and fine
wives that are hable to resolve sadness, and make men pluck up their
stomakes, do not grow in every place. Few have the gift of beauty through
Venus favor. Fewer have eloquence at Mercuries hands. Hercules makes not all
men rich. Jupiter grants not kingdoms to every body. Oftentimes Mars
favors neither party. Many return discomforted from Apollos oracle. Not
seeldome Jove's thunder destroieth men: and Phoebus launceth his arowes of plage
among you. Neptunus drowneth more folks than he saves (for what should I
speak of these Veioues, Plutones, Ates, Peynes, Fevers, and such other, not
gods, but rather helhoundes and turmentours unto you). But I Folly am she,
Folies power embraces all men.
that egally do comprehend all men under the compass of my so great a good
gift. And look not yet to be praide unto, nor am not angry, nor seek amends,
when any part of my sacrifice is misdoen, or ouerslipped. Nor I mingle not
heaven and earth together, if any one biddyng the other Gods to a sacrifice
banquet, leaves me only behynd, and allows me not my portion of the smoke,
and savor of the burnt offrynges. For of the other Gods in this poinct such
is the morositee and ceremoniousnesse, as in a manner it is easier, yea and
less peril for a man to let them alone, than to meddle with their rites, and
obseruaunces. Like as some men there be, so waywarde of nature, and so testi^e,
as better it were not to use their company, than to claim any acquaintance of
them. But no man (say they) makes sacrifice unto folly, nor builds her a
temple. Now surely I marvel not a little, (as before I said) at such
ingratitude of men. But yet of my gentilnesse I take this also in good part.
Albeit to say the troth I find no want thereof at all. For why should I
require, either frankensence, or leuained meal, or a got, or a hog for my
sacrifice? Whereas all mortal men, in every region, do yield me that
woorshippyng, which euin by these scripture doctors is wont to be most
approved? Unless perchance I should envy Diana, because her altars ar
besprent with man's blood. Naie, I think my self to be than most amply, and
religiously woorshipped, when every where, all men bear me (as they do) in
their hertes, How men woorship Folly.
express me in their manners, and represent me in their living. Which kind of
woorshippyng is not very rife, no not among Christians. For what a noumbre
of them see we, to set tapers before the virgin mother of God: and that at
noone days when lest need is? But than again, how few of them go about to
follow her steps either in chas^nesse of life, sobrenesse of manners, or love
of heavenly things? For so should saints most dignely be woorshipped.
Moreover, why should I find lack of a temple, All the world a temple to
Folly.
seeing all this world is in manner of a temple most goodly (as I take it) unto
me? And as for priests of my law, and other ministers of my religion, I am
sure I want none in any place, whereas men want not. Than, I am not altogether
so foolish, to demand any graven or peincted images representyng me, Graven
and Peincted images.
which rather should derogate than advance mine honour^ whereas oftentimes I
see many do^tes, and fatteheddes woorshippe such stocks, instede of the
saints them selves, whereby I might chance to be served, as they that are
thruste out of their roumes, by their deputies. But I take it, that so many
images are erected in my name, as there be living men, bearyng the lively
representacion and image of me about them, will they, or will they not.
Wherefore, I have no cause to be agreeued with the other Gods, though they be
woorshipped sundrely, in sundry parts of the earth: and that at times of the
year prefixed. As Phoebus in the Isle of Rhodes, Venus in Cypres, Juno at Argos,
Minerua at Athenes, Jupiter in Olympus, Neptunus at Tarentum: and Priapus at
Lampsacum, Whereas all the world universally offreth me day by day far
dearer, and more digne sacrifices, than theirs are. That and if I seem to some
folks, to have spoken these words more stoutly, than truly, go to, let us
but view a little, and consider the veraie lives, and doings of men, and so it
shall manifestly appear, how much they are endebted unto me, and how much I
am made of, both of hiegh and low degrees. Yet I entend not to accoumpt every
man's life, for that were an endless labor, but a certain only of the most
notable, whereby ye may easily guess, what the rest are. For what need I to
allege vulgar people? who altogethers (without any question) aperteine to my
band? The commen life of men full of Folly.


So many veins of Folly they abound in, and so many new mines they do
fresshe and fresshe seek out, as a thousand such as Democritus was, should not
suffice to laughe at them, although yet those very laughers had need of an
other Democritus to laugh them also to scorn. Yea, and it passes, to see
what sport and passetyme the Gods them selves have, at such Folly of these
^elie mortal men. For as for the forenoone, and sobre hours of the day,
those the Gods spend in counsel mattiers, and hearing of men's vows, and
supplicacions. But after diuer oues, when they have drunken merrily of their
Nectar, and list not to treat on ernest affairs, than which side of heaven
bends most toward the earth, How the Gods out of heaven behold men's folies
in earth.
there sit they, and intentiuely behold what mortal men do: and surely no
spectacle can be more pleasant unto them. Good lord, what a Theater is this
world? how many, and diverse are the pageantes that fools play therein? For I
also not seeldome am wont to sit among the Gods to mark men's doings.
One man see they ready to die for love of a woman, and the less he is beloved,
the more hotely to pursue her. An other marieth the goods, not the wydow. He
settes his wife to sale. An other ielous wretch like Argus, keeps his in mewe.

This man mourns, and lord, what folies says he, and does he, hyryng
also some plaiers (as it were) to weep and howl for the nones. An other, what
so ever he can rape and rende, slingeth it into his bealy gutte, when not long
after he would gladly skamble for a piece of biskette. An other puttes all his
delight in sleep, and sloth. There be some such also, as busy them selves
busely in other men's business, not lokyng ones how their own goes. Some
coumpt them selves rich men, in borowyng of Peter to clothe Paul, when soon
after they find not one fardyng left, wherewith to bliss them. An other
thinks nothing better, than living him self wretchedly, to make John^ his
son rich. This man for a little lucre, and that also incertaine, skymmeth
all the seas committyng his life to the waves and the wyndes, which no money
may restore to him, ones being forlorn. He had rather seek him riches in the
wars, than sleep in a whole skin at home. There be some, that in pliyng,
and geuyng attendaunce on old men childerlesse, wene to become rich through
executourship. Such want not also, that in wowyng of these wealthy old
trottes, think to speed sooner of their purpose. Either of which than surely
make most pastyme to the Gods their beholders, when of those that they go
about to train, they also are trained, and bayted with craft for craft. But
above all others, usurers Usurer^,
are a kind of men most foolisshe and filthy, whose trade and occupacion being
in deed the v^lest that can be, and thereto handled by them after as vile a
manner, with liyng, forswearing, bribyng, begylyng, and shiftyng, yet coumpt
they them selves to be head men of their parisshes, because they wear hoopes,
and goldrynges on their fyngers. And no marvel, when these blind minions,
these friars, can so faunyngly uphold them in their sermons to the people,
calling them worshipful, and venerande masters, in hope that some portion of
those evil gotten goods, may somewhat in compensacion of their golden
glosyng, fall unto their covent. You shall see again some others so much
geuin to Pythagoras sect, (who would have all things among friends to be
in commen) that what so ever they find liyng at large, with as free a
conscience they will take it, as if it came to them by inheritance. There be
some also, who only with wisshyng and wouldyng are rich in their own
fautesie, as when they imagine certain sweet dreams of glad things to
befall them, which they take sufficient for their whole felicitee. Many
rejoice to be holden richmen abroad, living at home with an Orange, or an
Oynion. This skapethrifte, throws his goods against the walls. That penny
father, skrapeth it togethers, both by God, and by the devil. He, is driven
through ambicion, to seek favor at him, and him. He, is no medlar, but sittes
by his own fire at home. Many fools, tangle them selves in the law, and can
never get out of it, but hold and shoue on both sides, only to make fa^te
these adiournyng judges, and Ambidexter Advocates. This man looks for a new
world. That man compasses some deep drifte in his head. Some one has an
especial devotion to go to Jerusalem, to Rome, or to saint James in Galice,
leuyng his wife and children succourlesse in the mean while at home. Briefly,
if one (as Menippus did) lokyng out of the moon, beheld from thence the
innumerable tumultes, and businesses of mortal men, he should think verily
he saw a meny of flies, Mortal men compared to a meny of flies.
or gnattes, braulyng, fightyng, begilyng, robbyng, plaiyng, living wantonly,
borne, bredde up, decaiyng, and diyng: So that it is scant beleuable, what
commocions, and what Tragedies, are sterred up, by so littell, and so short
lived a vermyn as this man is. For sometimes a small storm of war, or
pestilence, swopeth away and dispacheth many thousands of them togethers.
But I were plainly most fool of all, and worthy whom Democritus, with many
laughters should poinct to scorn, if I took upon me to tell up all the fortes
of vulgar peoples Folly and madness: The folly of those that are counted of
the wiser forte.
and not rather turn me to those, who among you, have a certain reputacion
of wisdom. Such as compass no mean things, but aspire ever to a certain
preeminence in knowlage and cunnyng above others. Among whom Gramarians
Gramarians,
and scholemaisters seem to be right notable. A kind of men (doubtless) most
miserable, most slauelike, and most contemptu^us, unless I did mitigate and
releue the discommoditees of their most wretched profession, with a certain
sweet bayte of madness. For surely these Grammerteachers are not pestred with
one, or two evils, but rather with centum grauamina. As who ever in their
schools, their schools, said I? naie rather in their Chapitre houses, session
places, or bucheri^s, being always bare, hungry, and slouenly, do wast them
selves away with continual travails among a meny of boys, wax death with
noise and criyng, kill them selves with stenche and filthiness.

And yet through my benefit, they coumpt no men like them selves. So lordely
a thing they take it, when their fear their fearful flock, with a thretenyng
voice and countenance. So princely an execucion, to tear the poor boys
arses with rods, and ferules, plaiyng the tourmentours, and termagantes
among them, much like the ass wrapped in a lions skin. But yet, whiles
they are thus occupied, that their filthiness seems more than clennesse unto
them, that stenche, and fyslyng, smells ambre grise, that bondage of
bondages is taken by them for a kingdom: So farfurth as they would not
change their tyrannisshe estate, neither with Phalaris nor Dionysius. But
far more blisfull yet be they, through a certain conceit they have taken
of a new trade in teaching, each therein following his own devise. That whereas
they put in to childerns heads, naught but mere trifles, and fond rules of
their own, yet (Lord) what Palaemon, or what Donate will not they despise, in
regard of them selves. But (thanked be God) they find the means yet, by what
craft I can not tell, to make the foolisshe mothers, and ignorant fathers
believe, that they are such in deed, as they host them selves to be.

Add also hereunto, this kind of delight they have, as often as any of them
chances in some old book to find out the name of Anchises mother, or some
other Latin word not commenly used, as Bubsequa, Bouinator, Manticulator, or
diggeth up some gobbet of an old stone graven with Roman or greek letters
somewhat defaced, (Lord) than what exultacion, what triumphs, what
commendacions make they of it? as if they had won all Afrike, or taken the
great city of Babylon. What think you also, when they set up and show
abroad their versis? versis (god knows) most balde, and foolisshe, but never
the more fail they of some as very asses as they, who will hieghly commend
the same: which puts them in such a flusshe, as plainly they believe they
have recovered Virgiles own vain in poetry. But this is the sweetest poincte
of all, to see them flatter, and praise each other, clawyng them selves by
courses. That and if (as is possible enough) it chances one of them to stumble
at some word, and an other being more advised than he to take him with the
manner, ( Oh Hercules) what Tragedies, what Disputacions, what Inuectiues are
tossed than and retossed betwixe them? Let never grammarian be my friend, if
I lie ought herein. I know a certain learned man, being both a Grecian, and a
Latiniste, a Geometricien, a philosopher, and a phisicien, yea a kings
physician, now almost.lx. years old, who setting all other things a part,
has whole twenty years togethers, gone about the making of a new Grammar:
estemyng him self right happy, if he may yet live so long, as to set a
perfect rule and distinction between the eight parts of speech: which
hitherto none of the Greek, nor Latin grammarians could fully bring to pass:
As who says, it were deadly sin, if one make a Conjunction a distinction
perteinyng to the nature of Aduerbes. And for this cause, though already
there be as many Grammers, as Grammer-teachers, naie m^e, for my friend Aldus
alone has more than five times set out a gra^mer, yet ouerslippeth he no
grammerboke, be it never so tedious, and barbarously written, which he l^keth
not over, and sercheth thoroughly, enuiyng any man that in this kind should
go one ace beyond him, as if he feared lest some other might take the glory
hereof from him, and so his twenty years labors should be spent in vain.
Now whether call you this a madness, or a Folly? For as to me it skilleth not,
so ye confess it to proceed all of my goodness, that these poor wightes,
these Grammarians, and Scholemaisters, who else should be as wretched as
wretchedness it self, wene yet they are mounted into such a felicitee, as
gladly they would not change lives, nor estates, Poets.
no not with the rich kings of Persia. Poets are somewhat less beholding
unto me, notwithstanding, euin by their profession they show them selves to be
of my sect, a free kind of men, that like peincters may feign what they
list, whose study tends naught else, than to feed fools ears with mere
trifles and foolisshe fables. And yet it is a wondrous thing to see, how
through fame thereof, they wene to be made immortal, and Gods pe^es, promisyng
others also like immortalitee thereby. To this order more than to any other,
both Selfloue, and Adulacion are a^nexed familiarly, and of no kind of men am
I observed more plainly, nor more constantly. Moreover Orators, and
Rhetoriciens, Rhetoriciens.
notwithstanding that a littel they seem to swerve from me, cleuyng to the
philosophers, yet I can prove them also to be of my faction, as well by other
arguments, as by this, that in the precepts of their art, among diverse
other trifles, they have written so largely and exactly, how to provoke
laughter in an audience, and of the cast, or means of scoffyng: So farfurth as
he what so ever he was, that wrote the book of Rhetorike to Herennius, makes
folly also to be a membre and parcel of Rhetorike. And Quintilian, the very
headman of this order, in his book of the institucion of an Orator, has made
one chapitre all of laughtersterryng, longer I wene than is Homers Iliade. yea,
so much do Rhetoriciens attribute to foolisshenesse, as oftentimes what
objection by no arguments may be refelled, the same yet with some laughyng
and scoffyng conceits, they would have shifted of. Unless perchance, ye will
say, that folly has naught to do therein, when with such tauntes and
meritourned aunswers, they provoke men to laughter, yea and that by rules and
precepts geuin thereof for the nones. Of this grape are such also as in making
and publisshyng of new books, Compi^ers of new books.
do fisshe for a praise and glory. These men as generally they are much
bounden unto me, so in especial are such of them, as do blotte their
papers with merest trifles. For as for those that take upon them to write
cunnyngly to the judgment of a few, and care not what learned men look upon
their doings, them take I to be rather miserable, than blisfull, seeing how
continually they are feign to writhe their wits in and out, in puttyng to, in
chaungyng, in blottyng out, in laiyng their work aside, in oueruewyng it
again, in showing it to some for a prouffe, and yet keeping it in their hands
whole nine years togethers, so that they are never satisfied with them selves,
whiles they go about to purchase so vain a reward as praise is, yea and that
geuin them by a few, only so dearly bought with many nights labors, and
loss of sleep, the sweetest thing that can be, and with so many travails, and
beatyng of their brains about it: besides the hurt they sustain in their
bodies, decaie of beauty, marryng of their eiesight, or also blindness,
together with pouertee, envy, forbearyng of pleasures, untimely age, hasted
death, and such like disaduantages, which natheles these wisemen stick not
at, so they may have their writings allowed at one or two of these blereied
bokewormes hands. But my Scribes on the other side, have not a little more
commoditee and pleasure of their folly. Whereas taking no great leisure in
pennyng of their mattier, naie rather what so ever toie lights in their head,
or falls in their thought, be it but their dream, they do put the same
straight in writing, with small dispense or none, saving waste of paper?
knowing (I warrant you) what will come of it, that the fonder the trifles be,
which they entreat of, the more commendacion shall they get of most men,
fools as they and unlearned. And what maistrie is it for them to set light
store by two or three of those learned men's repriues, if so be yet they read
their works? Or what avails them, so few wysemens allowaunce? where so
great a multitude of fools on the other side will disalow it. That in case
they have the feate to set forth other men's doings for their own, and can be
contented to bear the name of that, which others took the peines about, marie
sir than I think they have good skille: for though it chance them at last
to be taken with the manner, yet for a season they may keep their reputacion.
And it is a pleasure to mark how much these men esteem them selves, when
they are praised so of the people, and when they are poincted out in a great
company, as, this is the wondrous fellow ye here of: and when in every
bokebynders shop their works are set to the sale, and when they read their
names, surnames, and bynames, set in the first fruntes of every book, which
titles also they do counterfeicte, and turn into some contrary language,
as strange as may be devised. Yet, I pray you, when all is dooen, what be
they else but names? and how few shall know those names, having regard to the
worlds wydenesse? and how many less commend them? namely such diuersitee
being in judgments: yea among unlearned men also? But what say you to
this, that not feeldome they feign those names, or borow them out of old
A^tours? for one of them ioyeth to be named Telemachus, an other Stelenus, or
Laertes, he Polycrates, he Thrasymachus, and such like. So that now it
skilleth not how they entitle their books, for by as good reason might they
call it a goorde, or a radisshe root, or name it A, or B, as philosophers do
by theyrs. But this is the best sport of all, to see them present each others
with epistles, with verses, and with mattiers of praise, sent from fools, to
fools: and from asses, to asses. Here, he in his judgment is as good a Poet
as Alcaeus was, and him does he likewise compare to Callimachus. The one is
holden for more eloquent than Tullius Cicero: that other, for better learned
than Plato. Yea and not seeldome leuyng this fair play, they fall to foul,
The foolisshe contencion among learned me.
in sekyng them out some adversaries, to the end that in contendyng
togethers, their fame may be the wyder blown abroad. In the mean time, one
learned man takes his part, an other takes his, ^ill at last both the
Capitaines having buckled manfully togethers, would be taken for Victours, and
both parts pretend to Triumph therefore. These things of wysemen are counted
to be mere folies, as in deed they are, who can deny it? But yet there while
through my benefire they led a pleasant and glorious life, as not willing to
change their Triumphs, skarcely (I believe) with those of the Scipions. How be
it, such as are learned in deed, are not a little also beholding unto me,
whiles with great pleasure they may laugh at the other, and take fruicion of
their madness, which they can not again say, unless they be to unkind,
and the veriest chorles of all. Next these now, Lawiers of Civil and canon.
Ciuilians, and Canonistes challenge no mean place among learned men. And who
than they stand depelier in Selflikyng? For whiles continually they turn, and
return Sisyphus stone in rehersyng up an hundred laws and Paragraphes all
with a breath, it skilleth not how littell to purpose, and whiles they add
gloss upon gloss, and opinions upon opinions, they make as though their law
science were most hard, and difficult to be atteined to. So what so ever is
hardly dooen, that they reckon straight to be most excellent.

And ioigne we (hardily) to them these Sophistrers and Logiciens, Logiciens.
being a race of men more kackeling than a meny of dawes: each of whom in
bablyng may compare with ten women chosen for the nones, and far more
happy should be, in case they were only bablers, and not skoldes also: in
sort that oftentimes for the moon shine in the water, they strive whole days
together, and with to much arguyng, let the truth of the mattier slip by
them. Natheles through Selflikyng they are bathed all in felicitee, so that
armed only with three Syllogismes, they dare boldly provoke any man, as well
assured that they will never give over, though Stentor him self were matched
against them. Next them come these Philosophers, Philosophers.
venerable for their long beardes, and clokes down to the feet, protestyng
them selves only to have knowlage and wisdom, whereas other men stand for
no more than Ciphres in Algorisme. But (lord) how sweetly do they rave in
their own opinion: when constauntly they affirm there be worlds innumerable?
Or when they take upon them to measure the son, the moon, the planetes and
their compasses, as it were by ynchemeale, or drawn with a line: Or when they
expound the causes of thunder, of wyndes, of eclipses, and such other
inexplicable things, nothing doubtyng, as if they had crepte into natures
bosom, or were of counsel with the Gods. And yet does nature lowdely
laughe them to scorn, with all their conjectures: conjectures I say, and no
certain knowlage, which appears by this, that one sect of them agrees not
with an other, but rather contendeth togethers upon every little thing. And yet
these men, who in deed know nothing, will take upon them to know all thing. Yea
whereas they know not them selves, nor see not oftentimes a pit, or a stone
liyng in their way, either for poreblyndnesse, or because their wit is not
at home, yet make they their auaunt to see and perceive plainly their Idees,
their universals, forms separate, first mattiers, quidditees, and Ecceites,
things so subtle, and so fine, as not Lynceus him self could epsy them
out, though it be said how he could see through a stone wall. But than
chiefly do these Philosophers disdeigne other vulgar people, as often as with
triquetre, and tetragon circles, or with such like Mathematical figures,
drawn one upon an other, and entangled in manner of a mase, with letters also
set as it were in order of battle, and with lives drawn hither and thither,
they do cast a miste before simple folks eyes. Astronomers.
And such there want not also of this kind of men, that take upon them by
lokyng on the sterres, and planetes, to tell us aforehand, what shall happen
and betide a hundred years after.

Declaryng by their Prognosticacions, the success of certain wondrous
accidents, stranger than any wyche craft, or artmagike. yet such is their
hap, to find out men, who of their singular grosnesse give credence also to
this their so plain illusion. Now having reached thus far, and comen to the
place of doctors of diuinitee, I stand in doubt whether I may speak of
them, Doctors of diuinite^^
or rather pass them over, and not ^^urre at all their patience, being a
neste of men so crabbed and waspelyke, lest else perchance they should all at
ones fall upon me with six hundred conclusions, driuyng me to rec^^^; that in
case I refused so to do, than would they by and by denounce me for an
heretic. For that is the thunderbolt, wherwithall they threten such, as
stand not best in their favor. But surely although none other sort of men
do with less good will than these, acknowlage my goodness unto them: Yet
can I prove these Doctors also to be more than one or two ways in my danger,
being so propped up with their own Arrogance and Selflikyng, as if they
dwelled among the sterres, or looked down from aloft, and in a manner took
compassion upon other seely men like wourmes crepyng by the ground. Namely
whiles they are hedged in on all sides, with such a guard of Magistral
diffinicions, conclusions, corollaries, explicit and implicit proposicions,
with so many startyng holes, as not Vulcanes nets were hable so fastly to
hold them, but they would wind them selves out again with Distinctions,
wherewith they carue al knottes asunder, as smothely as a rasour does the
hears of a man's beard. Such a noumbre of newfounde monstrous terms have they
thick and threefolde invented. Also whiles they expound the secrettes of
scripture at their pleasure, disputyng how the world was first create, and
proporcioned, by what channels sin was derived into Adams posteritee, The
foolisshe questions or ^^hole doctors.
what ways, by what measure, and in how short space Christ was complete in the
womb of Marie the virgin: And how in the sacrament of the altar, the
accidents of bread and wine, remain when the substance is goen: but these
questions are for every young beginner. Other have they more mete for great
and illuminate doctors, which if at any time in disputacions or talkyng after
diner they do stumble upon, straight they shake of their slepie noddyng, and
do rowse them selfs. As, whether any instant was in the generation of god
the secounde person? whether in Christ there be more filiacions than one?
whether this proposicion be possible? God the father, hates the son, or
whether Christ might possibly have taken to him the likeness of a woman, of a
feende, of an ass, or of a goorde? Or how that goorde should have preached,
done miracles, or been ^anged on the cross? Or what should Peter have
consecrated, if he had consecrated what time Christ's body hunge on the cross?
Or whether Christ being transformed so into a goorde, might at the same time be
called man also? Or whether after the resurrection it be leefull for men to
eat or drink? as who says, prouidyng for hungre and thurst before hand.
Innumerable such fine toys have they, much more subtle than these, of
Instantes, formalitees, quidditees and Ecceitees, which no man I believe could
epsy out, unless he were so clear eied, as to see out in a deep deep
darkness those things that be no where. I may add also here to their
sentences or sawes, which are so estraunge and beyond all expectacion, as the
very Stoikes sentences called Paradoxes, being compared to theyrs, seem
gross, and more than vulgar. (For exemple) Less sin is it, (say they) to
slay a thousand men, than ones on a sondaie to clowte a poor man's shoe. Or
rather should we let all the world go to wreke both with dog and catte
(as they say) than ones to make a lesyng, be the mattier never so light. Now
again, these their subtle subtilties, do (...) make yet more subtle,
through so many sorts of Scholemen as they have. So that easier you shall
find it to wind out of a mase, then out of their intricate names of Reales,
Nominales, Thomistes, Albertistes, Occanistes and Dunsmen, The sects of schole
doctors.
yet these be not all, but the principal only. But turn you to which sect of
the^ ye will, and ye shall prove the same to be so cunnyng, so difficult, and
so full of hiegh Mysteries, as I wene the apostles them selves had need to be
enstructed by a new sprite, in case upon these matters they were compelled to
argue with this new kind of doctors. Paul could express what faieth was:
yet when he said thus, faieth is the substance of things to be hoped after,
and an evidence of things not yet appearyng. This Diffinicion (say they) was
not Magistraliter (idest) doctor like set forth by him. And, as Paul
could very well teach what was Charitee, so did he not yet (say they) half
like a Logicien either diffine, or divide the same, in the first epistle,
and.xiii. chapitte to the Corinthiens. The apostles likewise did holily and
devoutly enough consecrate the sacrament of Christ's body: and yet, who so had
apposed them in terminus a quo, and t^rminus ad quem, or in transubstanciacion,
or by what means the self same body of God may be in diverse places at ones?
or of the difference they put now between Christ's body as it is (...)
heaven, as it was on the cross, and in the sacrament of the altar: Or at what
instant the transubstanciacion is made, seeing the prayer, by virtue whereof it
is made, is ever passing over as it is on saying? These quaynt questions (wene
I) the apostles would never have soluted with like quickenesse of engine, as
our Dunsmen do^e both argue, and diffine (...) the same. The apostles knew the
virgin mother of Iesus^ but which of them did ever expound so clerkly, how
she was preserved from Original sin, as our doctors do? Peter received
heaven keys: yea received them at his hands (say they) that would never
have committed the same to one unworthy them. Now whether he knew so much
or no, I can not tell: but this I am sure of, that he never touched this narow
poinct, how it comes to pass, that he also may have the keie of science, who
has no science at all. The apostles Baptized every where, and yet they never
taught what is the formal, material, efficient, or final cause of Baptism:
nor ever made mention of the character delible and indelible. The apostles
prayed, but prayed in the sprite, following that saying of the gospel, God is a
sprite, and who so woorship him, must worship all in the sprite, and in
tr^uthe. But now it appears, that it was not than reveled unto them, how we
ought with all one prayer, and like reverence, woorship an Image drawn perhaps
with a cole on the wall, as if the same were Christ him self. So it be made
with.ii. blissing fyngers of the right hand streched out, and a ball in the
other, with long hear sheded and a coronet in manner of a platter upon his
noddle, decked with three sonnebeames. For who is he so pregnant witted, that
might ever grope out these mysteries, unless he had spent whole xxxvi. years
togethers in studiyng the Physicals and Vltramundans of Duns, and Aristotle?
The apostles also preached grace unto the people: but yet they never made so
narow distinction between gratia gratis data, and gratia gratificans. They
exhorted men to good works, yet never put difference between opus operans,
and opus operatum. They bydde us in many places keep charitee: but never divide
the same into Charitas infusa, and Charitas operata, nor expeund not whether it
be an accident, or a substance, a create, or an uncreate thing. They dishort us
from sin, but I renie my self, if ever they could cunningly di^fine, what
that should be, we call sin? Unless they were inspyred with the sprite of
these Duns doctors. For I can never believe, that Paul, upon whose writing we
may guess what mind the other apostles had therein, would ever so often have
reproved and condemned, such questions, disputacions, genealogies, and
conflictes of words (as he calls them) in case him self had ever been
instructed in their fine quidditees. Namely in as much as all the contencions,
and debates in arguyng, which chanced in his time, were but blunte, and very
gross, in comparison of these twice syfted subtiltees, that our Master
doctors use now a days. How be it they can so much their good, that where in
any place they find ought written by the apostles not formally, and
Magistraliter, that they reprove not, but handsomely rather do interpretate
it as best serves for their purpose: bearyng (as who says) thus much
reverence partly to the antiquitee, and partly to the name of apostleship. And
surely it were to much to require so hiegh mattiers at the apostles hands,
who never heard one word thereof mentioned by their master Christ. But in case
they take either Chrysostom, Basile, or Hierome with the like trippe, tha^
they take it sufficient for them to subscribe, that they allow it not. And yet
those ancient good fathers, rather through their holy life and miracles, than
by any arguments and Syllogismes, confuted both Ethenikes, and Philosophers,
and Jews, being bent of nature to stubbournesse, yea and those also, never a
one of whom were able to compass and understand the lest quodlibet of Duns.
But now, have ye any painem, or beretike, that will not give place and yield
straight to so many fine fine arguments of our master doctors? Unless he
were so gross, that he wiste not what they meant? or so shameless to hiss at
them? or rather fensed with like armor? so that now they were matches, as if
ye should set one enchaunter against an other, or an Olyuer for a Roland. For
than the battle were ever new to beginue. And surely in my judgment christen
princes should do politikely, instead of these bendes of gross
Lausknightes, who not seeldome (prouffe shows) do speed as well evil as
better, to arm, and send forth all these baulyng Dunsmen, and stubbourne
Occanistes, and invincible Albertistes, together with the whole tablement of
Sophistrers, against the Turks and Sarasius. They should see (I think
verily) a strange kind of skyrmisshe, with such a victory as never was heard
of. For who is he so cold herted, that would not straight be enflamed with
their pregnant devises? Or who is he so blunt, and restiue, that could not with
their pickant spurs be quickened? Or who so clear sighted, that may not with
such dark mistes as they cast, be blinded? But all this perchance ye wene I
speak half in mocage. And truly no marvel.

Seeing euin among these Divines ye shall find out some such, as being
institute in a better trade of learning, do loathe, and abhor such riddles
and Sophistical trifles of these Dunsmen. Some other again that do curse and
detest the same, as a kind of Sacrilege, estemyng it plain wickedness and
impietee, to speak so irreverently by so hiegh secrets of Scripture, which
rather we should have in veneracion, than after such rate go about to
expound them, or with so profane Ethnical problemes to dispute upon them,
or arrogantly diffine them, defilyng and bespottyng the maiestee of holy
scripture with so cold, naie rather filthy words and sentences. But this
notwithstanding, the other coddes heddes in the mean while stand most
pleasauntly in their own grace, or verilier stroke them selves on the head.
So that occupiyng them selves both nights and days, about these foolisshe
toys, they have never thus much leisure, ones to read over the gospel, or
Paul's epistles: and yet in triflyng out the time thus in their schools, they
believe verily it is they, that proppe up holy church, which else should go
to ruin, none otherwise with their Syllogismes, than poets feign that Atlas
the geaunt susteigneth heaven upon his shoulders. But now, how lordly is their
felicitee (trow ye) whiles they take upon them to form and refourme holy
scripture at their pleasure, as if it were a nose of wax, or a Welshemans
hose? and whiles they would their conclusions, whereunto a certain of some
vniuersitee have subscribed, should be holden for more than estatutes, yea
more fyrme and inviolable, than the bishop of Romes Decretals? And whiles also
like judges over the whole world, they call each thing to recantacion, that
one hear breadth disagreeth from their explicit, and implicit conclusions:
Pronouncyng as if it came from a prophets mouth, how this proposicion is
sklaunderous, this not reverent, this smells of the fagote, this sounds
naught.

So that now a days, not Bapti^me, nor the gospel, nor Paul, ne Peter, nor
Hierome, ne Augustine, nor yet Thomas of Alquyne, who is euin Aristotle's heir
and one hand, are able to make a man christian, unless these father bachelars
of diuinitee, do vouchesaue to subscribe unto the same. So narow and
profounde judgment have they, in discussyng of all manner doubts. For who
would ever have thought him to be of no catholyke bel^efe, that affyrmed these
two sayings, matula putes, and matula ^ute^: also ollae feruere, and ollam
feruere, to be both congruent, unless these wisemen had taught us the
contrary? Or who else might ever have rid the church from so great
darkness of errors, which no man I think would ever have read, or looked
on, unless they under the great seals of their vniuersitees, had in
condemnyng discovered them?

But are they not most blisfull (trow ye) whiles they busy them selves
hereabout? and moreover whiles they descriue and peinete unto us all things
dooen in hell, so exactly as if many years they had seiourned in the devils
court? Or whiles as likes them they do build new heavens, addyng also one
heaven set above all the other, most fair and rowmie, least else perchance
saints souls should have no elbowroome to walk, or bankette, or play at
tenes also if them listed. With these, and with two thousand such other
trifles, are their heads so stuffed, and swollen up, as not Jupiters head
(trow I) was ever so pestred, what time be borrowed Vu^canes axe to hew Pallas
out of his brain. And therefore have ye no marvel at all, though at their
Acts and Comencementes ye do see them swadled in with so many cappes, The
solemn weade of schole doctors.
coyu^s, and furde hodes as they wear, for else I think plainly their heads
would riue asunder. One thing, I my self am wont to laugh at, so often as I
here them speak their barbarous brass latin, wherein natheles they would be
compted most doctourlike. That when they fumble it out in such a sort, as none
but fumblers as they, may understand them, yet do they call it a certain
grace and finesse, which every body can not attain unto. For (say they) it
is not for the dignitee of holy writ, our profession, that we should be
compelled to follow any grammar rules: which surely (so being) is a great
maiestee of these Duns doctors, if to them only it be lawful to speak
false latin. notwithstanding that many cobblers and clowters can do that as
well as they. Lastly now, they take them selves in a manner for Gods peers,
when they are saluted solemnly by the name of master doctors, or Magister
noster: wherein they wene like mystery to be included, as the Jews say there
is in (...): and therefore they affirm it to be a much great offense, if one
do write, MAGISTER NOSTER otherwise than with great letters, that and if ye
turn the words, saying noster Magister, in steed of Magister noster, than
all at ones ye disorder the maiestee of the Theological name. Now next unto the
felicitee of these master doctors, such do aproche as people call
Religious men, Religious men.
and Monks, that is to say, solitary livers, but by both names evil
applied: seeing the greatest part of them are most far from religion, and none
so commenly shall you mete rouyng abroad, euin in every a^ehouse. Whose trade
and obseruaunce surely were most miserable and abject, unless that I did many
ways releue them. For though this kind of men be commenly so abhorred, as
euin to mete with them at unawares, or next a bodies risyng, it is taken for a
sign of evil luck all the day after: yet (lord) how they make them selves
to be more than Cherubyns. For first they hold it a great holiness, to meddle
so little with books, and learning, as scarce they know how to read their own
names. And when they rore forth (like a meny of asses) in their monasteries, a
noumbre of psalms not understood, than they wene verily to feed saints
ears with a marvelous melody. Moreover, some orders of them (namely Friars)
do take a pride in their beggerie in going from door to door to a^e their
bread with a great lowyng voice, pestryng men every where, both in innes, in
wagens, and in passengers, not a little (I promise you) to the hyndrance of
other begsters. And thus (lo) the blind minious, what with their gresinesse,
doltisshenesse, rudeness, and shameless hangyng on men, do represent unto
us (as them selves say) the life of the apostles. But is it not a comeliness
(trow ye) when they do all things by certain presidentes of their orders,
much ly^^e Mathematical rules, which in no wise without offense, they may
alter, or swerue fro.

As for example, how many wyndowes they must make to their shoes? what
color, and noumbre of knottes goes to their gurdelles? with what difference,
and whereof must their wedes be made? of what breadth their lether thounges? how
many busshelfuls their couses? how many inches long, their notted hear? and
how many hours for slepyng? Now who is he that sees not how unequal this
equalitee of theyrs is, namely in such a diuersnesse of bodies, and
disposicions?

Yet under confidence of these trifles, they not only set lay men as light as
butterflies, but euin among them selves despise each other. So that for all
the apostolyke charitee, which they profess, ye shall not see them stick to
fall together by the ears, either for a gurdell of a contrary facion, or a
garment somewhat of a browner or lighter color. Yea, some of them being of a
straighter rule, are so sore punisshers of their flesh, as outwardly they
wear naught but sack clothe, and inwardly no better than fine holland. Some
others again dare as soon touch poison as money, never the more forbearyng
from wine, nor contrectacion of women. Finally all their delight is to accord
in nopoinct as touching the rules of their religions. Nor they look not how to
resemble Christ, but sooner how among them selves to be dissemblable:
estemyng further a great part of their felicitee to consiste in the names of
their orders. For some of them reioise to be called gray friars, some white,
these Colletes, they Minors, other Obseruauntes, other Crossed, some
Benedictines, some Bernardines, these Carmelites, those Augustines, these
Guilhelmites, those Iacobites. etc.

As who says it were to sklender a name for them to be called bare
Christians. Now again most part of them are so geuin to their ceremonies,
and tradicions of men, as makes them wene, that one heaven is not a condign,
and sufficient reward for so great merits of theyrs, little remembering that
Christ nothing regardyng their supersticions, will only call to account how
they have observed his precept of charitee. Here one of them (may chance)
will for his discharge show forth a trowgh stuffed full of all kind of
fisshe. An other, will pour forth an hundred quarters of psalms. An other,
will noumbre up millions of fastings, castyng God in the tethe, that so often
with eating but one meal a day, his belie was nere burst. An other, will
bring forth whole packes of ceremonies, so many as scarce might be freyghted
in.vij. great bulkes. An other, will make his auaunt, that whole.lx. years
togethers he never touched money, but (at least) his hands were fensed with
two pair of gloves. An other, will show forth his cowle, or scapularie so
sweatie, and full of grese, as no mariner would gladly put it on. An other,
will say that sins time of his nouiceship be never passed the ^andes of his
cloister, much like a sponge cleuyng ever to one place. An other, that he is
hoarce with daiely singyng. An other, how through to much solitariness, he is
fallen into a benummednesse. An other, how his tongue through continual
silence has lost his use. But Christ iuterruptyng their Selfebostes, which
else would never take end, whence comes (will he say) this new race of
Jews, I do acknowlage but one law and rule for mine, whereof I here never a
word spoken. For whilom plainly, and by no shadow of parables, I promised my
fathers kingdom not to Cowles, nor Rosaries, not set fastings, but rather to
the works of charitee: not I know none such, as to much know their own
good works. These men would be coumpted holier than my self: let them dwell
therefore if they list in Pasquilles heaven. Or do they cause those to prepare
a new heaven for them, whose tradicions they have preferred before my
precepts. Now when they here Christ say thus, and see both carters, and
ploughmen, preferred before them, with what countenance (suppose ye) will one
of them behold an other? Natheles in the mean time they are happy in their
own hope, not without my help largely employed on them. Specially seeing for
all they are dead (as they say) to this world, no man dare yet contemn
them, and lest of all fr^ers, in as much as they are masters of men's
secrets by virtue of that they call confession: which secrets they coumpt it
great sin to discover, unless at some times having tasted a little of the
ale, they think good to recreate them selves with sportyng tales a crasshe,
only by conjectures and lykelihoodes to poincte you to the thing, suppressyng
yet men's names of their modesty. That and if any man sterreth up these
hornettes, than in sermons to the people have they a ready way to wreke their
tene, by touching their ennemies not directly, but in parables, so closely I
warrant you, as no man could not perceive them, but if he perceived nothing at
all. And never will they make an end of barkyng till some fat morsel be
cast them, to stop their mouths. But who in the mean while would not
gladlier behold one of these friar preachers how they counterfeicte the
Rhetoriciens in their sermons (lowsely god knows) but yet fetely following
those rules that Orators leave written of the Art of pronouncyng, than any
stage plaier, or Italian pardoner? Good lord, what strange iestures they
frame? how they singe their words? how they cast their arms hither and
thither? how they change the copy of their conntenaunces? how they mingle all
things with outcries? which their said art in preaching, conveyed by one
friar to an other, as it were from hand to hand, for a much priuey thing, all
be it vnleefull for me to know, yet I shall make you a guess at it as nere as I
can. Preachers
In the beginning therefore of their sermons, they use some Inuocacion, but
that they borow of the Poets. Than admit their Theme reune on charitee, they
fetch their proheme from Nilus the great river in Egypt. Or entenyong to
exprunde the mystery of the cross, they begin aptly with Beel the dragon of
Babylon. Or disputyng of fasting, they fetch their race from the.xii. signs
of the Zodiake. Or purposyng to speak of faieth, they make a long preamble
how a circle in Geometry may be made quadrate. A madd^ ta^e of a preacher.
I my self heard ones a solemn lowre, (I cry you mercy) a solemn learned
man I should have said, who in his sermon, before a great assembly, taking
upon him to declare the mystery of the Trinitee, to the end he might both
show his learning to the people, and satisfy the ears of some doctors there
present, took a new fet^he in his mattier. For what from letters, to sillables,
and to dictions, and than the concordes between the Nowne and the Verb, the
Nowne adjective and Substantive (diverse of the audience now meruailyng, and
saying to them selves, what the devil ayleth he) at last he brought it to
this pass, that he showed the figure of the whole trinitee to be so exactly
described and expressed in the rules of grammar, as no geometricien might
plainlier draw it with his finger in the duste. Which sermon the said
doctourlike doctor whole eight months together so ernestly had sweatte about,
as until this day he is as poreblinde as a betle. And no marvel, seeing he
drew up all the sharpness of his eye sight, to the poinct of his engine: but
for all that he nothing forthinketh his blindness, rather taking the same for
to chepe a price of such a glory as he wanne thereby. Likewise, not long
agone I was present at the sermon of an other famous doctor, being almost.80.
years old, and thereto so doctourlike, as if Duns were new arisen in him, who
entendyng to disclose the mystery of the name of Jesus, with great subtiltee
showed, how euin in the very letters was as much pithe included, and might be
gathered thereof. For whereas it is declinable but in three cases, as Jesus,
Iesum, Jesus, that (said he) was a manifest representacion of the Trinitee.
Than because the first terminacion of Jesus ends in S, the secounde in M, the
third in V, thereby lay a right secret mystery, in as much (quod he) as
the very letters do declare that Jesus, is Summus, Medius, and Vltimus,
(that is) the first, the midst, and the last. An other mystery he alleged
far more strange than these, diuidyng this word Jesus as it were by
geometry into two egall parts, leuyng S, in manner of a stickler in the
middle: which letter in the Hebrews ABC, is W, and they call it Syn. Now sin
(quod he) in englisshe is as much to say as a deadly offense against God. so
hereby it appeared, that Jesus was the stickler or mediator, that took on him
the sins of this world.

This so strange and far fetched a beginning, all men did gape at so,
chiefly the doctors there present, as little lacked that they were not
changed through astonnednesse into stones as poets feign by Niobes.

whereas I for my part through laughter, had almost let go a skape, as
Priapus did for fear of the.li. witches Canidia, and Sagana, when it chanced
him to see their sorceries by night season: and who could have blamed me if I
had so dooen? For when did ever Demosthenes or Cicero, use the like far
fetch in any of their oracions? They took that Proheme to be faulty, which
hunge not apliablie with the rest of their matter: as who says, there be any
man so gross that euin of nature is not instructed to do so much.

But my doctors now adays take their preamble (so they call it) to be most
Rhetorical, when it ioigneth lest with any other part of their Theme: which
makes the hearer, meruailyng at the estrangenesse of the devise oftentimes to
murtre to him self, now whither the devil will thou. Thyrdly instead of a
narracion, they expound somewhat of the gospel, but that very briefly, and
shortly passed over, whereas they ought to entreat thereof only, all their
sermon through. In the fourth place, falling as it were into a new mattier,
they move some doctorall question, sometime such as touches neither heaven
nor earth, which they take yet to serve much to their purpose. And here (lo)
they begin to spread their arms, in allegyng auctoritees out of solemn
doctors, subtle doctors, most subtle doctors, seraphicall doctors, holy
doctors, irrefragable doctors, and such other goodly big names of their
Schole pillars. And here they spowte out their Syllogismes, their majors,
minors, and conclusion, their corollaries, and most balde supposicions, with
such other trifles before the rude people, as if they were in their most ruff
disputyng Pro, et contra in their Schools. Rests now the fifte Act or part,
wherein it behooves them to show forth all their cunnyng and profundi^ee. Here
now (may chance) they come forth with some foolisshe tale taken out of Vitas
patrum, or gesta Romanorum, moralisyng the same both Allegorically,
Tropologically, and Anegogically. And thus much after this rate do they
knitte up all their Chimera, or strange shapen beast, with sundrier sorts of
forms and facions, than ever Horace described it, in the begiunyng of his book
De art poetica. But they have learned, I wotte never of whom, that the entry
and beginning of an oracion must be caulmely vttred without any loud voice, or
exclamacion. So they therefore begin their preambles so stilly, as scarce they
can here their own voices, perhaps because it avails them to speak
somewhat, that none should understand. They have heard also how criynges out
must sometimes be used to move up men's affections: and therefore speaking a
pretty while all stilly, euin at a brunt they fall into a skrekyng keie, and
fill men's ears with a criyng shrillenesse, where they have least need at all.
Moreover because they have read in Rhetorike books, that an Oracion should
somewhat kindle, and wax hot in process of arguments, They, in every part
of their Sermons, the entry into the same being somewhat more demurely
pronounced, by and by do fall into a wondrous loud chafyng voice, be the
mattier they entreat of never so cold, and leave of so, as if their brethes
failed them. Lastly having understood, that Rhetoriciens give certain
precepts of laughter sterryng, they also peine them selves to enterlace their
Sermons with some merry conceits: but (O the will of god) how full of grace be
the same? and how aptly brought in their right places? as if an ass were set
to play on a gyttarne. Sometimes also they fare as they would nippe folk
with their quippies, but so f^inctly (god knows) as rather they do ticle,
than pynche depelier. But never do they flatter more kyndly, than when they
pretend to speak most freely, and without respect. Finally all their cast in
preaching is such, as a man would swear they had gone to schole with these
Ceretans, such as in Italy are wont in markette places standing on stalles,
or where they may be seen best, to preach unto the people in commendacion of
some pardone, feigned medecines, or such like toys of their own inuencion,
to get money withal, and bleare the simples eyes. Which Ceretans natheles
do far pass them in their grace: All be it (to speak indifferently) the
one of them is so like the other, as none will doubt, but either they have
learned at those, or those at these again. But what need these my friar
preachers to pass thereon? seeing through my procurement they never miss of
such, as in hearing them, believe verily they hear Demosthenes, and Cireros
matches: Merchanustes and women.
of which opinion chiefly be merchauntes, and good wives, whose ears and
likyng, friars do wholly study to satisfy. For merchauntes in case they be
handsomely glosed, are wont to give them in Commendum some portion of their
misgotten goods, and women besides many other consideracions are specially
inclined to them, for that they are wont to pour into their bosoms what ever
evil will they bear in their hertes against their husbands.

Thus, ye consider (I trow) how much this race of Religious men, is endebted
unto me, when now with their Ceremonies and fond fantesies of their own, now
with their baulyng and criyng out in pulpites, they do exercise a manner
tyranny among men, and would be coumpted for more than Paul's, or Antonies.
But seeing they be such iuglers, as can no less unkindly dissemble, and
seem not to acknowlage my benefits employed on them, than they are otherwise
craftily counterfetctours of holiness, I hold it best to speak no more of
them. For I long sore a little now to treat of kings and princes lives,
Kings and Princis.
who most plainly and gentilmanly, as gentilmen^ do enterteine me. Whereas if
they considred well what belongs to their estates, now I see not what life
might be more careful than theyrs, nor less to be desired. For such shall
never think that a kingdom should either by usurpation, or any other
wrongful title be sought for, as do way with them selves, what a charge he
susteigneth on his shoulders, that rightly will execute the office of a prince:
who taking upon him the rule of things does now administer not his own, but
rather the affairs of many, whereby he should think of naught else but the
commen weal: obseruyng justly the laws, whereof he is both founder, and
ouerseer, to the end his uprightness, and integritee may be a president to
his vnderrulers and officers, when either being just and virtuous, like a
blisfull sterre of lucky aspecte he may bring both health and coumfort to
all his subjects, or otherwise, like a pestilent Comete, be their ruin and
destruction. In as much as meaner men's vices be not so much marked, nor so
largely diuu^ged. But a prince is set in that place, whereas if he wrie him
self never so little from that becomes him, straight ways the infection of
the exemple crepeth contagiously to many men. Besides that, how much more the
height of a princes fortune may be a means to pervert him from the right
trade, either through pleasure, libertee, adulacion, or delicateness, so much
the warelier should he resist them, watchyng diligently, lest at any time
being seduced, he do swerue from his duitee. And lastly (omittyng treasons,
hatredes, and other perilles or dreades, wherewith a prince is infested) if he
remember how the dome also of the heighest, and most rightful king of all,
hangs over his head, who soon after will call him to accoumpte for the least
fault he has done, yea and that the narowlier, the greater state he had
committed to him: These things (I say) and many like hereto, if a prince do
perpende well, (and perpende them he must needs if he has wisdom) I believe
surely he should take his sleep and fode, with less gladness, than a far
meaner person does.

But now, how many princes have you, which through my procurement, remittyng
all care and charge hereof to the gods, do for the most part only tend
their own pleasure? So that admit we feign now the image of some one
prince, such as not seeldome has been, a man (for exemple) unskilled in the
laws, enemy in a manner to the commen weal, geuin only to his peculier
profit, addicted all to voluptuousness, an hater of learning, an hater of
libertee, and of the truth, caryng nothing less than for the advancement of
his country, but rather appliyng all things to his own pleas^s^e and
commoditee. And now (on gods name) give him a chain about his neck, The
apparaile of a prince.
for token that all virtues would agreablie be euchayned in him: give him also
a crown frette with perle and stone, in sign he ought to excelle others in
all princely virtues: than a scepter in his hand betokennyng justice with an
upright mind on all sides: lastly a Robe of purpre, which signifies zeal
and fervent affection toward his subjects: This manner apparaile (I say) if
that prince should duly confer with his living, I wene he would be ashamed to
wear it, fearyng lest some fine expositor might turn all his pomp and
solemuesse of royal robes into a derision: namely when he has no manner part
of a prince in him, sauyng-onely the clothyng.

Now likewise what say you to Courtiers? Courtiers.
these minion gaibeseen gentilmen, who being for the most part as fawnyng, as
servile, as witless, and as abject as can be devised, would be taken yet
among all men for the principal. But although their pride in other poynctes
excedeth, yet herein surely they show a great modestee, when being contented to
have their bodies outwardly garmsshed with gold, with gemmes, with silks, and
with other representacious of virtue and wisdom, they give over the study,
and use of the things self to other men, not caryng how they leave their
minds naked, without any apparaile of disciplines: reputyng them selves most
happy, for that they have learned the phrase of court speech, at every word
to choppe in these goodly titles of honor, your noble grace, your royal
hieghnesse, your excellent maiestee: and that their faces like visers will
blusshe at nothing: and finally that in bourdyng, and in flyryng, they can
flatter pleasauntly. For these be the qualitees they hold most mere for a
kind gentilman, and rufler of the court. But now who so narowlier would
approach, and enserche their trade of living, should find them I warrant
you, to be more blunte and vnwittie, than ever were the ancient people of
Phoeacia, and thereto more dissolute than those wowers were that desired
Penelopes in marriage. Sponsi Penelopes, Sponsi Penelopes nebulones, Alemo^^.
ye know what follows in the verse, which I had rather that Echo (as she
ever does the later words) should declare unto you, than I.

These my hoglynges sleep every day till midnoone, and having euin yet their
eyes full of sleep, they send than for some huntyng chapleine, who whiles they
are in making ready, or rather risyug out of their beds, may slynge them up
a post mass. In the neck whereof commes their breakefast, and that scantly
finisshed, go they to diner. After that to the dyse, to tables, to cards, or
to boules, now with iesters, now with fools, now with courtisanes, daunces,
and daliaunces to trifle out the time, not without one, or two collacions before
supper, and after supper their bankettes one upon an other. And thus without
felyng any tediousness of their life, they pass easily over, both hours,
days, months, years, and whole ages. In sort that I my self am not seeldome
through hauntyng with them made the fatter, and gladly would never part
company, saving that sometime seeing how among the damoysels and Madames of
the court, they show them selves in their mastresses colors, and commenly
do vaunt them selves of that they have not, or never did, I can not keep my
self from laughter. Moreover seeing how among those Nymphs and Madames, each
reputeth her self the more worthy of honor and estate, the longer tail she
traineth after her. Seeing also how the gentilmen of the court do shoue one
an other, and prease for a show of estimacion to be next their prince, as who
says depeliest in his favor. And seeing lastly how they stand in their own
conceit, much estemyng them selves, as the more worthy a cappe and
reverence, the greatter chains they have, as if they desired not only to show
their richesse in wearyng the^, but also their strength of shoulders in bearyng
them. But now (on gods half) longer than of late days, Pope holy fathers
of Rome, Skarlet cardinals, and blessyng bishops, Cardinals ^ bishops.
have not only followed the steps of princes, as touching their pomp and
magnificence, but dooen also what they can to surpass them. Yet surely if a
bishop perpended with him self, what is meant by the linen rochet so purely of
white that he wears? Mary that his living likewise should be nete, and
clean from any spotte of sin: The apparaile of a bishop.
Or if he thought thus, that his mytre being divided so into two horns, each
typpe whereof is with the like knobbe gathered together, were set for a figure
of the perfect knowlage he ought to have both in the old and new Testament:
Or if he wiste that the gloves on his hands did signify, how he ought as
purely, and without any soil of woordlinesse to administer the sacraments:
And how his crossers staff admonished him of the wakery charge he should take
over his flock: And how his cross borne before him (be he an archbishop)
pretended victory over all woordlie affections: These figures (I say) and
many like hereto, in case a bishop did conster and confer accordyngly, I
believe he could not chose but lead an heavy and careful life: Yea but at
these bais (I can tell you) they take as little thought herefore, as all their
thought is how they may fair feed them selves, remittyng all care of their
flock unto Christ, or rather resignyng the same to such as they call their
vicares, and Suffragans. In which case they remember little their name. For
Episcopus, is as much to say, as a superintendent or wacheman, who vus^ly
tended and took head to his charge and commission.

How be it (in deed) as touching fisshyng for money, and heapyng up of treasour
bags, they furnisshe fully that their names imports, and therein show them
selves to be no blind wachemen. Moreover, if Cardinals likewise did consider
(seeing they challenge to succeed in the apostles places) how at their hands
also is required that sanctitee and perfection, that the apostles were of: And
further, how they are no lords, but rather stewerdes and administratours of
spiritual gifts and graces, for the which soon after they must duly and
exactly render accoumpte: The apparaile of cardinals.
Yea if they did but argue a while unto them selves upon their garments, and
think thus: Pardie the whiteness, and pure netenesse of this rochet I wear
on, signifies how I also should lead a pure and right innocent life.

This cramoysen gow^e, which I have underneath it, admonissheth me I should be
as fervently enflamed in the love of god. This utter robe also being so large
and so long trained, as suffiseth to ouerspred mine, the most reverend
fathers moyle, were she as lofty as any camel, does it not pretend, that
charitee should abouisd, and be so largely spreadde in me, as I should offer
my self to help and releue all men? be it in teaching, exhortyng,
coumfortyng, rebukyng, or aduerrisyng my even Christen: or be it in appeasyng
of watres between countries, or resistyng of wicked princes, yea or in spendyng
of my bloudde for Christ's sake, much more my worldly goods with a glad
heart: How be it I see not by reason, what I should do with worldly goods,
I, that take upon me wholly to imitate and represent the apostles, who like good
souls went poorly and barefooted. These things (I say) if Cardinals did
consider and take well to heart, they would not gape so gredily after that
dignitee, naie willynglier would refuse it, or at lest, as did the Primitive
apostles, lead a trauailsome and careful life, in attendyng to their offices.
Moreover if these thrice holy fathers, Bishops of Rome.
Popes of Rome and Christ's vicares (as they name them selves) did as eruestly
follow the exemple of Christ's life, in enbracyng of pouertee, or peinefull
teaching of the people, or in bearyng of his cross, and contempt of this
world, or if they did but think a while upon the name of Pope, which they
challenge peculierly, and is as much to say, as father, or the title of most
holy father, as they ^^ie to be called: Now I see not what men in all the world
should (by right) live in greatter carfulness and affliction then they. Nor I
see not upon what hope the rankest Symoniakes of them might reckon, if they
reked hereon, that all their goods and facultees were to scant to deal in
bribes to the Cardinals for their voices: or having ones purchased that room
with their penny, would than so manfully defend and keep it, both with
swoorde, with poison, and with all other efforce.

Good lord, how many pleasures and commoditees should wisdom at one pluck
bereue them, in case they did but ones look her in the face? Wisdom said I?
Naie if they had but one grain of that salt, whereof Christ makes mention in
the gospel, they would not hoorde up so huge heaps of gold, so hiegh
mountains of honors, so large dominions, so many marciall victories, so many
offices, so many dispensacions, so many revenues, so many taxes, so many
perdones, nor keep such a number of pampred horses, and slicke shorn moyles,
nor hold such a court and guard about them, with infinite other solaces, to
abound, or rather swim in delices. Ye see (I trow) in these few words, how
great a fair, and in manner a sea of pleasures and worldly welthinesse I have
set before you. In place whereof is there any of you thinks, Uertues apostolic.
that Peter's successors at these days, would willyngly embrace fasting,
watchyng, tears in vehement prayer, daiely preaching, studiyng on the
scripture, or sighyng at men's offenses, with thousand other such drerie
troubles, which they daiely shouldehtan be subject to? Or do you judge
peradventure they could easily find in their hertes, that so many scriueners,
so many registrers, so many notaries, The rabble at Rome.
so many advocates, so many promoters, so many secretaries, so many moyleters,
so many horsekepers, so many gentilmen of household, so many applesquyers, so
many baudes, (I had almost spoken a softer word, Sodomie.
but I fear me it would have sounded harder to your ears) briefly so great a
rablement of sundry men as do way down (I cry you mercy) I meant, do
wait on the Sea of Rome, should have cause to cry out on them, when with
the turn of an hand through their conversion to a sobrer course of living,
those might well enough be driven to die for hunger? specially seeing above the
rigor and extremitee of such an heinous act, a far more detestable
inconvenience should follow, when thereby the princes self, and pillars of the
church, yea the very Lamps (on gods name) which light the world, should
be called back again to a bag and a staff? whereas else they have found out
so good a shyfte, and conueighance, what ever labor or toil belongs to
their offices, to cast it wholly on Peter and Paul's shoulders, who have leysour
enough to welde it, whiles they may so good chepe reserve unto them selves
all the pleasure and commoditees of the same? whereby it comes to pass, and
all through my drifte, that no kind of men live more delicately, nor with
less care than these holy fathers do. For as for Christ, he (they think)
may easily enough be pleased, so long as they show them selves like popes in
their Mystical Pontificalibus, bolstred up with ceremonies, and titles of
blissednes, reuerendnes, and sanctitee, to bliss and curse whom they list:
what for the rest, it is stale with them, and out of use at these days to do
miracles: peynefull, to teach the people scholerlyke, to expound scripture:
to idle a thing, to pray: far more milkesoplyke and womannisshe, to cast
forth tears: vile, to be nedie: dishonorable, to be overcome: and most
vnsittyng for them who scantly will admit kings and emperors to the
kyssyng of their feet:

Finally it is an unsavory thing, to die: and as reprocheable, to be hanged on
the cross: So that refusyng to stand to any of these hard conditions, they
rest only upon feats of arms, with also those sugared and doulcet
benedictions of theirs, mentioned by Paul, with a thousand whereof I wene they
would part more liberally, than with one penny: and stick hardily to their
interdictions, suspencions, aggrauacions, redaggrauacions, anathemisacions, and
peincted pictures set up in churches, representyng such as they note for
cursed, or heretics, with also that their dredefull thunderbolt of
excommunicacion, the dynt whereof at their only beck is hable to dyng down
sely souls a thousand miles beyond the depest dongeon in hell: which
thunderbolt they level yet against no men so vehemently, as against those, who
through the diuelles instinction do go about to croppe Peter's patrimony:
Peter's patrimony,
which (for all Peter's own words in the gospel, Lord, we have left all
to follow the) they expound to be lands, citees, taxes, customs, and
dominions. For maintenance whereof whiles kyndled with the fervent zeal of
Christ, they fight both with sword, and with fire, than they wene they do
gaily, and apostolically defend Christ's espouse the church, in rebuttyng and
manfully (as they say) forchasyng of her enemies. As who says, there be any
enemies more pernicious to Christ's church, than wicked bishops them selves?
who suffer Christ's name for lack of their daiely remembering, to grow out of
the peoples knowlage: and do bind Christ to certain money laws of their
own: and with wrested gloses and exposicions do bastard him: and lastly
through the abominable president of their life do eftesoones crucify him. In
sort, that whereas Christ's church was first founded upon the bloudde of him
her autour, and reised up with the bloudde of the apostles, and enlarged with
the blood of so many martyrs: now, as though Christ were no Christ, or that he
were not hable as before to conserve his chosen, they in her defense do try
their quarrels only at the swoordes poincte. That whereas war (to speak
absolutely) is so cruel and despiteous a thing, as rather it becomes wild
beasts, than men, thereto so furious and rageyug, as the very Poets do
feign, that the Furies of hell do let is slip: also so pestilent a thing,
as draws for train all frothe and corrupcion of manners after it: Further so
unjust a thing, as for the most part is best executed by the veriest thieves
and distressours that be: and lastly so unchristian a thing, as in nothing
accords with Christ. Yet do these my Romyshe prelates, settyug all other
things a side, only study and employe their time on war. In which
exercise ye shall see some of them being so old and wasted, that their bones
rattle in their skins, so lively yet turmoylyng, and pronely bent thereto, as
if they were waxen young again: neither sparyng for cost, nor weried through
labors, ne any thing grudged in mind or agaste at it, though thereby all
laws, religion, peace, and tranquillitee in human things be turned
topsetturuie. For work they never so ungodly, yet fail they not of some
glosers learned men, who in hope of promocion, will name and expound this
their open madness to be a Zeal, to be a Piety, to be a Spiritual manhood
in them, bringyng it by a new found means to pass, that now a man may thrust
his sword into his brothers bealy, obseruyng nevertheless that love and
perfect charitee, which Christ byddeth each Christian to owe an other. And
truly I am as yet in doubt, whether bishops in Almaine have geuin, or rather
taken exemple hereat: seeing that somewhat plainelier, and without any
obseruaunce at all, used either in their wede, or blissyng, with such like
ceremonies as bishops would be known by, they do plainly show them
selves to be temporal princes, in sort that in a manner they coumpt it vilitee
for them to yield their valiant souls to God, any where else than in a
foughten field. And now, do not syngle priests Priests,
(trow ye) clinge as nere as they can to their prelates devotion? for (lo) how
warlyke both with swoordes, with stanes, and with stones, yea and by the teeth
also the good vicares can strive for their tytherightes? and how narowly look
they to find in old writ or in doctors, any sentence seruyng for their
purpose, to give terror thereby to their simple parissheners, yea and bear
them down, that they ought to pay more than their tenthes limited. But for
all their diligence in that behalf, they are as indiligent remembrers what is
written in many places of scripture concerning their duities, and what they on
the other part ought to render and re^paie unto the people. No not their shaven
crowns at lest can warn them, how priests must be free from all
worldliness, to pass on nothing else, saving heavenly treasure. But sooner at
these days my Iolie sir John's do take it for a sufficient furniture of their
rooms, as long as they mumble over their ports service, they care not how
rasshely, which (on my faith) I wonder what god hears, or understands?
seeing they them selves do almost neither hear, nor wot what they say,
when only with their lips they make a certain buszyng, no whitte procedyng
from the heart. How be it (to say the truth) it is a commen tatche naturally
geuin to all men as well as priests, to watch well for their own lucre: for
none is so unskillful, that in this poinct can not skanne the laws to the
uttermost. But in case there be any weight or charge thereon dependyng, that
the clergy has politikely learned to cast on others shoulders. For like as
princes are wont to ordeine under them many Deputies and officers, who
likewise do substitute Subdeputies in their steedes, so does the Clergy of
their goodness and singular modestee, remitte all care of holiness to the
lay people, and lay folk charge such therewith as they call Ecclesiastical
or churchemen, as who says all manner Christians had not to do with the
church, or as if they professed no such thing by their first vow of
Baptism. Than again priests that are named Seculers, as dedicate to the
world and not to Christ, do lay all this burden on reguler priests, who
likewise turn it over to Religious men, and religious men of an easier rule
commend the same to those of a straighter rule. But all with one assent do
can their charge on Friars necks, who natheles find a means yet to conueigh
the same to monks of the charterhouse, in which only order, holiness as in
her grave lies hydden, yea and so hydden, as scant at any time she can be
seen. Likewise holy fathers of Rome in tender consideracion of the daiely
business, wherewith they are occupied about their money harvest, are feign to
put bishops in trust with all other too too Apostolic labors. But bishops
disdeigne not through humilitee to let persons supply their rooms: And
persons like good fellows would their vicares should have the dooyng thereof:
Than vicares stick not to suffer friars to encroche upon them: And they
again make resignement thereof, to such as daiely do shere the woulle of
Christ's poor flock.

But (hola) it is best for me to stop here, seeing I took not upon me to boult
out the manner of bishops and priests livings now a days: lest any man
should deem how I rather intended to ratle up their vices, than to spredde
mine own praise, Folly exc^seth her ^el^ that she speaks of the wicked and
not of the good men.
or lest ye might mistake me, as if good and virtuous princes were taunted of
me, whiles foolisshely according to my custom I do commend the wicked. Naie
rather I have touched thus much, with few words, to the end it may
appear, how no mortal man can live sweetly in joy and pleasure, unless he
be a brother of my fraternitee, and have me to his friend and good lady. For
else, who is he dare look for good hap, Fortune ^lied wit^ Folly.
seeing Fortune her self, the guidresse of all worldly chances, is so much
bent on my side, as ever for the most part she is heavy maistresse, and
contrarions to these wysemen, whereas t^ fools on the other side she deals
her gifts so largely, as if she crammed the same into their mouths whiles
they are slepyng. Ye remember (I trow) what is written of Timotheus that
fortunate captain of the Atheniens, whose good hap and success in things
gave first place to this proverb, Sleep he never so fast, his net catches
for him. (For ye shall understand, that of his continual prosperous fortune
peincters took occasion to pourtray his image slepyng, and fortune in the mean
whiles throwyng into his nets both citees and dominions.) And likewise this
other proverb, The howlate flies (whereby was meant, that like as Pallas, to
whom the howlate is cousecrate, was wont to give good and happy success to
many of the Atheniens purposes unadvisedly enterprised: So likewise that army,
which had Timotheus ones for captain, was ever victorious, though ten to
one it should have chanced otherwise. But these proverbs on the other side
do make against wysemen, He was borne under an unlucky moon, or upon a
cross day: Or, he has S^ians^ horse (which horse as writers do affirm,
had for his beauty diverse masters successively, who all at last had evil
end.) Or, he has gotten Tolosan gold, (the owners whereof spedde no better
than the former) with many such other proverbs, which I hold it best to
ouerpasse, lest ye thought I had robbed my friend Erasmus Adagies. To return
therefore to my matter, I say, Who they be that for^^ne ad^^aun^eth.
that Fortune favors men not of the most forcast, and loves bold
hazardours, such as refuse no chance of the dyse. But wisdom makes men the
warer, and more fearful to adventure any thing. wherefore ye see daiely how
these wysemen are ever pounded in beggary and necessitee, and fed with smoke,
leadyng forth their times as unregarded, vnestemed, and vnaccepted. Fools
obtain promocions before wise men.
Whereas my fools on the other side do flow in richesse and promocions, and
for short do flourisshe on all sides. For surely, and if ye coumpt it no small
parcel of felicitee to stand in good grace with great men, and live
familiarly among those my golden gods: now I see not what wisdom can avail
you, nay rather how it should not much disprofite you, seeing they for the
most part being unlearned, do reprove lernyng, as that they know not. Or if
Richesse be to be sought for, I pray you what gain can the merchant have,
when as wisdom bids, his conscience at any time should stagger at a false
oath, or being taken with a plain lie, he did blusshe thereat, or set but a
barley corn by all those grudgeyng doubts, that wysemen put upon theft and
usury. Moreover, who so gapeth after spiritual dignitees and promocions, (as
there be rauins enough that watch for such carein) let him think that an
ass or a cowherde shall sooner be advanced to the same than any wise, or
learned man. Than in case thou estemest women's love and daliaunce (which sure
is one of the greatest parts of my play) They good podes are wholly addicted
to fools and trifletalkers, yea none otherwise do abhor and sho^ne a
wiseman, than they would do a Skorpion. Briefly, who so ever they be, that
entende to live frankely in feast and gladness, for the first poincte will
see well that Master Sage be shut out of the doors, and sooner let in any
manner beast than him. Finally, what ever side ye turn you to, be it to
Prelates, to Princes, Judges, Rulers, friends, or enemies, all thing is gotten
for money, Moneys force.
which like as a wiseman despises, so I think it be, because he can not come
by it, it stands so far from his reach, as if the fox would eat no
grapes. Well, all be it there be no end nor measure of my praises, yet it must
behoue me at last to make an end of my talk, I will leave therefore. So that
first I may briefly touch unto you, how I want not of many great Autours,
who with their writings and deeds also have blasonned and set me forth, lest
else perchance ye might judge, that foolisshely I stand in mine own
conceit, or lawiers might use cauillacions against me, saying, I alleged no
books for my prouffe. Go to therefore, let us allege somewhat for our self,
and reherce up as they do things nothing seruyng to the purpose. Folly
pro^eth her praises by ^uctoritees out of (...).
So first I say, that none will deny this old saw to be true, how whereas
the thing self wants, there it is best at lest to countrefaict the same,
whereupon young children that go to schole, have for one of their first
lessons this verse of Cato taught them, which says: It is most wisdom for
a man in place to countrefaicte Folly. Now therefore I pray you consider with
your selves, how great a weal and benefit must Folly in deed be, whereas the
countrefaictyng and shadow only of the same, deserves so much praise at
learned men. Among whom mine own good Horace, as a fat and fair fed
hoglyng of Epicures herd, advises men to myngle Folly with their grave
counsels, (all be it the addicion he makes of short Folly, was not all of
the cunningest.) Also in an other place he says, It is a sweet thing to be a
fool when place requires: And than again he confesses, he had rather be
holden for a fool and an Ideote, than being wise, to be barked at, and bytten
of every body. And Homer likewise, whereas in all conditions he praises and
commends Telemachus, yet in diverse places he is wont to call him childisshe
and imprudent, which name these writers of Tragedies do gladly for a token
of good luck give to boys, and stripelynges. But for Gods sake, what is else
conteigned in Homers whole Poesy of the sacred book called Ilias, save only
the contencious debates of foolisshe kings, and foolisshe people? whereby it
appears, that all the world is full of fools, as Cicero said rightly, in
which so few words he gave me as absolute and ample a praise, The worth full
of foo^ les.
as might be. For who is he that knows not the value and goodness of a thing
to be the more acceptable, the largelier and more copiously that the same is
spread into all parts? But it may be (ye will say) that Christen men give no
credence to these painem autours: Auctoritees out of scripture for folly.
in which case (if ye think so good) I am content to proppe up, and found^
(as doctors say) my praises upon such textes as for witness of the same I
shall fetch out of holy scripture. First of all praiyng divines of their
lawful favor, that they will license me so to do.

Next than because I take a great charge in hand, and it were no good manner to
call the Muses eftesoones from their fountain of Helicon, to come back so
great a journey as is from thence hither, namely for a mattier smally
perteignyng to their facultee, peradventure it were better wisshed of me,
whiles I play the Doctresse of diuinitee, and pass through these brambles,
that the soul of Duns would a little leave Sorbone College, and enter into my
breast, be he never so thornie, and fuller of pricles than is any vrcheon, to
depart again when I have dooen ones, and if he list to the galowes.

That would god I might proprely take a new conutenance, and were cladde in a
doctourlike apparaile: saving I fear lest some of you would lay theft to my
charge, as though I had privily pi^ed our Master d^ctors cunnyng out of their
study deskes, because I can so much Diuinitee without book. But have ye no
marvel though my continual and daiely conversation among doctors, makes
me to bear away some one word or other: seeing the fygtree image of Priapus
could in process of time, as his master read Homer, mark and remember some
Greek vocables. And likewise Lucyans cock through long continuance and
conuersyng among men, did learn so perfectly their speech. But now (ou gods
name) to our mattier: Solomon the Ecclesiaste writes in his first chapitre,
that the noumbre of fools is infinite. Now where he speaks of an infinite
noumbre, is it not as much, as if he comprehended all men therein, saving only
a certain, so few, as I can not tell if at any time they were seen at all?
Much more expressly does Jeremy confess the same: for each man (says
he) is made a fool in his own wisdom: So only unto God he loweth wisdom,
and assigns folly for peculier unto all men.

Than again a little about that, he would no man should glory in his own
wisdom: and why so mine own good Jeremy? Fo^so^the (will he say) for that
man ^ath no wisdom at all. But to return again to the Ecclesiaste. what
meant he (trow ye) by his protestacion, when he lowdely cried out so, Vanitee of
vanitees, and all is vanitee? what? but (as before I said) that this human
life is naught but a certain great play of Folly? confirming (as who says)
that noble sentence of Cicero ^ little before recited, how all this world is
full of fools. Moreover, where the other wise Ecclesiasticus said, A fool
changes like the moon, but a wiseman abides in one state as the son? what
signified he else hereby? but that mankind is altogethers foolisshe, and God
only deserves the name of wisdom. For ye shall understand, that by the
moon (according to the exposicion of doctors) is figured mankind: and by the
son, which is the head and fountain of all light, is meant god him self the
father, and original of all sapience. Whereunto this makes greatly, that
Christ him self in the gospel, denied any man ought to be called good; saving
god him self.

Now therefore if every man that is not wise, must be holden for foolish, and
who so ever is good, is wife also, (according as the Stoikes do affirm) than
per consequeut ye must needs confess, that mortal men are altogethers wrapped
in the bands of Folly. Furthermore, Solomon in his.xxv. chapitre says: Folly
makes fools glad: wherein he confesses plainly, that nothing in this life
can be sweet or pleasant, unless that folly yield the same unto you: and
hereunto makes that saieyng also: who exhorts you to wisdom, exhorts you
to sorrow: and in much understanding, is much indignacion: and does not this
noble preacher plainly confirm the same, saying in his.vii. chapitre: That the
heart of a wyseman is whereas sorrow is, and the heart of a fool whereas gladness
is. Therefore Solomon thought it not sufficient to consume time about the
knowlage of wisdom, unless he further should busy him self to know me
also.

That in case ye smally believe myue, mark I pray you his own words in the
first chapitre: And I have applied my heart (says he) to know wisdom and
learning, and likewise to know errors and folly: wherein ye must note this
well, how it makes much for my dignitee, that he puts folly in the latter
place, namely seeing the Ecclesiaste, or church preacher wrote it, and pardie
ye know how the church order wills, that who so is first in dignitee, shall
go last in place, to the end, that how ever in other poinctes, yet herein at
lest he do observe the precepte of the gospel. But folly to be far more
noble and excellent than wisdom, I wene I can prove you by witness of the
Ecclesiasticus, who so ever was autour of that book in the.xliiii. chapitre of
the same: whose text surely I hold it not best to recite unto you, before ye
somewhat shall have aided the induction of mine argument, with aunswearyng
handsomely unto me, like as Plato introduces those that dispute with Socrates
to do. So first I demand of you, what things to your judgment ought
soonest to be kept close and hydden, other those that are precious and rare to
be gotten, or other that are vile and dogchepe in every place? do you hold
your peace? Now surely how ever ye would dissemble, yet shall this old greek
proverb answer for you: the waterpotte is set behind every door: the
auctoritee of which proverb let none of you be so ^^godly to refelle, seeing
Aristotle him self, the god of our master doctors does in many places
recite it^ and in sadness I can not think, that any of you all is so mad,
to leave gold or precious stones in the hiegh way: naie rather ye lay them
up in your most secret closettes, and yet, that snot uffisyng, ye double lock
them in the strongest coffers ye have, whereas dirt ye leave liyng still on the
dunghill. Ergo, if that be hydden, that is more precious, and the other vile
things are left abroad as vntended to, is it not manifest now, that wisdom
which he forbyddeth to be hydden, is far more vile than folly, which must
according to his read be locked up and kept as close as may be? And now I am
content to reherce you his own words, (which are) Better is the man that
hydeth his folly, than he who hydeth his wisdom. But what say you to this
that scripture attributes to fools a certain benignitee, and gentill
whiteness of nature, condemnyng wysemen for proud and despisours of all
others save them selves? For so do I plainly take the meaning of the
Ecclesiaste in the.x. chapitre. But a fool (says he) that walks in the
street, being him self unwise, supposes all men to be fools as he. Now is it
not (I pray you) a sign of an excedyng gentilnesse in him to make every body
his match and fellow? that whereas none so base will not meanly stand yet in
self reputacion, his courtesy is such to dele every man a fleese of his
praise. Therefore Solomon being so great a king, was naught ashamed of my name
when he said in his.xxx. chapitre, I am most fool of all men: Nor Paul
doctor of the gentiles thought scorn thereof, when writing to the Corinthians
he said: I speak it as unwise, that I more than others. etc. as who says it
were a great dishonor for him to be overcome in folly. But here (lo) me
thynkes I hear how I am hissed at by some of these greek professors, who
study scripture in that tongue, and make as though other doctors at these
days saw nothing, no more than crows do when their eyes ar peckt out, whiles
with certain Annotacions of their own, they go about to duske men's eyes as
with smoke, among which sort of notemakers, my friend Erasmus, whom often
for honors sake and good will I do mention, may be counted the second, if
not the first. They (like enough) will reprove me, and (o) what a foolisshe
allegacion is this (will they say)? and how mete a witness for dame Folly to
bring in? whereas the apostles meaning is far otherwise, than she dreameth it
to be: for in these words he would not be taken for more fool than other,
but when he had said, They are ministers of Christ, and so am I also, to the
end yet he should not be holden for a vainglorious vaunter in that he made him
self coequall with the other, he added as by correction, I more than other,
signifiyng thereby, how not only he was match to the other apostles, but
somewhat also their superior: which although he would should be taken for
very truth, yet lest the arrogant auowyng thereof might partly have offended
men's ^ares, he did first shield the same with the pretexte of Folly, (saying) I
speak it as the vnwyser, because he wist what privilege fools have to speak
truth without offense. Well, what ever Paul mente when he wrote thus, I
leave hardly to them to dispute (...): because I will ynglier do follow the
auctoritee of other gross and fat doctors, who among vulgar folk, are in
greatest reputacion, so farfoorth as a great part of learned men also had lever
(by god) for more surety be deceived with them, than judge upon righter
knowlage with these studiers of the scripture in the three tounges. For no man
sets more by these smatterers in the Greek tongue, than they would do by as
many chatteryng iaes: chiefly seeing that a certain glorious doctor, whose
name I do suppress for the nones, Nicola^^ de Lyra.
lest else these iaies would chatter this greek taunt against him, An ass to
the harp, does in expoundyng both magistrally and theologically this self
same text from this poincte forward, I more than others, make it to be the
head of a new sentence, puttyng also a new clefte and division in the same,
which sure he could never have dooen, without a wondrous conueighance of
Logike. But for more plainness I will repete unto you his own words, not
only in form, but also in matter, (as scholemen say): And this was his
exposicion. I speak it as the more unwise, that is to say (quod he) in case I
seem unwise unto you because I do coequall my self unto the false apostles,
than more unwise will you coumpt me, in auauncyng my self before them.
Nevertheless this goodly e^positour not much bynethe that, as if he had
forgotten him self, falls quite into an other sense. But wherabout go I
now? Shall I stand to one only exemple in my defense, Holy (...) likened to a
Cheuere^ skin.
seeing all doctors take it commenly for their privilege, to streche out heaven
(that is to say) holy writ like a cheuerell skin? Seeing also how in Paul's
epistles, the words of scripture fare as if they were of contrary senses,
whereas being set in their right places, they do vary never a dele, if we give
credit to Hierome. For when Paul saw at Athenes an Altar dedicate to the
Gods, the entitlyng whereof he thought good to bring in for a prouffe and
corroboracion of the Christen belief, leauyng all the rest that made against
his purpose, he took only the two latter words of the same, (which were
these) to the unknown god, yet in some part he was content to change them
to: for the whole superscripcion was set up in this manner.

To the gods of Asia, Euro^a, and Africa, to the unknown, and estraunge Gods.
So upon this exemple of Paul I wene it proceeds, that commenly at these days
my fair brood of doctors do enterprise to nippe of here and there, four or
five words of the whole, yea and those some thing altered and corrupted (if
it stand them upon) to apply the same so botched together to their own
sense and commoditee, how ever that that goes before, and that that follows,
does nothing serve to purpose, or rather make clea^e against them. Which
their said iugglyng they conueigh yet by so happy an unshamefastness, as in
this poinct Ciuilians have cause oftentimes to envy doctors of diuinitee,
when now in Allegacions nothing making for the mattier, they be so far
passed by them. For I pray you (of friendship) tell me, what thing may be to
hard for these doctors to bring about? seeing how that great aforesaied
doctor (I had almost blabbed forth his name again, but I fear me I tell you
of the greek adage) could draw out of Lukes words, the construction of a
sentence no more agreeable unto Christ's meaning therein, than fire is with water?
For Christ when the imminent danger of his death aproched, what time, or
never, it becomes good servants most constantly to take their masters part,
and defend him to their powers, as confederates in league do one for an
other, to the end yet he might drive all confidence in such manner defense out
of his Apostles hertes, axed of them, whether they wanted ought, what time he
sent them forth so barely without any manner provision, not geuyng them so
much as shoes to save their feet from thorns and stones, nor yet a wallet to
put their meat in? whereunto when they had aunswerd, that they lacked nothing:
But now (quod he) who so of you has a wallette, let him self it, and his bag
also, yea and who so has not, make he sale at lest of his cote, to bie him a
swoorde. Now whereas it is manifest enough, that all Christ's doctrine
pretends naught but meekness, patience, and contempt of this mortal life,
which of you perceives not, what he meant in this place? For I take it
plainly that he said thus, to give his Ambassadors the Apostles, the better
courage, to the end that they not only should set no store by shoes, nor by
vitailyng bags, but should cast away their cotes also, the nemblier and more
deliuerly to go about their charge and commission of the gospel preaching,
prouidyng them selves of naught else but only a sword, not that sword that
thieves and murderers do occupy, but the swoorde of the sprite, being whetted
all on Charitee, whose poinct perseth into the inward parts of man's heart, and
cutteth all flesshely affections thence, so clean, as naught remains saving
piety, and ardent love toward god. But mark ye now (of fellowship) how
warlyke this famous doctor wresteth the plain and clear sense hereof. For by
the swoorde (says he) is meant defense against persecucion: and by the
wallette is understood competent provision we should make of things
necessary to live withal. As who says, Christ's mind were changed,
because him seemed that he sent forth his Ambassadors not half royally
furnisshed, and therefore did recant here, and call back his first Instructions
geuin them. Or as if he had here forgotten those words, which before he
spoke unto them with such a vehemency, ye shall be blissed when ye be
persecuted withal kind of oultrage and turment, but make ye no resistance
against those euisses ye shall suffer: for blissed be the meke in sprite, not
those that are fierce, and stubb^urne herted. Or as if it were quite out of his
remembrauce, that in other places he likeneth them to sparowes, and lilies, as
touching the small care that they should take for their living. Now, so much
lacked that he would have them go weponlesse, as rather they should sell
their cotes from their backs to bie the same: and sooner go naked, than
without a swoorde by their side. Moreover like as under the name of Swoorde (as
he expounds it) all manner of defense is conteigned, that may repel injury,
and violence, so under the name of bag, is comprised what ever provision is
made to live withal. And thus (lo) this deep expositour of Gods will and
meaning sets forth the apostles complete armed, with iauelins, bows and
arowes, slinges, and haulfe hakes, to preach the gospel, and Christ's cross.
Ladyng them moreover with great males, and paniers well stuffed with vitailes,
lest else perchance they might sometime depart from their innes vndyned. No
not so much as this, might any thing move this gaie learned man, that Christ
him self shortly after rebukyng Peter bids the swoorde should be put up
again, which before he commanded so ernestly to be bought: and that it never
was herb how the apostles did at any time occupy sword and buckler, to
resist their adversaries violence, which nathelesse they would not have
sticked to do, in case that Christ's meaning in these aforesaied words had
been such, as he expounds it to be.

There is an other doctor likewise of no less reputacion than this former,
but for honors sake I name him not, who interpretyng a place of Abacuc the
prophet, where he says, The skins of the land of Madian shall be
disparcled and torn asunder: nothing considering that the Prophet spoke of
the M^dianistes lodgeynges or tents for the field, which were made of
beasts skins, as aunciently men in warrefare used, writes plainly, that
Abacuc did prophecy there of the fleayng of Saint Barthelmeus skin. I my
self not long agoe^ was present (as many times I am wont to be) at a certain
disputacion, where diverse doctors were assembled. There when one of them by
chance had put forth a question, by what auctoritee of scripture heretics
ought sooner to be coumptrolled by the fire, than confuted by arguments? An
other ancient father, that satte by him, being so crabbed faced, as only the
complexion of his hangyng brows might tell you straight he was master
doctor, aunswerde in a great cholere, that Paul him self was the first
ordeigner of that law, whereas in one of his epistles it is read, Haereticum
hominem post vnam et alteram correptionem deuita (But I axe perdone at your
delicate ears, because I can not otherwise than in the latin phrase express
it unto you) I exhort you (says Paul) to deuite or shonne the company of
heretics, after you shall have ones or twice reproved them for their erronius
opinions. Now when this doctor had thundered forth this text in a big
voice, making often repeticion of this latin word (deuita) so that many
merua^^ed now what the devil he ailed, at last he concluded, that heretics
must be lifted de, vita, making two words thereof, as who says lifted out
of life.

Many laughed at this his fine exposicion, and some there were yet, who took
the same for a very Theologass inuencion. But whereas others (that
notwithstanding) began to reply, by and by rose up an other much solemn
and irrefragable doctor to take his part. And thus lies the case (quod he) It
is written, Suffer thou no misdooer to live, now sins that every heretic
misdooeth, ergo thou must suffer no heretic on live. This Syllogysme being
thus trussed up by him, (lord) how all the assistence began to wonder at his
wittiness, thoroughly coufyrmyng his sentence, yea and that the sooner, seeing
none of them ^ad the wit or learning to consider, how that law was first
ordained against lottemongers, enchaunters and sorcerers, such as the Hebrews
in their tongue name witches. For else why should not fornicatours, and
drunkardes by as good reason, be punished with the like peine of death? But I
play the very fool in going about to tell unto you, all such balde devises
of these furde hoodedmen, being in deed so innumerable, as would not (on my
conscience) be comprehended in all the large volumes of Crisyppus, and Didymus,
taking hardly Fytzharbertes abregementes for advantage. Only my meaning was,
to advertise you, that seeing those divine master doctors durst take upon
them to wrest and mistake scripture in such sort, than much more I must be
borne with, being but a young doctresse, and like a woman shotyng forth my
bolte at the gainest, if sometime may chance I lay not all my allegacions
fully by level. But now at last I lepe back again to saint Paul, and
Gladly (says he) ye do bear with unwise men, (speaking it by him self)
also in an other place, receive you me, as unwise that I am: and further, I
speak not this precisely as upon gods precepte, but rather in mine own
vnwisedome. Than again, we (says he) are become fools for Christ's sake:
Do you here now how great praises of Folly this so great an autour alleges,
yea and that more is, he plainly enioygneth Folly unto us, for a thing most
necessary, and right, importyng to salvation? For who so seems (says he) to
be wise among you, let him become a fool, to the end he be wise in deed.
How say you my masters, would ye any more evident prouffes than this, or an
other exemple also in Lukes gospel, where Jesus calls the two disciples
fools, with whom he ioigned company by the way? This in especial may be
taken for a marvel, These arguments must be taken as spoken by Folly, not
that Erasmus meant so in deed.
how Paul so great a divine spares not to attribute a manner foolisshenesse,
yea unto god also: where he says, what ever of god is foolisshe, is wyser yet
than any thing in men: in expoundyng of which text Origene denies it to be
possible, that this folly may be referred to the general opinion of men upon
the same. As appears by this other text of Paul, to reason of the mysteries
of the cross, is surely to such as believe it not and do perisshe in their
pe^uersnesse, naught else but Folly. But aye, what ayleth me to seek so many
textes of Scripture for witnesses of my words, seeing Christ him self in the
psal^ier does plainly speak thus unto the father, Thou know mine
vnwysedome? So, not without some cause and respect we see in scripture, how
fools and simple souls stand hieghly in Gods favor, which I take to be,
that like as great princes have wysemen in jealousy and suspicion, as Julius
Caesar had Brutus and also Cassius, whereas he nothing held him self adradde
of drunken Mark Anthony, and as Nero mistrusted Seneca, and Dionysius stood in
doubt of Plato, whereas freely on the other side they gave them selves to the
pleasant company of men, of a grosser and more simple capacitee: So in like
rate does Christ blame and reprove these worldly sages, who fully cleue and
stand to their own wisdom. This by Paul's words is confyrmed, where he
says, God has chosen him out those that the world reputed for fools. By
Folly in these places is meant godly symplicitee and by wisdom a worldly ^o
(...).
And in an other place: God has disposed to save the world by foolishness,
seeing that by wisdom it might not be conserved. Yea God him self does
sufficiently confess the same, whereas he cries by the mouth of the prophet,
I shall confound the wisdom of wisemen, and reprove the prudence of Sages:
So Christ in an other place rendeth thanks unto the father, that he had hidden
the mystery of salvation from wisemen, and disclosed the same to youngelinges,
(That is to say) to fools, (For so the Greek word signifies.)

And hereto serve the manyfolde nippes and tauntes, wherewith Christ in diverse
places of the gospel, bayteth Pharisees, and Scribes, and Doctors of the law,
taking ernestly yet the part of simple and unlearned folks. For is it not as
much to say, Woo be unto you, ye Scribes and Pharisees, as woo be unto you,
ye wisemen^ But where find you that ever he charged either yong^lynges, or
women, or fisshers, with that so heavy a word? For it seems proprely that
he delited much in their simplicitee, euin like as those kinds of dumme
^^astes were most acceptable unto him, that were fardest removed from all
Forelike wiliness. And therefore chose he rathest to ride on an ass, all be it
(so pleasyng him) he might as safely have bestridden a Lions back. We read
also that the holy ghost descended (...) the likeness of a Culuer, and not of
an Egle, or a Puttocke. And besides this, scripture in many places makes
mention of hertes, of faunes, of lambs, and such sely beasts. Like as
Christ does call his elect and chosen by the name of Sheep, which beast is
of all others the vnwysest (witness this proverb of Aristotle) his manners
savor of the sheep, or he has shepishe conditions: which quippie in way of
reproach is used against blockeheades of the very sklendrest capacitee. And
yet we see, how Christ professes him self to be the herdeman of such a
flock: Yea and that more is, delited him self in the name of Lamb, that John
the Baptist gave him, when he poincted him thus to the people: Lo^ here the
lamb of God: which ressemblaunce is likewise cited in many places of the
Apocalipse. Now all these textes that I have alleged, do they no^ plainly
testify, that mortal men being ^ooles, are godly also? and that Christ him
self mindyng the relefe and redemption of mankyndes folly, although he was the
ineffable wisdom of the father, became yet a manner fool, whereas taking man's
nature upon him, he was found both in form and habit like unto other men.
Euin as Paul says, he was made sin also, to cure and heal the sins of
the world: to which sins yet it pleased him to ministre none other
medecines, than the Folly of the cross, by the hands of the Apostles, being
gross and unskilled men: whom ^atheles he as diligently did persuade unto
foolisshenesse, as otherwise he retired and dishorted them from wisdom, in
alluryng them by exemples showed upon Children, upon burdes of the air, and
other things smallie sensed or no whitte, as which live by no art nor
fordrifte, and likewise in warnyng them to take no care how they should use
their words, when they were brought before judges and presidentes, and further
in forbiddyng them to seek out the accoumpt of times, or the smallest momentes
of times. To the end (as who says) they should not lean to their own
prudence, but with whole thought and mind depend on him, remittyng all unto
his discrecion. Whereunto this also may be applied, that god the Creator and
first former of all things forbadde Adam under penaltee of death he should not
taste of the fruit of the tree of Science or knowlage. As who says Science
were the mere poison to felicitee: According whereto, Paul also does openly
reprove science for a thing most hurtesome and pernicious, The tasting of the
fruit of the tree of knowlage brought in ^eath.
seeing it puffs up the mind of man with self glory: Like as saint Bernard
also following (as I take it) Paul's said opinion, expounds the hille, whereon
Lucifer establisshed his seat, to be the hille of Science. And perchance it
should not be the feblest argument, to say that fools find so much grace
and favor before god, as to Folly only is geuin perdone and forgiveness of
trespasses, whereas to wisdom not so much as the leastiote is remitted.

In sort that who so ever do axe at god forgiveness of their sins,
although they wittyngly did commit the same, yet will they use a certain
color and pretext of Folly for their excuse. For so does Aaron in the book
of Numbres (if I well remember me) desire perdone of the punisshement that his
wives faults deserved, Saieyng, I pray the (O lord) not to lay to our
charge this sin, which we have foolisshelie committed. And so does Saul
pray David to forgive him, For it appears (said he) that I have dooen
foolisshely. Thau again the self David speaks fair and humbly to the lord,
in this wise, But I pray the (O lord) to perdone the iniquitee of thy
servant, seeing we have dooen foolisshely. As if he thought he should obtain
no mercy, unless he had laid Folly and inconsidraunce to b^^e. But what
speak we of David? knowing how Christ the son of god hangyng on the cross
did in this wise make intercession for his enemies, Father, forgive them, and
laid none other excuse, than, for they know not what they do. So Paul in
like manner writing to Timothe said, But herefore have I obtained the mercy of
god, in as much as ignorantly I offended in mine incredulitee. Now what is it
to say, I offended ignorantly, but that, I did it through folly and not
thorough malice? or what other exposicion can ye make, of herefore have I
obtained mercy, than that else I should not have obtained it, not having laid
the wit on Folly? And no less makes for us, that saying of David in the
Psaltier, Lord, take not to heart the trespasses of my youth, and mine
ignorauncies remember not. Do you mark now what two colors he brings in
for his purgacion? that is to say Youth, which age I do ever accompany,
and ignorancies, speaking it in the Plural number, to express thereby the
greatter copy and habounbance of his Folly. Finally, as it were an endless
labor to tell you infinite such exemples, so to knitte up shortly, I say in
my conceit, that Christian Religion seems to have a certain sybship with
simplicitee, and devout foolisshenesse, These words must not be wrested to
any ^uill sense otherwise than the autour ^^ent.
in nothing agreyng with worldly wisdom. But if ye axe me, as how? than do
no more but consider how children, old folks, women, and fools, are those
among others that show them selves deuoutest, and most inclined to church
service, and holy things, reioysyng to be present thereat, in sort that ever at
Mass time ye shall see them approach nerest unto the altars, euin through a
certain instinction of natural selinesse prouokyng them to god. Think also
how the very first autours and founders of Christen Religion were as sharp
adversaries of all Science, and men trustyng to their own cunnyng, as
otherwise friendly embrasorus of simplicitee and plainness. Lastly perpende ye
thus, how no manner fools are in appearance more ideotelike, than such as are
totally rauisshed, and enflamed with the ardent zeal of Christian charitee. So
loueshly they deal their goods abroad, forgette all injuries done unto them,
suffer them selves to be deceived, put no difference between friends and
foes, abhor all pleasures and delites of the body, are fed up and made
fat with fasting, watchyng, tears, labors, and despites, despise their own
life, end desire death above life, briefly seem to be so astonned and past all
commen sensis, which men live by, as if their souls dwelled not in those
bodies they bear about with them, but rather in some other mansion place.
Which strange trade of theyrs I know not how to call, but well may it to the
commen judgment of men, appear to be a very madness, or ra^yng of the
wits. Marvel ye the less therefore, that the apostles were judged by the
wicked Ethnikes to be drunkardes, Take these words to be spoken under the
person of Folly.
as if their heddes were ouercharged with new wine. And that Paul likewise was
holden for mad, of Festus the president of Jury, in these words, Thou
rauest Paul, and much learning of books has turned the into a madness. But
seeing I have ones taken upon me to play the d^ctresse, puttyng on a Lions
hide (as they say) let me not stick now to go through withal, and to teach
you this also, that the self same felicitee, which Christians do so hotely
desire, Folly speaks.
and by so many labors do seek for, is naught else than a certain kind of
rauyng, in the sprite, and godly foolisshenesse. Which words I would not ye
should grate on, nor take them at the woorst, but rather note the thing in
deed as it lies. For first ye must think, how Christians in this poinct do
fully agree with the opinion of Platos Sectatours, how the soul of man being
drowned and entangled in the fleshely bands of the body, can not as being
dusked with the grosenesse of the same, behold and take fruicion of the fight
of very things as they are in deed. Whereupon Plato defines Philosophy to
be a meditacion or remembrance of death, in as much as it plucketh and
retyreth the mind of man from visible and corporal things, to those that are
invisible and ghostly. Which effect is in death also. Therefore so long as the
soul within man does rightly and in due wise peruse the Organs of the body,
so long is that man called sound, and of good discrecion: but when some of
those bands or conduite^ being ones perisshed, she does busily labor to
recover her freedom, minding a certain flight (as it were) and breakyng lose
from that her flesshely prison the body, by which struglyng the whole frame
of the sensis, and inward powers is disioygned, you do hold him for mad
and out of his right mind: which passion if it come perhaps through
infyrmitee, or faultiness of any of those Organs, than do all men precisely
agree, Diuinitee (...) rauers.
that it is plain Madness: How be it we see that euin this kind of rauers do
sometime also prophecy of things coming, and sodeinly become knowers of
tounges, and arts, which erste they never learned, showing to have in them I
wot never what espece of new inspiracion and diuinitee: which undoubtedly
chances, because the soul being somewhat enlarged, and made freer from the
bodies yoke and contagiousnesse begins a little to exercise and welde her
self according to the propretee of her own nature. And upon like occasion
many folk laboring in the extreme panges of death, are much subject (as I
take it) to somewhat like hereto, as often as if they were ravished in a
trau^ce, they do speak of certain wondrous things perteignyng to an other
world. But and if the said wandryng of the wits do befalle a man for that
he is right passyngly moved and stirred up with the love of heavenly things, I
doubt now whether it may be called the self same kind of madness, yet sure
it is so nere sybbe thereto, as many men now a days will doubt never a whitte
to repute that his fervent affection toward god, for a very dotage of the
mind. Namely seeing a small number of such sely good souls as are deteigned
therewith, do in all their deeds, and living repine, and disagree from the
whole band of other mortal men. Wherefore (I suppose) they are served, as
Plato feigneth, that one of those prisoners was, that satte bounden in a dark
den under ground (as before I recited unto you) whereas naught was seen else,
saving shadows and representacions of things. That where by chance the said
prisoner escaped out of the den, and so coming abroad into this world, saw
very things as they were in deed, returning of good will to his fellows, to
advertise them of the error they were in, he was no whitte believed of them,
but rather laughed to scorn: For whereas he like a man of wisdom and
experience seemed to pity their madness and great blindness in mistakyng so
of things, they on the otherside did pot at him, and thrust him out of their
company, for a frantike fool. So fares it by the vulgar sort of men, who
commenly have those things in greatest price and admiracion, The difference
between worldly and goldly men.
that are most sensual and bodily, as which they take to be only, and none
other: whereas gods folks on the other part, what ever draws nerest to the
bodily use, do the sooner therefore despise and set light by it, forsomuche as
they are holy rauisshed and geuin to the contemplacion of invisible things.
For as worldlynges have richesse in best reputacion, next thereto estemyng the
weal of their bodies, and lest regardyng the profit of their souls, in case
they regard it at all, for some of them believe there is no soul, because they
can not see it at the eye: So again devout persons put their whole confidence
in god, being the simplest and most pure thing of all others, and secondly do
chearishe that, that draws nerest to him, I mean the sprite, bestowyng no
cost nor ^endance on their bodies, nor on pleasures belongyng to the same. But
money of all things they neglect, and set no store by, no more than ye would
do by things superfluous, or rather noisome. That and if (may chance) at
any time they be enforsed to go about worldly affairs, I can tell you yet,
that they do it evil willyngly, and with a spyced stomach. So that (Paul
says) they have goods, as not having goods: and possess them, as not
possessyng them, by reason they vary so much from the universal and vulgar
sort of men. For although the Senses have all a certain parentage and
kynneship with the body, yet be there of the same, some grosser in substance,
as are fealyng, hearing, seeing, smellyng, and tastyng: some again more
severed and removed from the body, as is memory, understanding, and freewill.
Now seeing that the soul of man has therein most strength and vigor, whereunto
she most applies her self, therefore it comes to pass, that holy men, the
force of whose sprites is wholly bent upon things contemplative, which are
most distaunt and aliened from the grosser senses, do fare in the rest, as if
they were benumbed, or brute of judgment, as domme beasts are. Whereas
contrary the souls of vulgar people are most ^^fe and pregnaunt in those
gross rude senses of the body, being as blunt and dulle yet, in the other five
powers of the wit. And hereupon (I think) it comes, Saint Bernard drank
oil instead of wine.
that some devout persons (as it is written of them) did without
apperceiuyng the difference, drink lamp oil in steed of wine. So likewise
as conceruyng the affections of the mind, some of them be of faster league and
aliaunce to the body, as are flesshely lust, appetite to fode or sleep, ire,
pride, and envy, with such other disordinate mocio^s, wherewith holy men are
ever at vnpeasible war, but the vulgars not only do not eschew, but rather
embrace them, Diuersitee of affections.
as supposyng they can not live without them. Than again, some other
affections are entredeux and indifferent to both parts, which we may name
Natural, as the reverence a man bears toward father and mother, the
chariness he has over his children, the love he owes to his kinnesfolkes and
friends, with such like. Which said Middle affections are had also in some
degree and price among commen people, though not so much as the other. But
holy men will struggle to race them also out of their hertes, saving as
farfoorth as they be ghostly, and make rather toward the hieghest part of
man, which is the Sprite, than any other flesshely appetites: by which
conueighance they may love their parents not as their parents, (for what else
begat they saving their bodies? yet euin that also ought to be referred to god
the maker of all things) but love them rather as good folks, in whom the
image of the sprite of god resplendissheth. Which said ressemblance they call
very felicitee, as the greattest good that may he had, yea such (they say)
as only, and none other, should be beloved, required, and wished after. And so
by this said rule, do they measure likewise all the other parts and duities
of this life: whereby it comes to pass, that what ever thing is seen here
presently at the eye, if so be they do not fully contemn the same, yet sure
they set much less thereby, than by other things, which may not outwardly
be seen. Yea they say also, that euin in the church sacraments, and works
of charitee there may be tried out both a ghostlinesse and a bodilinesse: As
for exemple, In fasting they hold it not sufficient for a man to abstain from
eating of flesh, which vulgar folk suppose to be the entiere and perfect
fast, unless that he rebate somewhat also from his affections, in geuyng
less raines than before to his anger, or in cuttyng his prides combeshorter,
or in lightnyng him self of his bodily peize, to the end his sprite may the
nemblier climb up to the gripe and fruicion of heavenly things. Likewise in
howsell, and receiuyng of the sacrament, albeit (say they) the ceremonies and
circumstaunces used about the same, ought not to be neglected, yet must we take
them of them self alone to be little auailable, or rather hartfull, unless
the other part, which is spiritual, be added also thereunto: that is to say,
the thing it self, which by those outward signs is represented. For
represented is the death of Christ thereby, which death all Christen men are
bound to follow and express, both in dauntyng, fordooyng, and buriyng of all
bodily affections, to the end they may rise again, being restored to a new
life, as united thereby unto Christ, and made all one among them selves.
These mysteries are by godly and spiritual meaners scanned in this sort: but
leude folk commenly do take the M^sse sacrifice to be of none other effect,
than as it were a certain church service, wherein they fully did their duities,
aslonge as they be present at it, standing as nere the altar as they may, to
here the words of the priest, or chauntyng of the quyre, with other like
ceremonies and obseruaunces used about the same. Now, not only in these two
poinctes, which for exemples sake I have set to fore you, but generally
throughout all their living, holy men will fly from those things, that savor
of the body, as being rapte and drawn up to the other, that are ghostly and
invisible. Insomuche therefore as there is such diuersitee and discencion in
all poinctes between these two trades of men, it comes to pass, that each of
them do take other for mad and distraught, Mark how Folly dalieth in her
words which are to be construed to ^ good sense or else to be but as a talk
of Folly.
notwithstanding (in my conceipte) that name may rightlier be applied unto
holy men, than vulgar people: which ye shall plainlier perceive why, as soon
as I have briefly (according to my promise) declared unto you, how the final
mede and gwerdone, that Christen men do look after, is naught else than a
certain sweet rauyng, and simple alienacion of the mind: wherein eftesoones I
require you, not to be over scrupulous graters at the bare words without
taking the sense withal. First therefore ye must think, that Plato did euin
than dream of such a thing, when he wrote, that the passion and extreme rage
of fervent lovers was to be desired and embrased, as a thing above all others
most blisfull: because that a vehement lover lives not now in him self, but
rather in that that he loves, so that the further and further a lovers heart is
distraught from him self, to dwell with the beloved, the more and more he
reioyseth. And when the mind seeks to wander from the body, nor occupies the
powers of the same in the due use, who will call this otherwise than plain
madness? For else why do you use commenly this phrase of speech? he is out of
him self, and return man to thy self, and he is come again to him self.
It follows therefore, how much more perfect, and the depelier such love is
impressed, that so much the greatter, and the blisfuller is the rage also.
Which so being that souls yet pinned within these bodily foldes may smacke a
little of such a felicitee, consider ye than what a life the saints souls
lead in heaven? whereunto the minds of godly persons do with such feruencie
aspyre? Seeing there the sprite as vanquissher, and far more puissaunt, shall
wholly draw up, and convert the body into her own nature: Which she may do
the easilier, Transformacion of the body in (...) the sprite
seeing euin in this life here, she had cleansed and purified the same through
fastings and other devout meditacions, to be the meter and more apt to
receive such a ghostly transformacion. And than again, the sprite self
shall be meruailously rauisshed and soked up by the far more strong and
attractiue power of the hieghest sprite of all, which is God. So that now
those holy men shall be altogether transformed and alterated, by none other
means yet to so hiegh a degree in felicitee, saving only because they as
wholly being issued out of them selves, shall enjoy and be participant of that
unspeakable heavenly sweetness, procedyng from a pure and tight perfect
pleasure, through the might of god, the greatest good of all, that rauissheth
and attyreth all things to it self. Now albeit this said felicitee is than
most amply and absolutely enioied, when the souls at the resurrection day
being restored to their own bodies, The life of good Christians a meditation
of the life (...) come.
shall ioynctly receive immortalitee: yet inasmuche as the life of good
Christians is naught else than a continual meditacion or certain shadow as it
were of that life to come, it chances, that they yet living, have for their
coumforte permission at sometimes to discern a taste or savor of that
hieghest reward behight unto them: Which said smacke or sent, be it but a
little drop in respect of that large flowyng well of eternal felicitee, yet
surely it surpasses, and incomparably excedeth all other bodily pleasures,
yea although all the delices of all men were wholly ioigned and put in one. So
much (lo) are spiritual things to be preferred before flesshely things,
and the invisible before the other visible. For this undoubtedly is euin the
very gwerdone that the Prophet promyseth, Saying, was never man's eye saw, nor
ear heard, not thought of heart yet compassed, what, and how great felicitee
god has prepared unto such as do love him. And this is Mary Magdalens
portion, which by change of life shall not be plucked away, but rather be
more perfitely confyrmed. Who so ever therefore have such grace (which sure
is geuin to few) by their life time to taste of this said felicitee, they are
subject to a certain passion much like unto madness or witrauyng, when
rauisshed so in the sprite, or being in a trance, they do speak certain
things not hangyng one with an other, nor after any earthly facion, but rather
do put forth a voice they wot never what, much less to be understood of
others: and sodeinely without any apparent cause why, do change the state of
their countenaunces. For now shall ye see them of glad chere, now of as sad
again, now they weep, now they laugh, now they sighe, for brief, it is
certain that they are wholly distraught and rapte out of them selves. In sort
that when a little after they come again to their former wits, Godly men in
a kind of trance.
they deny plainly they wot where they became, or whether they were tha^ in
their bodies, or out of their bodies, wakyng or slepyng: remembering also as
little, either what they heard, saw, said, or did than, saving as it were
through a cloud, or by a dream: but this they know certainly, that whiles
their minds so roued and wandered, they were most happy and blisfull, so that
they lament and weep at their return unto their former senses, as who says,
nothing were leefer unto them than continually to rave and be deteigned with
such a spece of madness. And this is but a certain smacke or thin taste of
their bliss to come. But ones more forgettyng my self, I pass my bounds.
Howbeit if ought shall seem unto you to have been said of me more
knappisshely than became me, or with more words than neded, think I pray
you, that I was the speaker, being both Folly, and a woman. Yet for all that
remember the Greek proverb, that oftentimes a fool may speak to purpose,
unless perchance ye think that this makes no whitte for women. I perceive ye
look for an Epiloge or knotte of my tale, but than sure ye are very fools, if
ye wene that I yet remember what I have spoken, after such a rablement of
words powered forth. The old proverb says, I hate a talebearer from the
boorde: But I say, I hate him that remembers what he has said. Fare ye well
therefore, clappe your hands in token of gladness, live careless, and drink
all out, ye the trusty servants and solemn ministers of Folly.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE IN THE HOUSE OF THOMAS BERTHELET.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M. D. LXIX


