SEVEN DIALOGVES BOTH PITHIE and profitable.

The

1 Is of the right use of things indifferent. 2 Shows what comfort Popery
affords in time of danger. 3 Is between a good Woman and a Shrew. 4 Is of
the conversion of a Harlot. 5 Is of putting forth Children to Nurse. 6 Is of a
Popish Pilgrimage. 7 Is of a Popish Funeral.
By W. B.

LONDON. Printed for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at his shop in Saint
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet-streete. 1606.

To the Right Worshipful, the Mayor, Shiriffes and Aldermen, together with all
that unfeignedly fear God, and sincerely love the truth, in that religious and
famous City of Norwich, W. B. wishes all outward prosperity, with increase
of heavenly grace in this life, and eternal felicity in the life to come.
RIght Worshipful, Fathers, and Brethren, as Elisha said 2. King 4. 13.
unto the Shunamite (who provided a chamber for the Prophet) Behold, thou have
had all this care for us, but what shall we do for thee? So may I truly say.
The City of Norwich has been very careful for me, and exceeding kind unto
me sometime an unworthy Minister of Christ amongst them, but what shall I do
for them, whereby to show my self thainkefull for their love? five years it
was my blessed hap (through the goodness of God) to reap the benefit of two
very reverend and godly persons then your City Preachers, M. Moore. M. Roberts.
and now Citizens of Heaven, (whose memory is blessed of all that knew them,
and must of me be ever honored as my Fathers in the Lord, and with them also I
inioyed the labors of many learned and godly persons besides, which made your
City like Bethel and Jericho, which mainetained 2. King. 2.
the Schools of Prophets amongst them. Oh the heavenly harmony and sweet
amity that then was amongst you from the highest to the lowest! The
magistrates and the Ministers embracing and seconding one an other, and the
common people affording due reverence, and obedience to them both. No matters
of weight were usually concluded in your common assemblies for the good of your
City, before you had first consulted with your grave and godly Preachers. It
was David's joy, to see the people go unto the house of the Lord. And whose
heart was not filled with joy, to see in Norwich the continual resort that
was every day through the year, and that for many years together unto the holy
exercises of Religion, which were continually supported by worthy and sincere
Preachers, and graced by the presence of so many grave and Religious
Magistrates? And so great a meeting of learned, godly, and faithful Pastors;
above twenty together, of good account have I seen usually frequenting the
holy exercises, and all having pastoral charges in the City, besides those
of the Cathedral Church. And all these were of one heart, and one mind, all
as brethren embracing most lovingly each other from the heart, boldly
conuersing, and freely rejoicing one with another, no man suspecting each
other. Such was their care and vigilancie, yea, and such was their gravity and
modesty, yea such was their grace and humillitie, and such was their charity,
and fidelity; but especially so well were things managed by the wisdom and
moderation of those two worthies before mentioned, who were still amongst the
rest as presidents, or leaders of an army, that it was not possible for any
jar or contention to be of any longer continuance then a spark of fire
produced by the violent stroke of the steel and flint, of which a man might
truly say, Oritur moritur, if any were kindled with one word, the next word
quenches it again; their heavenly doctrines were greedily received of you for
the truths sake, and themselves were always welcome unto you for their
doctrine sake, but whether of their doctrines or their persons were in greater
price with you, it is hard for me to say. Being invited to your houses (as
daily they were by one or other) they were seldom or never dis-ioyned, but
whither some went, all went: none were excluded, to show that you had not the
word in respect of persons, but all were embraced alike, that all might receive
encouragement alike in the work of the Lord: in which course of yours, whether
your abundant love, or christian wisdom ought to have the pre-eminence, I
know not: passing sweet was the one, and exceeding pleasant was the other, yea
gracious and admirable were you in both chargeable: I confess it was unto you,
yet such was the love you bare to those, whose feet brought you the glad
tidings of peace, that you counted nothing too dear for them. I write not thus
to flatter you: the Searcher of hearts will witness for me, that I speak the
truth and lie not, my conscience tells me that I should do you open wrong, if I
should not acknowledge the City of Norwich to have been always as kind and
loving to their Preachers, as they have been famous for their government. In
all, let God have the glory. As for my self, (the most unworthy of all) I
must acknowledge my self by many bands of love to be tied unto you, but
espetially, for that in my troubles which befell me about matters of my
Ministry (though long since, yet never to be forgotten) it pleased you for the
most part in your own persons as occasion served, but espetially in the person
of a most worthy Senator, then your chief magistrate (and now also a glorious
citizen of heaven, to stand forth in the face of all the world for my just
defense, as also afterward when all means failed, to extend your enlarged
hearts to the utmost of your power for my maintenance. Abounding was your love
before, but the^ it superabounded, and by the cheerful working thereof it
appeared to all the world, that your faith was not dead nor barren, but like
David's blessed tree, planted by the rivers of celestial waters, which brings
forth his fruit in due season, without either fading or fall of the leaf; so
far were you from driving me away (as it has pleased Envy to remour it home
even to the place where I dwell) that I must needs confess, that you did
labor to the utmost of your skill, to have kept me still amongst you, and no
less was the care for the rest of my brethren, and fellow laborers, who being
in the fame predicament with my self, were also enforced (through the
indisposition of those times) to remove their tents from amongst you, to the
general grief of themselves, and the most part of your City, and to place
them elsewhere, upon those aggrauated rumors posted after me by the malignant
messengers of the envious man, it has bin my happc (God purposing for my good
I trust to have it so) to be not alittle sifted in this country, where it has
pleased the Lord of his goodness to place me: to which end, there has been
also posting from hence unto you for coppies of records and I wot not what,
assuring themselves, that from thense would come such shot that would batter
down my hold, and make me quite to give over; and no less in boasting manner
most confidently they gave out amongst themsel^es. But God be thanked, who
suffered them like deluded souls, no less foolish then maliciously to triumph
before the victory: and my fear is, that those men which traueled so far, and
searched so near, and were at such cost and raked (as it were) so many
backesides, and troubled both themselves, and others, and all for the finding,
and reuiewing of an old rotten coffin (so many years since buried with a
blocks end in it, sor want of a better co^se) have received the most hurt
themselves: for some of them (besides the forfiture of their credit which they
pawned upon the bargain) have proved since that, like cloth that shrinkes in
the wetting, and having borrowed till no man will trust them, are glad to live
where no man does know them, shifting for themselves tanquam indiuidua vaga,
which are vix demonstratiua in their own country, whereof I take no pleasure
at all, for I have always wished them more good then they do themselves: and
I hope, the rest of their confederates will make good use of their fellows
falls. But as for you, right Worshipful, and in the Lord entirely beloved,
your hearts, and hands have ever bin free from such kind of practices, and
blessed be God that has ever kept you from casting in your lot amongst them,
whose devising has bin still to spread nets for the innocent and simple man:
and as the remembrance of your ancient love does much rejoice me; so is my joy
much more increased, through the constant continuance of your love, which by
many signs and tokens, did most plentifully appear, when (after many years
discontinuance) it pleased the Lord of his goodness, to bring me amongst you
again. And now, beloved in the Lord, what remains, but that you continue
your ancient and holy courses, that so the fame of your faith, love, and zeal,
which is spread far and near, may increase yet more and more, to your
everlasting commendation. And if you have still the holy assemblies and sacred
exercises of religion continued amongst you, as I hope you have, I beseeeh you
be thankful unto God for them, and make your best use of them while you may.
And you that be the worthy Senators and governors of that City, let me
entreat you to follow the good example of your predecessors, grace the holy
assemblies with your presence, and go before the people to Gods house, as
David did in fetching home the Arc; encourage your Pastors and Preachers
still, and show forth the power of religion in your holy conversation and good
government, as you have done. And my good brethren which be of the ministry
in that City, if I have found grace in your eyes, and may be counted worthy to
advise you in the Lord, be you all of one heart and of one mind in the Lord.
And I beseech you forget not the holy counsel, which one of your ancient
Fathers and Pastors was M. Moore.
wont oftentimes to put you in mind of; though there may be some difference in
opinion, about matters of circumstance and less weight, yet let there be no
difference in brotherly affection, but love one another in the Lord from the
heart, remembering that of the Apostle: If any be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal it unto him in his good time: and let none be too forward in rushing
into the heart and conscience of his brother, for that is (as you know) Gods
prerogative, but rather imitate the Lord himself, who said; if Solomon did
sin against him, he would visit 2. Sam 7.
him with the rods of the children of men: but yet his loving kindness and
mercy, he would not take from him. So, though there may perhaps arise some
hot disputes amongst you, about this or that, and in heat, you may perchance
sometimes strike too hard, and make the sparkles ^ie too fast; yea, cause may
be given sometime to reprehend one another roundly, as Paul did Peter, yet let
charity and loving kindness never depart from amongst you, and the God of peace
shall bless you as he has done, to the wonder of the world. I know you are
already established in the present truth, and therefore need none of my
instructions: yet, for so much as sound faith has need of a strengthening, and
a pure mind, of a stirring up, and a weary heart, of a warming, I bear my
self somewhat bold upon your Christian patience, to write thus unto you as I
do. And now (right Worshipful, and the rest of your City beloved in the Lord)
for a testimony of a heart that would be thankful, if my velle and posse,
would be suitable the one to the other, I do here offer unto your Christian
consideration, and courteous patronage, these Dialogues, which I have at times,
for my own recreation, translated out of Latin into english. And because they
contain variety of matters, therefore I dedicate them to your whole City,
which also comprehends variety of wits and dispositions. I trust you will
accept them in good part, as you always have done my self, and all my poor
and slender indeuoures in former times: which if you do, you shall encourage
me to labor hereafter, in arguments of greater moment, if greater may be. In
the mean time, I commend you to the grace of God. And as I have you always in
remembrance in all my prayers, so I beseech you, forget not me in yours, nor
the whole Church of Christ, that so the communion of Saints, may not sound
only in our lips, but may be powerful in our hearts, and fruitful one
toward another, until we shall all fully enjoy that blessed fellowshippe of
the Saints, which the Lord Jesus Christ, our head and blessed Redeemer, has
purchased with his blood, and reserved for us in the heavens, Amen.

From my study at Reading, in Barkeshire, 1606. Your servant for the Lord
Jesus, William Burton.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader, here I exhibit unto thy view, certain Dialogues, compiled first
in Latin by that famous man Erasmus, and now by me translated into English,
for the general good of our Church and Commonwealth: not absque delectu, or
hand over head (as they say) have I gathered them, but according to the
Apostles rule, I have tried all, and chosen the best. If thou will but enter
into them, thou shall find so delightful and fruitful a walk, that thou will
hardly retire until thou have gone through. They are full of doctrines, both
sound and substantial. Repleate they are with sent^nces, not pretty, but
pithie, and garnished they are with similies and examples, both witty and
weighty. Of Philosophy both natural and supernatural, thou shall find there
great plenty. Of learning both divine and humane, thou shall have thy fill:
Both pleasure and profit will entertain thee at thy entrance, and recompense
abundantly thy travel all the way thou go. What should I say more? Good
wine needs no Iuy bush, and Erasmus, has no need of my commendations. To the
learned and judicious, yea generally to all men, he is so well known for his
deep learning, and profound judgment: that for the entertainment of th^se his
conferences, I needed not but only to have said Erasmus wrote them. For the
matter or subject of them, I refer thee to heir sever all titles: Only thus
much I thought good to make known unto thee, that he fifi Dialogue, which is
of a woman in Childbed, is especially ^tended against the monstrous and
unnatural exposing of children to nurses by wanton women, and such as having
dame Nature most beneficial unto them, do yet show themselves both (...)
Dames, (...) most cruel mothers to their tender infant, whereby many sweet
babes, which might have lived, and done good ser^ice, both to God and their
Prince, to the Church and Commonwealth are now made away, yea, cast away by an
untimely death, hasted by the unnatural dealing of Mothers, and Nurse^. And
many, though they live, yet are marred in the handling, and caused to (...) out
of kind, by the unkind provision that is made for them, (poor babes) between
the nice wanton mother, and the unconscionable greedy nurse. Of men that come
to their end by untimely death, the saying is, that Plures periere crapula quam
gladio: surffeting killes more then the sword, which I think to be true. But
of children that come to their end by untimely death, I suppose I may (and that
not improbably) say, that more have miscarried in the nursing, then otherwise,
as shall further appear by the reasons of this reverend and learned Author.
And for further confirmation thereof, mark what I shall tell thee. Not yet a
year since, it was my hap (being in London) to be present at s^pper in a
Merchants house, where this matter of putting forth children to nurse, was
debated, Pro and contra, (as they say.) There was then in presence an ancient
grave Matrone, and a midwife, who openly protested, that she knew a Nurse, that
had taken (for greediness of gain) three several women children to nurse at
one instant, and they were not of the meanest sor^ neither: and her manner was
to go forth in the morning, and come no more in again till night, but to
leave the poor tender Infants in the Cradle together without any company or
comfort, which within a short space by continual crying and beating themselves
one against another for want of food, ended their miserable and woeful days: a
thing able to break a heart of flint. This midwife being demanded whether she
spoke this upon hearesay or no, did protest that she was an eye witness
thereof her self, and saw them all three laid forth upon a board together. The
hearing whereof caused some watery eyes, and bitter sighs. This cruel murderer
answered the Law, but she could not give the poor Infants their innocent blood
again. When thou have advisedly read the, learned Dialogue, (...) (...) (...)
(...), (...) (...) (...). If by my publishing hereof, but one Infant in the
world may be preserved, or be the better educated, my (...) (...) (...) ^ly
(...). In the rest of the (...), (...) (...) perceive how little (...) the
Papists (...) (...) (...) (...) Erasmus, as a m^n of their side. (...) (...),
and reap (...), and (...) (...) (...) thy prayers.

Thine in^ the Lord Iesus^ William Burton.

The Printer to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, there have in this impression some faults escaped, whereof I
must acquit the Author, and plead thy pardon for my self, he being both
absent, and unacquainted with the sudden publication of his book: and I,
sometimes misled by doubt and difficulty of the copy. The number and moment
of them is not so great, but I hope thy kindness will be greater, in giving
what thy self (as being a man) do sometimes need, excuse of errors.

A dialogue of Fish-eating, both pleasant and profitable, wherein are many
excellent points of Divinity discussed, but chiefly that of the right use of
things indifferent, very necessary for these times.
The Speakers are only two.
1 Lanio, that is, a Butcher. 2 Salsamentarius, that is, a Fishmonger.
Butcher. HOw now lusty Fishmonger? have you yet bought you a rope?


Fishmonger A rope Butcher, what to do?


Bu. What to do? to go hang thy self.


Fish. Why man, I am not yet weary of my life.


But. But you will be ere it be long.


Fish. Why Butcher, what is the matter?


But. If you know not, I will tell you. There is coming toward you, a very
Saguntine famine (as they call it) that will make you even go hang your selves.


Fish. Good words Butcher, let this come to our ennemies: how comes it
about, that of a Butcher you are so suddenly become a diuiner of such great
calamity?


But. It is no divination, do not flatter your self, the matter is evident,
and the thing it self is already in the open market place.


Fish. You trouble my mind much, fhew it me if you have any thing.


But. I will show it you to your great grief: There is of late come forth an
edict from Rome, that from henceforth it shall be lawful for every man to eat
what he list. And wat then remains to you and your order, but an insatiable
hunger with your rotten salt fish?


Fish. For my part, I care not if any man do list to eat snailes or netles,
let him: but is any man forbidden to eat fish?


But. No, but there is liberty granted to all men, to eat flesh that will.


Fish. If this be all, then go thou and hang thy self: for I hope to gain
more hereafter than ever I have done.


But. Yea, great coming in, but hunger to the full: or if you had rather hear
more merry news, henceforth you shall live more cleanely, neither shall you
use to wipe your snotty nose, which is ever itching with scabbes upon your
arm, as you were wont to do.


Fish. Ha, ha: now we be come to the top: the blind reproacheth the
one-eyed, I would it were true that you tell me, but I am afraid you do but
feed me with a false joy.


But. That which I tell you is too true, but whereupon do you promise to your
self greater gain?


Fish. Because that the world is come to that pass, that look what is most
forbidden, that men do most of all desire.


But. And what of that?


Fish. Because more will abstain from eating of flesh, when there is liberty
giu^n to eat it, neither will it be counted a dainty banquet indeed, where
there is no fish, as the manner has been amongst our forefathers: therefore I
am glad that the eating of flesh is permitted, and I would also that the eating
of fish were forbidden, for then ^ould men more gladly buy it then now they do.


But. Surely a goodly wi^.


Fish. This I could wish, if I respected nothing but the gain of money, as you
do, for the love whereof you have devoted your gross flesh devouring body to
the infernal spirits.


But. You should seem to be all salt, by your unsavory speech.


Fish. What has moved the Romans to release men from that law which
res^rained flesh eating, and has bin observed so many ages?


Butcher They think (as the truth is indeed) that by Fishmongers the city
is polluted, the earth, the air, the waters, and the fire are infected, and
the bodies of men are Discommodities of fisheati^g.
corrupted, for by eating of fish the body is filled with rotten humors, and
from hence proceed fevers, consumptions, gowtes, the falling sickness,
leaprousies, and what not?


Fish. Tell me then (master Hippocrates) why in good governed Cities it is
forbidden to kill bulls and swine within the walls? And it were more for the
health of the Citizens, if there might be no cattle killed within the walls.
Why have Butchers a certain place allotted them to dwell in, for fear that if
they should dwell every where, they would soon infect the whole City with the
plague? Is there any kind of stinch more pestilent than the corrupted blood
and dregs of beasts and other living things?


But. These things be very sweet spices, if they be compared with the rotten
savor of fish.


Fish. To you I think they be mere spices, but not to the Magistrates which
have removed you from the City. And how sweetly your slaughter houses do
smell, let them declare that pass by them, holding their noses: yea ask the
common people, who had rather have ten bawdes dwell by them then one Butcher.


But. But neither pondes nor whole rivers will suffice to wash your rotten salt
fish: and it is truly said, that you spend water in vain, for a fish always
smells like fish, though you should besmeere it with sweet ointments. And no
marvel though they smell so when they are dead, for the most of them do smell so
soon as they are taken. Flesh being powdered in brine may be kept very sweet
many years together, and common salt will preserve it from smelling: being
dried in the smoke and the wind, it gathers no ill savor. If you should do
all this unto fish, yet it would savor still like fish. By this alone you may
conjecture, that there is no rotten savor to be compared unto that fish makes.
And fish corrupts and putrifieth the very salt it self, whose nature is to
preserve things from putrefaction, whilst by his natural force it both
shuts and binds, and also excludes and keeps out whatsoever might hurt
outwardly, and dries up inwardly whatsoever might putrify the humors. In
fishes only salt is not salt. Some dainty or delicate person perhaps does hold
their nose when they go by our sla^ghter houses, but no man can abide in the
boat where your salt fish lies. If upon the way any trauelers chance to
meet your carts laden with your salt fish, what running is there til they be
past it? What holding of noses, spitting, and coughing? And, if it were
possible, that pure salt fish could be brought into the city, as we do the
flesh of beasts that we kill, yet the Law would not sleep: but no^ what shall
be done to those that ore rotten before they be sp^nt? And yet how often do
we see your damned merchandise taken by the Clarke of the Market, and cast
into the river, and your (...) fined for bringing such stuff to the Market?
And this should be done oftener than it is, but that they (being corrupted by
your bribes) do more respect their own private gain, than the good of the
common^ wealth.


Fish. Although no man did ever know of any Butcher fined for selling of
meazled porke, or r^tten sheep that have died in a ditch, and shoulders of
mutton eaten with worms, yet by washing of them, and be^mearing them over with
fresh blood, the matter has been covered.


But. You cannot show such a president amongst all of us, as we can show
amongst you, as of an eele sodden with a cru^ of bread, there died nine
citizens, a horrible thing: with such dainties do you furnish men's tables.


Fish. You tell of a case that no man could avoid, if God would have it so: but
with you it is an ordinary thing, to sell cattes for conies, and dogs for
hares. I say nothing of pasties made of man's flesh.


But. What do you know by me? you vpbraide me by men's abuses, let them answer
these matters that commit them, I do but compare trade with trade, and gain
with gain: so you may also condemn Gardiners, for that against their wills
they may sometimes sell hemlockes or woolfes bane for colewortes: so may you
also condemn Apothecaries, for that sometime unawares they give poisons
insteade of medicines. There is no trade ^o free from offense, but such
mischances may now and then happen: but you Fishmongers, when ye have done
what you can, yet is it poison that you sell, if you should sell a crampefish,
or a water snake, or a hare of the sea, caught and mingled together with other
fish in your nets, it were a chance, and no crime, neither were you any more
to be blamed for it than a Physician, who oftentimes kills that sick body
which he intends to cure. This might be borne withal, if only in winter time
you did thrust out your filthiness^s, the rigor of the season might mitigate
the plague: but now in the heat of summer you cast out your rotten garbage,
and the Autumn, which is dangerous of it self, is by your means made more
dangerous. And when the year does renew it self* and hidden humors do
again show themselves, not without great danger to the body* then do you for
two whole months together play the tyrants, corrupting the infancy of the
spring with untimely age. And when this should be helped by nature, that
bodies, ^eeing purged from bad humors, might be renewed with new moisture, you
fill them with mere rottenness, and stinking corruption: and if there be any
corruption in the body, by your means it is increased: and if there be any
good humors, they are also corrupted. And this also might be ^orne withal, if
you did corrupt men's bodies only: but now, because by the difference of
meats, the organical instruments of the mind be corrupted, it comes to
pass, that the minds of men are also infected: for the most part, you shall
see these same great fish eaters, such as the fishes themselves are, that is,
they look pale, they smell, they are blockish and mute.


Fish. Oh sir, you are another Thales, one of the seven wise men of Greece.
How then I pray you do they look and smell which live upon beetes? do they
look like beets? do they savor of them? how do they look and savor that eat
of oxen, sheep, and goats? For sooth like oxen, sheep and goats, do they not?
you Butchers sell kids flesh for dainty meat, and yet as it is subject to the
^alling sickness it self, so it breeds the same disease in those that love
flesh, were it not better to please the hungry stomach with salt fish?


But. As though this were the only lie, that the natural Philosophers have
written, but admit that they be all true which they write, yet to bodies that
are subject to diseases, oftentimes those things that be of themselves
exceeding good, prove very bad: We sell kiddes flesh unto those that are
troubled with fevers, and consumption of the lungs, but not to giddy brains.


Fish. If fish-eating be so hurtful as you would make it, why do the
magistrates allow us to sell our wares all the year, and restrain you from
selling of your commodities a good part of the year.


But. What Is that to me? peradventure that is procured Note that of the
Physician.
by bad Physicians, to the end their gains might be the more.


Fi. What do you tell me of bad physicians? why man, none are more enemies to
fish than they be.


But. O deceive not your self, they do not that for any love that they bear
you, or to the fishes, when they can abstain from them, none more religiously,
they know what they do well euough: they do therein provide for themselves,
and their own health. That which makes many to cough, to languish, to be
sick, is good provision for them, and they like it well.


Fish. I will not speak for Physicians, let them reu^nge themselves upon thee,
(as I doubt not but they will) if ever thou fallest into their nets. It
suffices me that I have to defend my cause, the good life of our forefa^hers,
the authority of the most approved Writers, the approbation of the reverend
Bishops, and the general custom of christian countries, whom if you will
condemn all of madness, you may: but I had rather be mad with them, than
so^er with Butchers.


But. You will not patronize the Physician, neither will I be a censurer of ou^
forefathers, or the common custom, I was always wont to reverence them, but
not to inueigh against them.


Fishm. In this respect you are more wary than godly, unless I be deceived in
you.


Bu. In my opinion, it is good for men to beware how The Butcher discourses
out of the Bible.
they have to do wi^h such as have auctority in their hands: but I will tell
you what I think, according to that which I read in my Bible, that is, of the
vulgar translation.


Fish. That so of a Butcher you may become a Divine.


But. I think that the first men, so soon as they were created of the moist
clay, had very healthful bodies, which appears by their long living. And
further, that paradise stood in a most commodious and healthful air. And I do
think that such bodies in such places, yielding on every side a sweet air,
by reason of the sweet herbs, trees and flowers that there did grow, might
live long without any meat, and the rather, I think so, because the earth
abunda^tly powered forth every thing of it own accord, without the labor of man:
for the dressing of such a garden was rather to be counted a pleasure than a
labor.


Fish. As yet that which you say is likely, but go on.


But: Of that great variety of things which came of s^ ^ertile a ground, there
was nothing forbidden, but only one tree.


Fish: Most true.


But: And that for no other cause, but that by their obedione^ they might
acknowledge their Lord and Maker. And this I think, that the earth when it was
young, did bring forth all things more happily, and of better juice, then if
does now, being old and almost barren, but especially in Paradise.


Fish: Not unlike: what then?


But: Therefore to eat there was of pleasure, not of necessity.


Fish: I have heard so.


But: And to abstain from tearing, or butchering, living creatures, was then a
point of humanity, not o^ sanctity.


Fish: I know not that. I read, that after the flood, to ^eede upon living
creatures, was permitted: I do not read that it was forbidden before. But why
should there be now a permission granted to eat of them, if it were permitted
before?


But: Why do we not feed upon frogs, as well as upon other living
creatures? Not because they are forbidden, but because we abhor them. And it
may be, that God in that place, does but adm^nish men what meats are fittest
for humane ^rugality, and not what he would permit to be eaten.


F^sh: I am no Sooth^sayer.


But: But we read, that so soon as man was created, it was said unto them;
bear rule over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, and all
living things that move upon the earth. What use is there of this dominion, if
it be net lawful to eat of them?


Fish: O cruel Master, do^st thou so debar thy men and thy maids, thy wife
and thy children? but by the same reason thou may go eat thy chamber pot
too, for thou bear rule over it.


But: But hear again you proud Fish monger, of other things there is an use,
and the name of rule is not in vain: The horse does bear me on his back, the
cammell carries packes, but of fishes what other use can there be, but to
feed upon them?


Fish: As if forsooth, there were not a number of medicines made of fishes.
Again, there be many things that be made only for the delight of man, who
also in the beholding of them, may be drawn thereby to an admiration of the
Creator. Peradventure you will not believe that Dolphines do carry men upon
their backs. But to conclude, there be fishes which do fore-shew a tempe^t to
be at hand, as the Hedge. hog of the sea: do you not want such a servant at
home sometime?


But: Well, grant that before the flood, it was not permitted to eat of any
thing but of the fruits of the earth, yet it was no great matter to abstain
from those things which bodily necessity required not, and in killing whereof,
was a show of cruelty. This you will grant me, that the feeding upon lining
creatures, was permitted from the beginning, for the imbecility of man's nature.
The fl^ud brought cold with it: and we see at this day, that in cold Countries
men are more ginen to eat then in hot: and the ouer-flowing of waters, did
either extinguish, or much corrupt the fruit of the earth.


Fish: Be it so: What then?


But: And yet aft^r the flood men lived above two hundred years.


Fish: So I believe.


But: Why then did almighty God permit those that were so strong without
comparison to eat of all things, and afterward re^rained those that were of a
far weaker constitution and shorter time, to certain kinds of meats, Of the
re^traint of meats under the Law.
as he gave in charge by Moses.


Fish: As if it were for me to gi^e a reason of Gods doings. But I think the
Lord did then as Masters use to do, who abridge their servants of their
liberty, which before they allowed them, when they see that they abuse their
Masters lenity and kindness. So we take from a horse that is too lusty and
unruly, his beans and ^ates, and give him but a little hay, and then ride him
with a sharper bit and sharper spurs. Mankind had shaken off all fear and
reu^rence of God, and was grown into such a kind of licentiousness, as if
there had been no God at all. Hereupon were ordained laws, as bars and
ceremonies, as railes, precepts, and threatenings, as bridles, that so men might
repent.


But: Why then do not those bars and bridles remain unto this day?


Fish: Because the rigor of that carnal servitude was taken away, after that
by the Gospel we were adopted to Of our libert^ under the Gospel.
be the sons of God, when the grace of God did more abound, those preceps
were abrogated.


But: Gods law is perpetual. And Christ says; he came Object.
not to break the Law, but to fulfill the Law. How then durst they that came
after, to abrogate a good part of the Law?


Fish: That Law was not given to the Gentiles: and Answer.
therefore it seemed good unto the Apostles, not to burden them with
circumcision, (which theIewes observe unto this day) lest they should (as the
Jews also do) place the hope of salvation in bodily observations, rather then
in faith and love toward God.


But: I omit the Gentiles. By what scripture prove you that the Jews (if they
would embrace the profession of the Gospel) should be free from the bondage of
Moses Law?


Fish: Because the Prophets did foretell, that God would make a new covenant
with them, and give them a new heart, and they bring in the Lord, abhorring the
festival days of the Jews, refusing their sacrifices, detesting their fasts,
rejecting their offerings, and desiring a people of a circumcised heart. The
Lord himself confirmed their prophecies, who giving his body and his blood
unto his The choice of meats abrogated.
Disciples, calls it a new Testament. Now if nothing were abolished of the
old, why is this called a new* The choice of meats is abrogated, both by
Christ's example, as also by his word, who says; That man is not defiled with
that which goes into the belly, and is cast out in the draught. The same was
showed to Peter in a vision; yea, and Peter himself with Paul and the rest,
eats common meats forbidden by the Law. This matter is handled by Paul in
all his Epistles, and without doubt, the Christian people to this day do
follow the same rule, as delivered them from the hands of the Apostles.
Therefore the Jews are not only freed from the superstitious observation of
the Law, as it were from milk, or food that they were familiarly used unto,
but now they are driven from it as a thing out of season. Neither is the Law
abrogated, but only some part of it is commanded to cease, which now would be
idle, or in vain, which may be illustrated by some familiar Similies.
similitudes in the course of Nature.

Green leaves and blossoms do promise fruit to spring 1
after them. Now when the tree is laden with fruit, no man desires the
blossoms: neither is any man grieved 2
for the loss of his sons childhoode, when his son is grown to man's
estate. No man cares for candles and 3
torches when the Sun is risen. The tutor has no cause 4
to complain, if his scholar (being of a ripe age) does challe^ge his
liberty, and has his tutor under his own power 5
or command. A pledge is no longer a pledge, when the things promised are
exhibited. The Bride, before she be 6
brought to the Bridegroom, does comfort herself with letters, which he sent
unto her, she kisseth the gifts that come from him, and imbraceth his picture;
but when she inioyeth the Bridegroom himself, then she neglects those
things which she loved before. But the Jews at the first, are hardly drawn
from their old customs; as a child is hardly weaned from the breast.
Therefore they are almost by force driven from those figures, or shadows, or
temporary comforts, that they might wholly i^brace him whom that ceremonial
law did promise and shadow.


But: Who would ever have expected so much divinity to come from a Fish monger?
Truly you are worthy to sell salt-fish no longer, but fresh fish. But tell me
one thing, if you were a Jew, as I am not sure whether you be or no, and were
in danger of death, by reason of extreme famine, would you die rather then
you would eat any swines flesh?


Fish. What I would do, I know: but what I should do Ofeating swines flesh.
I know not.


But. God has forbidden both, he has said, Thou shalt do no murder, and he
has said, Eat no swine flesh. In such a case, which commandment should give
place to other?


Fish. First, it is not e^ident, whether God forbade the eating of swines flesh
with this mind, that men should rather die than preserve life by eating of it.
For the Lord h^mselfe excuses David, that contrary to the law did eat the
show bread: and when the Jews were exiles in Babylon, they omi^ted many things
which the law prescribed. Therefore I should judge the law of nature, which is
perpetual and inviolable, to be preferred before that which neither was ever,
and was af er to be abrogated.


But. Why then are the brethren of the Macha^ees commended, Why the Macabees
refusd to eat swines flesh.
for choosing to die, rather a most cruel death, than once to taste of Swines
flesh?


Fish. I think it was, because that eating so commannded by that heathen king,
did comprehend under it a renouncing of the whole law of their country, even as
circumcision, which the Jews would enforce upon the Gentiles, contained the
profession of their whole religion, no otherwise then an ear^est which serves
to bind men to the performance of the whole bargain.


But. I^ then the grosser part of the law were rightly taken away, when the
light of the Gospel arose, what is ^he reason that the same, or more grievous
then they, are now commanded again; and especially ^eing as the Lord does
call his yoke an easy yoke. And Peter in the Acts of the Apostles does call
the law of the Jews a hard law, which neither they nor their fathers were
able for to bear? Circumcision is taken away, but baptism is com in stead
thereof, I had almost said, of a harder condition. Then the Infants were
deferred unto the eight day, and if the child chanced to die in the mean
time, the parents desire of circumcision was imputed unto them for
circumcision. We bring little children immediately from the mothers womb, and
dippe them over head and ears in cold water, which has stood perhaps long
a putrefying in a stone font. An^ if it chance to die the first day, or to
miscarry even in the ^irth, through no default of the friends, or parents,
they say in Popery that the poor miserable infant is damned in hell for ever.


Fish. So they say indeed, but I see no reason for it, for Of children dying
without baptizing.
not the want of the sacrament, but the contempt and neglect of the sacrament
is dangerous, but especially to the parents: but other wise, if children die
before they can be lawfully baptized, we must believe that they are saved by
gods election, and by virtue of the covenant which God has made to the
faithful, and to their seed, of which covenant baptism is but a seal and a
pledge, to confirm our faith that do believe, and the childs faith when it
comes to years of discretion: but Gods grace is not tied to his seals or
pledges. We are pestered with more fasting days, and festival days than the
Jews were. They were more free from their meats than we be, for they might
all the year long eat muttons, capons, partridges, kiddes, etc. so may not
we. There was no kind of garment forbidden them ^ut linsey woolsey: but now
we must be prescribed what appa^rell to wear, of what fashion, and color, and
(...) must wear ^ilke, and who not: and many things more I could (...), which
makes me think that the state of the Iewe^ (...) sa^re better than ours.

You err all the way Butcher, you err: Christ's yoke is not such a thing as
you imagine it to be. A christian is tied Math ^ 29. and hebr 2. 3. and hebr.
10. 28
to more things for quantity, and more hard for quality than the Jews: yea
and to a sorer punish meant, if he neglect them or contem^e them, but a greater
force of faith and love being joined unto them, does make those things sweet
and easy, which are by nature most hard and greeu^us.


But. But when the Spirit was given in the likeness of sierie tongues, it
replenished the hearts of the faithful with a most plentiful gift of ^aith
and love: why was the burden of the Law then withdrawn as it were from weak
ones, that were ready to sincke as it were under a most cruel burden? Why
does Peter (being now endued with the holy Ghost) call it an intolerable
burden?


Fish. It was abrogated in part, and that for two causes.

First, lest Iudaisme should (as it did begin) ouerwhelme the glory of the
Gospel.

Secondly, lest through the rigor of the ceremonial Law, the Gentiles should
be kept back from Christ, among whom were many weak ones, who were in danger
of a double inconvenience, if some part of the Law had not been taken away.

First, they might else have believed that no man could be saved without the
observation of the law.

Secondly, they might otherwise perhaps choose rather to remain still in
their Paganism, than to undergo the yoke of Moses law.

Therefore it was meet to allure and catch those weak ones, with a certain
bait of liberty.

Again, part of the ceremonial law was then abrog^ted, or changed to some
other thing, in regard of the who slatly denied all, or any hope of salvation
to be in the profession of the Gospel, without the observation of the (...),
circumcision, sabba^ths, choice of meats, and many such things. And further,
that speech of the holy Apostle saint Peter, where he says, the Law is an
intolerable burden, is not to be referred unto that person which he then
sustained (for to him nothing was intolerable) but to those gross and weak
Jews, which not without great yrkesomenesse did bite upon the shell, having
not as yet tasted the sweet ker^ell of the spirit.


But. Your reasoning is gross enough, or (if you will) Humane observations to
be arbitrary, and why.
substantial enough: but me thinks there are causes enough why their carnal
observations should be now taken away, or at leastwise be left arbitrary to
every man's conscience and discretion.


Fish. Why so?


But. Oflate I saw the whole world pictured upon a linen cloth, but very
large, there I saw how small that part is which does purely and sincerely
profess Christian religion, namely one corner of Europe reaching westward, and
part of it toward the north, and a third part tending (but afar off)
toward the south, and the fourth reaching to the eastward seemed to be Polonia.
All the world besides contains either Barbarians, not much differing from
brute beasts, or Schismatiques, or Heretics, or all.


Fish. But you saw not all that part which lies southward, and the dispersed
Islands, noted for worthy christains.


But. I saw them: and I learned, that from thence many preys have bin taken:
but that christianity was planted there, I heard not. Since therefore the
harvest is so great, I would think that this were the best way of all for to
plant religion there, that as the Apostles took away the burden of Moses Law,
lest the Gentiles should go back again; so now also to alure the weak ones,
it were fit to remove the bondage of certain things, without which the world
stood well enough at the first, and now might continue as well, if there were
that faith and charity which the Gospel requires. Again, I see that there be
many which do place the cheifest part of piety in the observation of places,
garments, meats, fasts, gestures, and singing, and by these things do judge
their neighbor, against the rule of the Gospel, from whence it comes, that
when all things should be referred to faith and charity, by the superstition of
these things, both are extinguished. And far is he from the faith of the
Gospel, that trusts to such things: And far is he from Christian charity,
that for meat and drinks sake, will grieve his Christian brother, whose
liberty Christ has purchased with his blood. What bitter contentions do we
see amongst Christians? What deadly reproaches about garments of this fashion,
or that fashion, and about the color of garments, and about meats which the
waters yield, and which the fields yield? If this mischief had infected but
a few, it might be contemned: but now the whole world we see is at deadly
centention about them and the like. If these things were taken away, or le^t to
every man's discretion, we should live in greater concord, and ceremonies
neglected, we^ should strive only to such things as Christ has commanded, and
other Nations would the sooner receive the Christian religion, when they should
see it accompanied with such Christian liberty. And I hope, that he which is
now chief Bishop, Clemens by name, (which signifies Mildness, who is,
animo, pietateque clementissimus, both for his nature and godliness most
mild) to that end he may draw al men to the fellowship of the Church, will
mittigate all those matters, which have hitherto kept back from embracing the
same. And I hope that he will more respect the gain of the Gospel, then the
persecuting of his own right in all points. I hear daily complaints of diverse
actions and Churches that be grieved, but I hope he will so moderate all
matters, that hereafter he shall be very impudent that shall complain.


Fish: And I would to God that all Princes in Christendom would do the like,
and then I ^oubt not but that Christian religion, which is now driven into a
strait, (...) flourish and spread most happily, if the (...) nations might
perceive that they were called to the liberty of the Gospel, and not to humane
bondage: and that they should not be exposed to repine and spoil, but admitted
to be pertakers with us of happiness and holiness, when they shall come
amongst us, and find in us true Christianity, and christian dealing indeed
they will of themselves ^ffer, more then any love can enforce or draw from them.


But: I hope that would be effected in short space, if that pestilent goddess,
of revenge (which has committed two most mighty Monarchs of the world, unto
most deadly war) were gone to the devil, from whence she sprang.


Fish: And I much marvel that this is not already effected, seeing as King
Francis is so full of humanity, as no man more: and Emperor Charles, I suppose
is sufficiently instructed by his tutors, that by how much the Lord has
enlarged his Dominions, by so much the more should he add daily unto his own
clemency and goodness.


But: Surely there is nothing wanting in either of them.


Fish: Why then has not the whole world, that which they so much desire?


But: As yet the Lawyers and Counselors cannot agree about the limits of
their dominions. And you know, that the tumults that are in Comedies, are all
ways shut up and ended wi^h marriages: and in like manner are the tragedi^s of
Princes. But in Comedies marriages are suddenly accomplished: but amongst
great Personages the matter is with great ^ficulties brought to pass: And
better it is to have the wound by leisure brought to head, then presen^ly to
have the soar break out again.


Fish: And do you think that these marriages are firm bonds of concord?


But: Truly I could wish it were so: but even from hence I see often times,
the greatest part of wars to arise: and if any war be begun, while one
kinsman bordereth upon another, the fire does flame out further, and is more
hardly quenched.


Fish: I confess it, and do acknowledge it to be most true that you say.


But: But is it meet think you, that for the brables of Lawyers, and the
delays of marriages, the whole world should suffer so much evil? For now
there is nothing safe, and bad men may do what they list, while it is neither
peace nor war.


Fish: It is not for me to talk of Princes counsels, but if any would make me
an Emperor, I know then what I would do.


But: Well, go to, imagine that you are an Emperor, and Bishop of Rome too
if you will, what would you do?


Fish: Nay, rather make me Emperor and French King.


But: Go to then, suppose you are both.


Fish: So soon as I had gotten peace in my land, I will send out Proclamation
throughout my Kingdom, that The Fishm. plays the Emperor.
no man, upon pain of death, should touch so much as his neighbors hen. And
having by that means pacified all matters with my own good, or rather (I may
say) with the common good of my people; I would then come to a point about the
borders or bounds of my dominions, or about some conditions of marriage.


But: Have you no surer bond of peace then marriage?


Fish: Yes* I think I have.


But: I pray you show it.


Fish: If I were Emperor, ^s would I (without delay) deal with the French
King. Brother, some evil spirit has stirred up this war between us, and
yet the contention that has been between us, has not been to death, but
for rule only: you for your part have showed your self a most courageous and
valiant warrior; Fortune has favored me, and has made you, of a King, a
Captain; that which happened to you, might have fallen unto me, and* your
calamity does admonish us all of humane condition: we have both of us found by
experience, that this kind of contending is discommodious on either side. Go
to, let us hereafter contend the contrary way: I give you your self, and I
give you your liberty; I accept of you, not as an enemy, but as a friend, let
al former quarrels be buried in oblivion, return unto your own subjects a
free man, and that gratis, without any ransom, take your goods with you, be a
good neighbor, and hence-forward let us strive only about this; which of us
shall ouer^ome other in faithfulness, in good will, and in kind offices, let
us not strive which of us shall most enlarge our possessions, but who shall
administer and govern that which he has most holy and uprightly. In the
former conflict I gat the praise of a fortunate man, but in this, he that
overcomes shall win far greater glory. And truly, to me this fame of
Clemency shall purchase more true commendation, then if I had conquered all
France, and the fame of your gratitude, shall win you more hono^r, then if
you had driven me out of all Italy. Do not you envy me that honor which I
affect, and I again shall so favor your desire, that you shall willingly be a
debtor to such a friend? Oh what magnificent and plausible renown would this
courtesy win unto Charles through the world? What Nation would not willingly
submit themselves to a Prince so mild and courteous?


But: You have played Caesar's part very finely. Now let me hear what you would
do if you were chief Bishop? The Fishm. here plays the Bis^op.



Fish: It were a long whiles work to prosecute every point. I will tell you
briefly, I would deal, that all the world should see that he is the cheifest
bishop in the church, that thirsts after nothing, but the glory of Christ,
and the salvation of men's souls. And such a course would free the name of
chief Bishop from all envy, and would also purchase sound and perpetual
honors.


But. But to return to our former matter again. Do the bishops laws and
const^tutions bind all that are in the Church to observe them?


Fish. They do, if they be good, and confirmed by the autho^itie of the Prince.


But. If the constitutions of the Church be of such force, why does God in
Deuteronomy. so straightly charge, that no man Object.
shall add any thing to his laws, or take any thing from the same? Answer.



Fish. He does not add unto the law of God, which more plainly unfolds that
which lay wrapped up before, or which does suggest that which may make for the
observation of the law: neither does he detract from the word of God, who
according to the ab^itie of the hearers, does despence the word and law of God,
revealing some things, and concealing other some, as the necessity of the time
shall require.


But. Suppose that the bishops, with the rest of the Church, should make a
constitution, that no man (returning from Market,) should eat meat with
unwashed hands; he that should break this constitution, should be in danger
of hell fire?


Fish. I think not so, unless the fault be aggrauated with contempt of
public authority.


But. ^ath a master of a family the like authority in his Of the master of a
family, his authority.
house, that a bishop has in his Diocese?


Fish. I think he has, according to his proporiion.


But. And do his commandments bind in like manner?


Fish. Why not.


But. I command that none of my household shall eat no Onions, or the like,
what danger is he in before God that shall break my commandment?


Fish. Let him look to that; for it is a breach of the first commandment.


But. But I see my next neighbor to be in danger, and when I meet with him,
I do secretly admonish him, to withdraw himself from the company of
drunkards, and gamesters he settes my admonition at naught, and lives
afterward more riotously then he did before. Does my adm^nition bind him?


Fish. I think so. For if we be bound by the Scripture to exhort one another
while we have time, then those which are exhorted are bound to hearken unto,
and obey the exhortations of their brethren.


But. Then whether we counsel, or exhort, the party counseled, etc. is
snared.


Fish. Not so, for it is not an admonition, but the matter of an admonition,
that does snare the conscience. For although I be admonished to wear
Pantofles, yet am I not guilty of any crime, though I neglect this admonition.


But. From whence have humane laws their force of binding?


Fish. From the words of Saint Paul, Obey those that have the ouer-sight of
you.


But. Have every constitution and ordinance of Magistrates, civil and
ecclesiastical, his power of binding the conscience?


Fish. Yea, so it be equal, (...), and lawfully ordained.


But. But who shall judge of this matter?


Fish. They that made the law, must also interpret the law.


But. He that relieueth his parents, being thereunto compelled Of constrained
obedience.
by law, whether does he fulfill the law or no?


Fish. I think not. For first, he does not satisfy the mind of the Lawgiver:
secondly, there is added hypocrisy unto an unwilling mind.


But. A man fastes, that would not fast, except the church did command him to
fast: does he satisfy the law?


Fish. Now you change both the Author and letter of the law.


But. Compare then a Jew observing his prescribed fasting days, (which he
would not observe unless the law did drive him thereunto) with a christian
observing his fasting days, which he would not observe unless the church did
compel him thereunto.


Fish. I think he may be pardoned, which for infirmity sake borrows a point
of the law: but not he that ofsette purpose (and when he needs not) shall
obstinately cross the law.


But. If Gods laws and men's laws do alike bind the conscience, what difference
then is there between them? The (...) between Gods laws and men's laws.



Fish. He that (...) the laws of men, does sin immediately against man, and
mediately against God, (as the Schoolmen say:) but he that breaks the laws
of God, sins immediately against God, and mediately against men.


But. What skils it whether the Vinegar, or the Wormwood be put in first,
seeing I must drink up both? But what difference is there between the
authority of God, and the authority of man?


Fish. A wicked question.


But. But many do believe that there is great difference, God gave a law by
Moses, which may not be broken. The same God gives laws by Magistrates, and
Sy^ods of Bishops, and other Ministers, what difference is there between them
and these? Moses laws was given by a man, and our laws are given by men?


Fish. Of the spirit of Moses it is not lawful to make any doubt.


But. What difference between the prec^pts of Paul, and the ordinances of
bishops?


Fish. Great difference, because that without controversy Paul wrote by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost.


But. Why is not Paul's spirit to b^ called in question?


Fish. Because the consent of the whole Church is against it.


But. Of the spirit of Bishops a man may make some question.


Fish. Not rashly, unless the matter does manifestly sa^our of impiety, or
filthy lucre.


But. What say you of Councels? Of Councels and their authority.



Fish. Men must beware how they call their Decrees into question, if they be
lawfully as^embled and guided by the holy Ghost.


But. Then there may be some Council held, so whom these things agree not.


Fish. There is no doubt of that, for there have been many wicked Councels:
and if that were not so, Divines would not have added that distinction.


But. It seems then that a man may doubt of Conucels.


Fish. Not after they be received, and approved by the judgment and consent of
Christian Nations.


But. What other difference can you show me between the laws of God, and the
laws of man?


Fish. I desire to hear that from you.


But. The laws of God be unchangeable, unless they Other defferences between
the laws of God and the laws of men.
be such as were made to signify or foreshew some other thing, or to hold the
people in subjection for a time, which also the Prophets foretold should end,
as touching their carnal sense, and which the Apostles also taught should be
omitted.

2 Again, amongst the laws of men, there are found oftentimes wicked,
foolish, and pestilent laws, where^pon they are abrogated, either by the
authority of the higher power, or by an universal neglect of the people. In
the laws of God there is no such matter.

3 Again, man's law does cease of his own accord, when the cause is ceased for
which they were made.

4 Again, man's law is no law, unless it be approved by the consent of the
people. The law of God ought neither to be examined, neither can it be
abrogated. And albeit Moses in giving the law gathered the voices, and required
the consent of the people, yet this was not of necessity, but to make them the
more guilty, and to leave them without excuse if they did break them. For it
is an impudent part to contemn that law which thou have approved, by giving
thy voice and consent.

5 Lastly, for so much as the laws of men, (which for the most part prescribe
bodily things) are inducements to godliness, they seem then of right to cease
when any man is grown to the strength of a spiritual man, that now he need
not any longer to be bounded in with such railes or bounds, so that to the
uttermost of his power he be careful, not wittingly to offend the weak ones,
nor maliciously to offend those that are superstitious. As if a father, for the
better preserving of his daughters virginity until she be married, does charge
her, while she is a virgin, that she drink no wine: but when she is grown to
be of years, and married to a husband, she is no longer tied to her fathers
commandment. Many laws are like unto medicines, or potions, which are
oftentimes ^ltered and changed, or taken quite away, according to the nature of
their obi^cts about which they are employed, the Physicians themselves also
allowing the same, who if they should A s^t similitude.
always use the same remedies which have been prescribed by ancient writers,
they should kill more then they should heal.


Fish. You heap up a number of things together, whereof some I like, and some I
mislike, and some I understand not.


But. What if a bishops law shall evidently savor of cou^tousues, as for
example, if he should ordain that eu^ry parishioner thr^ghout his Diocese
shall twice cuery year give a ducket of gold to be absolved from such cases
as they call episcopal cases, whereby he may extort the more of those that
are under his jurisdiction, do you think he is to be obeyed?


Fish. I think he is, but in the mean time his wicked law is to be cried out
against, but always without sedition: but whence is it that the Butcher is
such a Questionist and sifter of matters? let Carpenters (...) of their
building, and Eutchers of Butchers matters.


But. We are oftentimes troubled with such questions at feasts, and s^metimes
the heat is so great, that it grows to fighting. How we should carry our
(...) toward the laws established by pu^like authority



Fish. Let them fight that list, I think that the laws of our Emperors ought
to be reverently embraced, and religiously observed, even as proceeding from
God, neither d^e I hold it safe, or sauouring of godliness, (...) ^o
conceive, or suspitiously to speak of public authority. And if there ^e any
thing that may seem to savor of tyranny, which yet does not compel men to
impiety, I do hold it better to suffer it patiently, than to resist it
seditiously.


But. By this means I confess you provide well for them that excel in
dignity, and I am of your mind, neither do I envy them, but I would
willingly hear what course might be taken for the liberty and good of the
people.


Fish. God will not leave his people destitute.


But. But in the mean time, where is that liberty of the spirit which the
Apostles promise out of the Gospel, and which Paul so often beats upon,
crying out, that the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, and that we that
are the children of God, are not under a Schoolemaister, and that we should be
no longer in bondage to the rudiments of this world, and a number of things
more: if Christians be burdened with so many constitutions more than the Jews
were.


Fish. I will tell you Butcher, christian liberty does not Wherein christian
liberty consists.
consist in this, that it may be lawful for men to do what they list, being
set free from humane constitutions, but that from the aboun^ance and feruencie
of the spirit, they being prepared for all weathers, (as they use to speak)
do those things willingly and cheerfully which are prescribed them, that is
to say, like sons, and not like unto servants.


But. Uery well, but under Moses law there were sons, and under the Gospel
there be servants. And more than that, I fear lest the greatest part o^ men
are of the nature of servants, which are compelled by law to do their duty:
what difference is there then between the old Testament and the new?


Fish. In my opinion, great di^ference. That which the old Testament taught
under vailes, the new Testament The diff^ence between the old and new
Test^ment.
lays before our eyes. That which the old foretold by figures, and
shadows, the new shows more clearly. What that promised very obscurely, and
afar off, this has exhibited for a great part thereof. That was offered to
one nation only, this does exhibit salvation indifferently to all. That made
a few Prophets and worthy men partakers of that excellent and spiritual
grace, this has plentifully powered out all manner of gifts, as namely of
tongues, of healing diseases, of working miracles, of prophecyings, etc. and
that upon men of all ages, sexes, and nations.


But: What is then become of all these things now?


Fish. They are not dead, but asleep: not perished, but ceased, either because
there is no need of them, the doctrine of the Gospel being now published over
the world, or because many being but christians only in name, want that faith
whereby miracles were wrought.


But. If miracles be needful for those that be unbelievers, Of Miracles.
and distrustful, then now are they needful, for now the world swarmeth with
such.


Fishm. There are unbelievers that err of simplicity, such were the Jews
which mu^mured against Peter for receiving Cornelius and his household unto the
grace of the Gospel. And such were the Gentiles, who supposed that the religion
of their forefathers would save them, and as for the doctrine of the Apostles,
they accounted it strange superstition. These, at the sight of miracles were
converted. They which now distrust the Gospel, after so great light of
knowledge, so long shining in all parts of the world, do not err of
simpli^itie, but being blind^d with evil affections, they li^t not to
understand. No miracles would ever reclaim such persons to a better mind. And
now is the time of healing, hereafter will be a time of vengeance, upon all such
as will not be healed of their error. But to let these things pass, tell me
in good earnest, is it true that you said, that there is liberty given for
eating of flesh, who list, and when they will?


But. I did but jest, to stir you a little. And if such an Edict were made,
the Company of the Fishmonger^ would be seditious. Again, the world is full
of Pharisaicall persons, who can no way else get themselves an opinion of
holiness, but by such observations. And they would neither loose one jot of
that glory which they had gotten, nor endure that their inferiors should have
more liberty than themselves. Neither would this be for our commodities that
are Butchers, to have a free use of all things granted, for then our gains
would be very uncertain, whereas now our gain is more certain, and less
subject to chance and labor.


Fish. You said most truly, and the same discommoditie would redownd unto us.


But. I am glad yet, that at the last there is somewhat found, wherein the
Fishmongers and the Butchers do agree. Now that I may begin to speak in good
earnest, it were better (as I take it) for the christian people to be less
clogged with constitutions and humane ordinances, especially such as do not
tend much to godliness, but rather do hurt, yet on the other side, I will not
defend them which reject all, and care not a straw for any constit^tions of
any man. Yea so peevish are they some of them, that therefore they will do such
and such things, only because they are forbidden. But yet I cannot marvel
enough at the preposterous judgment of mortal men.


Fish. No more can I.


But. If we suspect any danger of loosing any ioate of Man must be so honored
as God be not defrauded of his honor.
weight from the constitutions and authority of the Clergy, we keep a
stir, as if heaven and earth should go together: but although there be so
much given to humane authority, that Gods authority is not so much regarded
as it ought to be, yet we sleep soundly, and think there is no danger at
hand. And thus while we labor to shun one rock, we run upon another more
deadly, and that without any fear at all. The ^ishops and clergy are to have
that honor which is due unto them? who denies it? especially if they do
according to their names: but it is a wicked thing to transfer that honor
unto men, which is due and proper unto God, and while we are precise in
reuerencing of men, to do little or none at all unto God. The Lord is to be
honored and reverenced in our neighbor, but in the mean time we must beware,
that God by this means be not defrauded of his honor.


Fish. In like manner we see many ^o put so much confidence in outward
ceremonies, that they altogether neglect those things which pertain to true
piety, arrogantly ascribing that to their own merits, which is due only to
Gods mercy and goodness, setting down their rest there, from whence they
should proceed to greater perfection, and withal, reproaching and judging
their neighbors by those things which in themselves are neither good nor bad.


But. Yea, and one and in the same action, if there be Cases of prepost^rous
judgment.
two things whereof the one is better than the other, we do ever make most
reckoning of the worst part. The body and bodily things are every where more
esteemed than the soul, and the things that belong to the soul. To kill a man
is counted a heinous crime, and so it is, but to corrupt the soul of man with
pestilent doctrine, and viperous suggestions, is a sport. If a Minister wear
a Lay man's garment, he is cast into prison, and severely punished: but if he be
found drincking and bowsing in alehouses, and whore houses, if he be a
whoremaister, if he be a gamster, if he defile other men's wives, if he never
study the Scriptures, yet (if he be formal) he is for all that a pillar of
the Church, and nothing is said unto him. I excuse not his disorderly going in
apparel forbidden: but I blame this preposterous judgment.


Fish: Yea, if he say not his stint of prayers at his set hours, he is an
Anathema, accursed: but if he be an usurer, or symonist, he goes scot free.


Fish: If one should see a Carthusian Friar otherwise clad, then according to
this order, or feeding upon flesh in Lent, or upon Fridaies, etc. how is he
accursed, abhorred, detested, yea, men fear that the earth will open and
swallow up both the beholder and him that is beheld: but if the same man see
him lie drunken in the steeetes, or with lies and standers, raging against the
good name of other men, and laying snares through crafty and subtle means, to
entrap his poor neighbor, no man does therefore abhor him.


Fish: It is as if one should see a Franciscan Friar wear a girdle without
knots, or an Augustine Friar to wear a linen girdle in steed of leather, or a
Carmelite to go without a girdle. Again, to see a Franciscane wear shoes, or
a Crosse-bearer half shood, were a horrible fact, and they worthy for the same
to be drowned in the bottom of the sea.


But: Yea, of late there were with us two women, counted both wise women: one
of them went home and traveled before her time, and the other fell into a
sweund, because they saw a certain canon go before the holy Nuns, or
Uirgines (as they will be called) in the next Uillage, and walking openly
without a white garment, and his black cloak upon it: but the same woman had
often seen such birds banqueting, and reuelling, singing, and daunsing,
kissing and ambling, the rest I will conceal, and yet they thought they never
saw enough.


Fish: Peradventure that sex is lawless: but you know Polithescus, do you
not? he was very dangerously sick; the Physicians had often persuaded him to
eat eggs and white meats, but all in vain. To the same effect did the
Bishop exhort him, but he (though he were learned, and a Batcheller of
Divinity) did choose rather to die then to follow, the counsels either of the
Bishop or of the Physicians. Then it seemed good to the Physicians and the rest
of his friends, to deceive him by a wiie: there was a supping made for him of
eggs and goats milk, which they called Almond milk, he did eat it very
willingly, and so continuing some days together, at last he began to amend,
until a certain damsel told him what it was, then he began to cast up that
which he had eaten. But the same man that was so superstitious in eggs and
milk, made no conscience of forswearing a debt that he owed me: for when I in
simplicity sent him his bill, he secretly with his nail cut it and rent it,
and swear it was cancelled. What more perverse then this judgment? he sinned
against the mind of the Church, in not obeying either the Bishop or the
Physicians, and in manifest perjury he had a firm conscience, that was so
weak in a mess of milk.


But: Now you make me remember a tale that I heard of late a Dominican Friar
tell in his sermon, of a holy Uirgine that was oppressed by a young man; the
swelling of her belly did plainly argue the fact: she was called before the
Abbasse, and the rest of the Nunnery, the pleads that she was ouermatched:
but you should have cried out (says the Abbasse) I should have done so
indeed, but it is a great offense to break silence in the sleeping chamber.


Fish: Now to requite your tale with the like. I was Holy virgins.
of late in a place where a couple of Nuns came to visit their acquaintance;
their man through forgetfulness had lest their portuse behind. Good God what
a stir was there, to supper they would not go before they had said their
euensong, neither would they read on any other book but their own: In the
mean time, all the house tarried for their supper. To be short, their man was
feign to run back again to their Cloister, la^e in the evening he brings
their own prayer book: well, prayers are said, and scarsely had we supped
before ten of the clock.


But: All this while I hear nothing worthy to be much blamed.


Fish: Because you have but half the story. While they were at supper, those
Uirgines began to be merry with wine: at length, having finished their
laughter, the whole company abounded with ieasts and scoffs, not very plea^ to
chaste years, but no man was more lascivious then those holy Uirgines, which
would not go to supper before they had said prayers upon their own book, and
after the manner of their Cloister or Covent: from ^ing they proceeded to play,
to dansing, to sing bawdy songs, the rest I dare not tell: but I am afraid there
was that night somewhat committed that did scantly become Uirgines, unless
these fore warnings, their lascivious ^yorts, noddings, and kissings, did much
deceive me.


But: This impiety is not so much to be imputed to the Uirgines, as to those
Priests which had charge over them: but go to, I will also requite your story
with such another, and such a one as I was an eyewitness unto my self.
Within these few days there were a company clapped in prison for baking of bread
upon the Lords day, which they said mere necessity drove them unto. I condemn
not this censure, but I like not the preposterous partiality of men's
judgments. A little while after upon a Sunday, called Palms sunday, by chance
I was to go to the next Uillage: there, about four of the clock after
dinner, it was my hap to meet with I know not whether I may call it, a
ridiculous, or a miserable spectacle: I suppose that no drunken feasts had ever
more filthiness: some reelde this way and that way with wine, even as a ship
left at sea without Most beastly drunk^nnes.
a guide, is tossed of the winds and the waves. There were some that went arm
in arm to hold by one another, and yet so weak they were, that they were still
down, and could hardly rise again. Many of them were crowned with oaken
leaves. A certain Seignior amongst them, playing the foster-father of Bacchus,
was carried like a pack upon men's shoulders, in that manner as men use to
carry a dead corpse, his feet upward, and his head downward, with his face
toward this porters legs, lest he should choke himself with vomiting, if
he had been upward, he did pitteously bewray the hose and shoes of those
porters that came behind: neither was any of the porters sober: for the most
part they did nothing but laugh, but in such sort, as any man might easily
perceive them to be besides their wits. The fury of Bacchus had so possessed
them all, and with this show they went through the City even in the open day
light. If these men had but tasted an egg, they should have been haled to
prison, as if they had killed their father, whereas for loosing the sacred
sermon, for neglecting the public worship of God, and for committing so
horrible intemperancy, and that upon so holy a day, and in so public a manner;
to the great offense of God, and grief of the godly, no man punished the^, no
man was angry with them.


Fish: Never marvel much at that: for in the midst of the City, in
Alehouses that be next unto the Church, upon Sabbath days and other holy
days, you shall have them tippling, singing bawdy songs, dancing, quarrelling,
and fighting, with so great noise and tumult, that neither the sermon can be
heard, nor any holy business be performed without disturbance. If the same
persons should at the same time but mend a shoe, or eat a pigge upon a
Friday, they should be severely punished for a most deadly sin. And yet the
Lords day was cheefely ordained to this end; that men might be at leisure to
hear the doctrine of the Gospel, and therefore are men then forbidden to work
bodily work, that they might be at leisure to inform their minds with the
will of God. Is not this strange perverseness of men's judgments? Of fasting.



But. Uery strange. Now in the fast it self, which is prescribed in Popery,
there be two things, one is the abstaining from meat; the other is the choice
of meats. Every one knows the first to be according to Gods commandment:
but the other is, not only humane, but also contrary to the doctrine of the
Apostle, howsoever we would excuse the matter, yet here also by a pr^posterous
judgment it is lawful for the people to suppe, and it is no fault in them;
but to taste of meat forbidden by man, and Of receiving the Sacrament.
permitted by God, and his servants the Apostles, is a deadly sin counted. What
a heinous offense would men account it, to receive the holy sacrament of
Christ's body and blood with unwashed hands* and indeed it is a ^ault, but h^
(...) little do they fear to receive the same with anwashen heart, and a mind
defiled with perverse and wicked lusts?


Fish. Yea, how many Priests are there, which would rather die then minister
the Sacrament in a Cup, not yet consecrated by the Bishop, or in such
garments as they usually wear every day: but amongst these that are so
affected, how many do we see, which are no whit afraid to come to the holy
Table, being as yet full and foul with the former nights surfeiting,
gurmandizing and drunkenness? It is forbidden by humane constitution, that no
person that is base borne, lame, or poreblind shall be admitted to the holy
Ministry: and here how strict are w^? And yet in the mean time we admit
every where, such as be unlearned, gamsters, drunkards, soldiers, cutters,
and ruffians. They will say perhaps, they know not the diseases of the mind:
but I speak not of secret defects, I speak of such as are more open in the
view of al men, then the defects of the body be.

Again, there be great ones that make no bones (as the saying is) of
oppressing the liberties, and privileges of ecclesiastical Deuourers of
Church lands which were first given to the use of the poor.
persons, neither yet of joining unto their own houses, such houses as are part
of the Churches inheritance, and were given by the devotion and liberality of
godly and well disposed persons, for the relieuing of such as are aged, and
sick, and poor and needy in the Parish. And yet they seem unto themselves
very great Christians, if they can rage, and play the mad men against such as
omit a ceremony, leave out a Collect, or observe not every holy day, or holy
day even, and the like.


Bu. Well, let them go, and leave them to the Lord, who will meet with such
hypocrites well enough. Let us now talk of fish and flesh another while.


Fish. With a good will. Let us return then to our former Of fasting and
fish-eating.
speech of fasting, and fish-eating. I have heard that the laws of the church
do expressly except children, old folks, sick persons and weak, great
laborers, women with child, giving suck, and very feeble.


But. And the same have I also often heard.


Fish. I have also heard of an excellent Divine, Gerson I think his name is,
that has added this, that if there be any cause of the like moment, with
those which the canons of the Church do except by name, that then also the
force of the law does cease. For there be peculiar habites of states of men's
bodies, which do make the restraint of meat more dangerous than an evident
disease. And there be secret diseases which yet do not appear, which in truth
may be so much the more dangerous. And they which compel children, or very old
folks, or sick and feeble persons, either to taste, or to eat fish, do
commit a double sin, first against brotherly charity: Secondly, against the
mind and meaning of the Church, which would not have them wrapped in a law,
which cannot keep it without their own destruction, or danger.

Whatsoever Christ did institute, he instituted it to the health both of soul
and body, neither can any potentate challenge unto himself so great power, as
that by his constitutions he may drive any persons to endaunger their lives. As
if one by fasting one night, should not be able to sleep, and for want of
sleep, should be in danger of a frenzy: he that shall drive a man to this
inconvenience, is (both against the mind of the Church, and against the will
of God) a murderer of his neighbor. Princes so often as they see cause, do
make laws to punish men by death: what Princes may punish by death.
they may do I do not define; this I think I may say, that they should deal
more safely, if they did not punish any by death, but for such causes as are
expressed in the holy scriptures. In heinous crimes, the Lord does call men
away from the uttermost bond of circumstance that may lead thereunto, as in
the case of perjury, he forbids to swear at all; to keep men from murder,
he forbids men to be angry. We for a humane constitution do drive men to the
uttermost bound or very point of manflaughter. But so often as there appears
any probable cause, it is the part of charity to exhort our neighbors, unto
those things which the weakness of his body does require. And if there
appear n^ cause, yet it is the duty of christian charity, favorably to
interpret the matter, that it might be done with a good mind, unless he that
will eat, shall show therein a manifest contempt of the laws. And such as shall
contemptuously, and seditiously, eat any thing that is forbidden by law, the
civil Magistrate does justly punish. But what every man may eat in his own
house, for the health of his body, it is for Physicians, and not for
Magistrates to determine.

But if hereupon also any shall be so wicked as to raise any tumult, let him be
guilty of sedition, and not he that provides for his bodily health, not
breaking either Gods law or man's law. And such is the lenity and moderation of
the Church of Christ, that upon good cause, they will of their own accord
stir up men to use such things as the health of their body shall require,
and which their licenses or charters will also arm men against the accusations
and backbitings of ill disposed persons.

It may be called zeal, if any man shall deal severely with his own body,
for every man is best known unto himself; but where is the piety, or where
is the charity of these men, who contrary to the law of nature, contrary to
the law of God, and contrary to the meaning of the Church, would enforce their
weak brother unto death, or to some kind of disease more cruel than death it
self?


But. Your speech makes me to remember a story of ^ne M^unsier Eros.
Mounsier Eros, a learned man, and now very old, he would never eat any flesh
upon Fridayes, nor in Lent, and yet by reason of diverse infirmities that vexed
him, he had a license or dispensation from the Bishop to eat what he would.
This Mounsier Eros for his health ^ake, went on a time to Feruentia, and I in
kindness bare him company. Being come to Feruentia, he turned into the house
of an old friend of his, who had often by letters invited him thither. This
friend of his was a man of great wealth, and authority. He came to a fish
dinner, but Eros began to be very daungerously ^icke, there was an army of
diseases upon him, the ague, the headache, vomiting, the stone, etc. This host,
although he saw his friend in great danger, yet durst not give him one bit of
flesh. And why think you? he saw causes enough why he might lawfully do it,
and he had seen the Bishops dispensation, but he feared the tongues of men.
And now the disease was grown so far upon him, that it was in vain to give
him any.


Fish. What did Mounsier Eros? I know the nature of the man, he had rather die,
then to do any thing that might procure his friend any envy.


But. He shut himself into his Chamber, and for three days together he lived
after his old manner: his dinner was an Egg only; his drink was water boiled
with Sugar. So soon as the Ague had left him, he took his horse, and carried
his diet with him.


Fish. What was that?


But. Almond milk in a Flagon Bottle, and Raisins in the Sun in a Bag.
When he came at home, he had a ^itte of the stone, and he kept his bed for
it a whole month together. Now because he did eat every day an Egg at his
friends house, there followed a horrible rumor after his departure of eating
of flesh, and in that furious manner it was aggrauated, as if he had poisoned
te^ne men, and this rumor was spread as far as Paris: What do you think to
be the fittest remedy against such offenses?


Fish. The best remedy that I know, is this, let them power all their chamber
pots upon their heads, and if they chance to meet you, stop your nose
until you are past them, it may be that so they may be ashamed of their folly.


But. Certainly Preachers shall do well, sharply to reprove this Pharisaicall
impiety. But what think you of that host?


Fish. He seemed to be a wise man, who knew full well what Tragedies upon
frivolous occasions would be (...) by the foolish people. But it is now time to
return from this long digression, to our former purpose.


But. There is no loss of time in this digression, it is to the purpose,
unless perhaps you have any thing else to add to that which has been said
already concerning humane constitutions.


Fish. Truly, to me it seems that he is not a right obseruer The end why
men's laws are made must be considered.
of men's laws, which does negl^ct the meaning and drift of the lawe-makers:
for he that upon holy days abstaineth from handy labor, and yet in the mean
time is not at leisure to hear Sermons, and to join with the congregation in
the exerc^es of Gods worshipp^, ^oth neglect the chiefest thing for which the
festival day was instituted: for therefore is one good work then forbidden,
that a better might be done in his steed: but they which leave their ordinary
business, only to haunt tauerns, and harlots houses, to fight and brawle, to
be great drinkers, and riotous, etc. they are double violaters of the holy
festival day.


But. And I know diverse which would choose, rather to die, than to minister
the Sacrament, if by chance they had tasted any mea^e that morning, or if but
one drop of water (while they wash their mouth) should chance to slip
down their throat. And yet the same persons have confessed, that at the same
instant they have carried some privy grudge against certain persons, whom they
would have killed, if fit opportunity would have served, neither did they make
any scruple or doubt to come to the holy table of the Lord with this bloody
mind.


Fishm. And as prepostereus are men in their judgments Vows.
concerning vows. There is no vow more religious than that of baptism. Now
he that has vowed a monastical life etc. and afterward upon just cause
changes his garment, or his place, is sought for as if he had poisoned his
father, he is apprehended; haled, and pulled, imprisond, and bound, and many
times put to death for the honor of his order. But they whose life is directly
contrary unto the vow which they made in baptism, while they giu^ Vow of
Baptism.
themselves wholly to serve mammon, their belly, and the pomp of this world,
they are had in great account, neither are these men charged with the crime of
violating their vow, neither are they accounted apostataes, or back sliders,
but good christians.


But. He is punished, that (being moved by some urgent False oaths.
cause) does swear a false oath, but they that mingle every third word with a
false oath, are not punished.


Fish. These do not swear of set purpose, or in good earnest.


But. By the like reason you may excuse him that killes a man, so he did it
not in earnest, or of set purpose. To swear a false oath is not lawful,
either in jest or earnest. And it is a more heinous crime to kill a man in
jest, than in anger. What infamy does pursue a maid that has slipped aside,
but a slanderous and backbiting tongue, with a heart fraught with hatred and
malice or a greater evil, and yet no body woondreth at them: there is no law
for adultery and The^t.
them. Where is not the lightest theft punished more seu^rely than adultery? No
man will willingly converse with one that is stained with the infamy of theft:
but to be familiar with one that is loa^en and covered over with adulteries is
a great credit, and a point of good neighborhood accounted. No man will
bestow his daughter upon A (...), a common sold^r.
a common hangman, which for his stipend does execute the laws, but we do
like well to have affinity with a common soldier, which has often against
the will both of the parents and magistrates served in a mercenarie war,
which has bin defiled with so many whoredoms, rapes, sacrileges, murders, and
other most heinous crimes, which either in the wars themselves, or in going to
them, or returning from them, are wont to be committed, such a one do we make
choice of to be our son in law: such a one that is worse than any hangman
does a virgin doat upon, and that we account great nobility that i^ g^ten by
mischief and villainy. He that takes away a man's money, is hanged, but that
they by purloyning the common Thieues.
stock of Churches and towneships, by monopolies, by vsuries* yea by a
thousand wiles, and deceitful tricks d^e spoil many, are reckoned amongst
the chief men of the parish.


Fish. So, they that give poison to some one person, are Poyso^ers.
punished by the laws as a poysoner, but they that infect and kill the people
with infected wines and corrupted oiles, are lawless.


But. I have known some Monks so superstitions, Superstitious Monk^s.
that they would think themselves in the hands of the (...), if by chance
their holy vesture were left off, but although they give themselves to lying,
and slaundering, to drunkenness and envy, they fear no such matter.


Fish. And such ideotes a man may find amongst us Fo^lish armor agenst the
devil.
many, who do not think their house safe from the power of the devil, and
malice of witches, and wicked spirits, unless they have consecrated holy
water, or a holy candle, or a horse shoe nailed upon their thresholde, but
they fear not their houses wherein daily God is provoked by so many means,
and the diu^ll is daily worshipped.


But. And how many are there that trust more to the help of the virgin
Marie, or of Saint Christopher, than of Christ himself. The m^ther of Christ
they worship with candles, images, and songs, but Christ himself they do most
obstinately and stowtly offend with their wicked lives. And for such trifles as
these and others that we have spoken of, how great breach is there of brotherly
charity? how bitter hatred and hart-burning? what virulent backbiting and
traducing of men's names? Against which, both Christ in the Gospel, and Paul in
his Epistles do vehemently inueigh: And which all Divines and Preachers should
strongly beat down.


Fish. Indeed it (...) ^ so: but there be ma^y amongst them, who h^ ^ather
have the people, and princes, and bishops at that pass, than otherwise. And
again, there be which do no more savor or understand these things than the
common people does, or if they do understand them, they dissemble their
knowledge, taking more care for the belly than for the Lord Jesus. Hereupon
it comes to pass that the people being on every side corrupted with
preposterous judgments, are confident where there is cause to fear, and
afraid where there is no danger. There they stand at a stay, where they ought
to go forward, and there they march forward, from whence they ought to retire.
And from these so ill taught, if a man should attem^t to pluck any thing
away of their old customs, they would cry out that he is a raiser of
se^ition: as if it were sedition for a man, by good medicines, to reclaim or
purge a body corrupted, which unskillful Physicians have had long in handling,
and brought to a natural habit of corruption. But it is time to break ^ff
this complaint which has no end.


But. As I was lately reasoning of these matters at suppe^, by ill hap there
was a certain fellow in presence that was lousy, ragged, pale, lanke, dry,
and with a withered erabtree face very ghastly, he had scarce three hairs upon
his scull, so often as he spoke he shut his ^ies, they said he was a divine:
he called me a disciple of Autichrist, and many other things he babbled out.


Fish. What said you? were you mute?


But. I wished h^e might have one mite of a sober mind in so filthy a brain,
i^ he had any brain at all.


FINIS.
Naufragium A pitiful, yet pleasant Dialogue of a Shipwreck, showing what
comfort Popery affoordeth in time of danger.
The speakers names.
Antonius, Adolphus.
Antonius. YOu tell me horrible things Adolphus, of your sea voyage, is this to
be a Mariner? God keep^ me from going to sea.


Adol. Yea, that I have told you bitherto, is (...) sport to these things you
shall now hear.


(...). I have h^ard of evils more then enough, I trembled al^ the ti^e you were
reciting them, as if my self had been in danger with you.


Adol. But to me my labors past were ple^sing enough. But that night there
happened a certain thing, which for ^ great part of the night, took away all
hope of life from the Master of the ship.


Anto. What I pray you?


Adol. The night was somewhat light, and in the top of the maste stood one of
the ma^iners in the basket (for so I think they call it) looking about to see
if he could spy any land: fast by this man began to stand a certain round
thing like a bal of fire, which (when it appears alone) is to the shipme^ a
most fearful sign of hard success, but when two of them do appear
together, that is a sign of a prosperous voyage. These apparitions were called
in old time Castor and Pollux.


Anto. What had they to do with seamen, being one of them a Horseman, the
other a Champion, or stowt warrior?


Adol. So the P^ets did feign. The Pilot of the ship sitting at the stern,
said to him that was aloft; fellow (for so do the ship-men call one another)
do thou not see what a companion stands by thy side? I see it (said the
other) and I pray God it ^e for good: By and by the f^ery globe sliding down
by the ropes, tumbled it self ^ntil it came to the Master of the ship.


Anto. Did he not die with fear?


Adol. No, Mariners are accustomed to monsters. It having ^ayed th^re a while,
it roled it self along the brimmes of the ship, and (...) from thence down
into the middle rooms, it vanished away. About midnight the tempest began
to increase more and more: did you ever see the Alps?


Anto. Yes, ^ have seen them.


A^ol. Those mountains are but hillockes in comparison of the waves of the
sea: so often as we were heaued up with them, we might have touched the Moon
with our fingers; so often as we went down again, it s^emed unto us as
though the earth had opened, and we had been going directly to hell.


Anto. O madm^n that commit themselves to the sea!


Adol. The mariners striving with the tempest, but all in vain, at length the
Master of the ship came unto us very pale.


Anto. That palenesse does presage some great evil.


Adol. My friends (quoth he) I can be no longer Master of my ship, the winds
have gotten the upper hand, it remains now, that we commit our selves unto
God, and every man to prepare himself for extremity.


A^to. O right Scy^hian sermon!


Adol. But first (quoth he) the ship must be disburdened, necessity has no
law, a sore weapon it is, there is no remeady, better it is to save our lives,
with the loss of our goods, than to lose both goods and life together. The
truth pr^uailed, many vessels were thrown over into the sea, full of rich
merchandise.


Anto. This was indeed to suffer wrack.


Adol. There was a certain Italian in the ship, who had Of an Italian.
gone Ambassador to the King of Scots, he had a chest full of plate, gold
rings, cloth, and silk apparel.


Anto. He would not bestow them upon the sea.


Adol. No, but desired either to perish with his beloved riches, or to be saved
with them. Therefore he was somewhat wilful, and stood against the rest.


Anto. What said the ship-maister?


Adol. We could be well content (quoth he) that thou, and that thou have,
should perish together: but it is not fit that all we should be in danger for
the saving of thy chest: if you will not be ruled, we will throw both you and
your chest hed-long together into the sea.


Anto. A right mariners oration.


Adol. So the Italian lost his goods, wishing all evil both A sorry revenge.
to the heavens and the hells, for that he had committed his life to so
barbarous an element.


Anto. I know that is the manner of Italians.


Adol. A little while after, when we saw that the winds rage^ more and more,
and we had done what we could, they cut the ropes, and cast the sails
ouer-boord.


Anto. O miserable calamity!


Adol. Then the Master came to us again, friends (quoth he) the time does
exhort every man to commend himself to God, and to prepare himself for to
die. He was asked of certain, who were not altogether ignorant of seafaring,
for how many hours he thought the ship might defend it self, he said that he
could promise nothing, but above three hours he said it was not possible.


Anto. This speech was yet harder then the rest.


Ad. When he had so said, he commanded all the ropes to be cut, and the
maine-maste to be sawen down close by the box wherein it stood, and together
with the saile-yardes to be cast over board into the sea.


Anto. Why did he so?


Adol. Because (the sail being gone or torn) it served to no vs^, but to
burden the ship: all their hope was in the st^rne or rudd^r.


An. What did the passengers and shipmen in the mean time?


Adol. ^here you should have seen a miserable face of things, the mariners
singing Salve regina, they cried to the Sa^ue regina.
Uirgine Mary for help, they called her, the star of the Sea, the Queen of
Heaven, the Lady of the world, the haven of Health, Poor shifts.
fl^ttering her with many other titles which the holy Scriptures never gave her.


Anto. What had she to do with the sea, that I think never went to sea in all
her life?


Adol. Venus had sometimes the charge of mariners, because she was thought to
be borne of the sea: and because she g^ue over her cure, the Uirgin mother was
substituted in her steed, which was a mother, but no virgin.


Anto. Now you jest. Ridiculous superstition.



Adol. Many falling flat upon the b^ordes, did worship the sea, crying; O most
gentle Sea, O most noble Sea, O most rich Sea, O most fair S^a, be qui^t, save
us: and thus they cried to the deaf^ s^a.


Anto. O ridiculous superstition! what did others?


Ad. Some did not^ing but vomit, and some made vows. There was a certain
Englishman, who promised golden mountains to his Lady of Wa^singham, if ever
he came safe to land. Others promised many things to a wooden cross that
stood at such a place: and others to another that stood in anoplace. The like
vows were made to the Uirgin Mary, which reigns in many places, and they
think their vow of no effect, except they name the place.


Ant. A jest, as though the Saints did not dwell in heaven.


Adol. There were that vowed to become Carthus^ans. Ther^ was one who vowed to
go to St. James of Compostella, barefooted, and bare headed, with nothing upon
his body but a ^hirt of male, and beg for vittailes.


Anto. Did none remember S. Christopher?


Adol: Yes, I heard one (but I could not forbear laughing) promise Saint
Christopher, which stands in the great Church at Paris, a wax Candle as big
as himself. Now this Christopher is rather a mountain than an Image, and this
he cried out as loud as ever he could, for fear he should not be heard, and
this he often repeated. One of his acquaintance that by chance stood next
unto him, pulled him by the s^eeue, and warned him to take heed what he said:
for (said he) if you should make sale of all that you have, you are not able to
pay your vow. Then the other with a loud voice (lest Christopher should hear
him) said, hold thy peace fool, do thou think Saint Christopher like to be
cousened of a (...).
that I speak as I mean, or mean as I say? If once I get to land I will not
give him a tallow Candle.


Anto. O gross wit, I think he was a Hollander.


Adol. No, but he was a Zeland^r.


Anto. I marvel that none remembered Paul the Apostle, who himself was
sometime at sea, and suffered shipwreck, and out (...) a broken ship swanune
to land he having been in danger himsel^e, would perhaps have pitied
others that were in danger.


Adol. There was no mention of Paul.


Anto. But they prayed in the mean time, did they not?


Adol. Yes, that they did, striving who should do best. One sung, Salve Regina;
another sung, Credo in Deum; There were some that had certain special short
prayers, like charms against dangers.


An. How religious men are in affliction: in time of prosperity, m^n think
neither upon God, nor any godly man, what did you all this while? Did y^u vow
to no Saint?


Adol. No surely, because I make no covenant with Saints, ^or what is it else
but a formal contract, or bargain? I will give you this, if you will do that
for me: I will give you a Candle, if I may swim to land.


Anto. But you craved the aid of some Saint: Did you not?


Adol. Not I, for heaven is large. And if I should commend ^ (...) next he
door.
my safety to any of the Saints, suppose it were to saint Peter, who
peradventure would be the first that should hear, because he stands at the
door, before he could come to God, yea before he could declare my cause, I
should be drowned.


Anto. What did you then?


Adol. I went directly to God himself, and said, Our father which art in
heaven, etc. None of the Saints do hear sooner than he, nor more willingly
give us that which we ask.


Anto. But did not your conscience fight against you? were you not afraid to
call him Father, whom you had so many ways offended?


Adol. Truly to deal plainly, my conscience did somewhat terrify me, but
presently I gathered courage unto me, thinking thus with my self, there is no
father so angry with his son, but (if he see him in the river and in danger
of drowning) will take him by the hair of the head, or else where, as he may,
and pull him to land. Amongst all the rest, there was Of a woman with her child
none more quiet, and free from fear, then a certain woman, who had an Infant
sucking upon her breast: she neit^er cried out, nor wept, nor made any vow,
she only embracing her tender Infant, prayed softly to her self. In the
mean time, the ship rushed upon a shallow, and the Master fearing lest it
would be split all in pieces, he bound it together with Cables, from the
foredocke to the stern.


Anto. O miserable shifts.


Adol. In the mean time there stands up a certain Mass Of an old* Pr^est.
Priest, an old man, about three score, he casting off all his clothes to his
very shirt, together with his boots and shoes, wished all the rest in like
mann^r to prepare themselves to swim. And so standing in the midst of the
ship, he preached unto us out of Gerson* of the utility of auricular
Confession, exhorting us, that every one of us should prepare himself both to
live and die. And there was a certain Dominican Friar: to these two they did
confess themselves that ^isted.


Anto. What did you?


Adol. I, (seeing all so full of tumult) secretly confessed my self unto God,
condemning before him my unrighteousness, and craving his mercy in Christ.


Anto. Whither should you have gone, if you had so died?


Adol. That I committed unto God my judge, for I would not be my own judge:
yet in the mean wh^le I was of good comfort. While these things were thus in
doing, the Master of the ship came again unto us weeping, and said, let every
man shift now for him self, for we are not like to have any use of the ship a
quarter o^ an hour, for it being torn in certain places, the water came in
apace. Within a little while after, the Master told us that he had spied a
holy Tower, or a Church, wishing us to call for help unto that Saint that was
patron of that Church. All fell down and prayed unto an unknown Saint.


Anto. If you had called him by his name, he would have heard you.


Adol. No man knew his name. In the mean time the Pilot as much as lay in him,
did guide the ship that way, which was now torn and rent, and leaking on every
side, and had fallen all to pieces, if it had not been bound together with
Cables.


Anto. Things were now at a hard pass.


Adol. We were driven so near, that the inhabitants o^ that place might see
us, and in what danger we were. They came running out by heaps unto the
shore, and holding up their cloakes, and their hats upon poles did inuit us
to come unto them. And casting up their arms toward heaven, did thereby
signify how much they did bewail our hard fortune.


Anto. I listen for an end, to hear what success you had.


Adol. By this time the ship was full of water, and we were no safer in the
ship then in the sea. The Mariners emptied the ship boat of water, and put it
out to the sea: into that boat all endeavored to go, all the Mariners crying
out with great tumulte, that the boat was not able to hold such a multitude:
let every man (said they) get what he can and swim out. There was no time t^
^ske long counsel, one ^ooke an oar, another a qu^nt, another the (...) of
the (...), one gat a b^ket, another a table, and every man with such as he
could g^t, committed themselves to the waves.


An. (...) became in the mean time of that same woman that was so quiet?


Adol. She was the first that came to the sheare: ^or we had put her upon a
broad table, and had made her so ^ast unto it, that she could not easily fall
off, and we put alittle board into her hand, which ^he might use in stead of
an oar, and so b^dding her farewell, we thrust her off with a quant, that
she might be free from the ship, where was all the danger.


Ant. O courageous woman*


Adol. When nothing was now left, one plucked down a wooden image that was
there of the virgin Marie, that was rotten, and eaten hollow with rattes, and
having gotten that i^ his arms, he began to swim.


Ant. The boat came safe to shore, did it not?


Adol. That was the first that was drowned, with thirty persons in it: for
before it could get free from the great ship, with the wauing and wallowing of
the ship, it was overthrown.


A^t. O hard hap, what then?


Adol. While I gave counsel to others, I had like to have perished my self,
for there was nothing left that was good for swimming.


Ant. ^ here cork would have done good service, if one had had it.


Adol. In such a strait. I had rather have a piece of vile cork, than a
golden candlestick: while I was looking about for a thing to swim upon, at
the last I remembered the lower end of the maste. And because I could not p^ll
it up alone, One more than was looked for.
I took another unto me, we*lying both upon that, committe^ our selves to the
sea, so as I held by the right horn, and he by the left. While we were thus
tossed, and putting off from ^he ship, that same mass Prie^t that preached
to ^he Mariners threw himself in the midst upon our shoulders. And he was
not very light, for he had a big body. We cried out, who is that third? he
will cast us all away: but he answered us somewhat ^heerefully, Be of good
cheer, here i^ rowme enough for us, God will be with us.


A^to. What became of the Dominican Friar?


Adol. He having called upon the Saints, cast away all his ^pparrell, and
betook himself naked to swimming.


Ant. What Saints did he pray unto?


Adol. Saint Dominicke, saint Thomas, saint Vincent, and S. Peter, but his
chiefest trust was in saint Katharine of Seen.


Ant. Did he not call upon Christ?


Adol. Not that I could learn.


Ant. He might have swomme out the better, if he had not cast away his holy
koole: but when that was gone, how could saint Katharine know him? but go
forward to tell of your self.


Adol. While we were tossed and tumbled hither and thither by the ship side,
the Rudder of the ship chanced to hit him that held by the left corner of the
Maste, and brake his thigh, so he let go his hold and fell off. The priest
praying God to send him eternal rest, took his place, exhorting me with
great courage to hold fast my corner and to stir my feet lustily. In the
mean time we drunk in a great deal of salt water: but the priest taught me
a remedy against it.


Ant. What was that I pray you?


Adol. So often as any wave came toward us, he would turn his noddle against
it with his mouth close.


Ant. A strong old man.


Adol. When we had by swimming in this manner gone some way, the Priest being
a wonderful tall man, said unto me, Be of a good cheer man, I feel the
botome. But I durst not hope for so great happiness, we are further (quoth I)
from the land than to hope for any bottom. Nay (quoth he) I feel the ground
with my feet. P^raduenture it is (said I) some chest that the sea has rolled
hi^her. Nay (said he) I do plainly feel the ground with my fingers. When we
had swumme alittle longer, and he again had felt the bottom. Do you (quoth
he) what you think best to be done, I giu^ you all the maste, and I will
betake my self wholly to the ground: and withal, when he saw the billow go
from him, he ran after it as fast as ever he could. And when the billowe came
again, he clasping both his hands together about both his knees, he strove
with all his might against the waves, hiding himself under them as Cormorants
and Duckes use to do when they diue under the water. And when the billowe was
past him again, he set forward and ran. I (seeing him to speed so well)
followed him. There stood on the shore some strong men, and used to the sea,
which with long poales did strengthen themselves against the waves, so as the
hindermost of them could reach his pole unto him that could swim, and so by
that means diverse were drawn to shore, and saved.


Anto. How many?


Adol. Seven, but of them two died so soon as they came to the fire: there
were in the ship 58. but when we came to land there, we had experience of
the country men's kindness, which indeed was incredible, who with wonderful
speed and cheerefuluesse, provided for us lodging, fire, meat, apparel, and
all necessaries for our journey.


Ant. What country was that?


Adol. It was Holland.


Ant. There is no nation in the world more kind and full of humanity then
they be, and yet they are compassed about with cruel and barbarous nations.
But I believe you will not go to sea again in haste.


Adol. I do not mean it, unless God shall deprive me of my wits.


Ant. And I had rather hear such tales, than make trial of them: but thanks
be to God that has preserved you, and I hope you will be the better for this
to him-ward while you live.


Adol. God grant I may.


FINIS.
A very excellent Dialogue between a good Woman and a Shrew, showing how a
Woman may win her Husbands love, though he be never so froward.
The Speakers names.
Eulalia Xantippe.
Eulalia. GOd save you, my most desired Xantippe.


Xan. And you also, my most dear Eulalia, we think you look fairer than you
were wont to do.


Eul. What, do you receive me with a scoff at the first dash?


Xan. No truly, but so you seem indeed to me.


Eul. It may be that my new apparel does make me look better than I was wont.


Xan. You conjecture very right, for I saw none more fine a great while, I
think your gown be of English cloth, is it not?


Eul. It is English wool, but of Venice die.


Xan. It is softer than silk, but how pleasant a color is this purple? who I
pray bestowed such an excellent gift upon you?


Eul. Where should honest women have such things but of their husbands?


Xantip. O you are happy that have met with such a husband, I would I had
been married to a mushrome when I was married to my Nicholas.


Eul. Why so I pray you? are you so soon fallen out?


Xan. I shall never agree with such a one as he is: you see how ragged I am, so
does he suffer his wife to go. Let me die if I be not ashamed to go abroad
when I see how well other women be clad, whose husbands are far y^rer tha^
mine.


Eul. The grace and decking of matrons is not in apparel* or in other kind of
trimming up of the body, (as Saint Peter the Apostle does teach us,) but in
chaste and modest behavior, and in the ornaments of the mind: harlots are set
forth to please many men's eyes, we be fine enough, if we may please our
husbands only.


Xan. But in the mean time, my good man that is so sparing toward his wife,
does spend lustily of that portion which he had with me when I was married, and
that was no mea^e portion.


Eul. Wherein?


Xan. In what he thinks good, in wine, in harlots, an^ in play.


Eul. Good words Xantippe.


Xan. But so it is, and more than that, when he comes home drunk at
midnight, he lies snorting all night, and many times he berayeth his bed with
vomiting, I Will keep the rest.


Eul. Fie, fie, you discredit your self when you discredit your husband.


Xan. I would I were hanged if I had not rather lie with a ^ow that has
pigges, than with such a husband.


Eul. Do not you chide at him when he comes home?


Xan. Even as he is worthy, he finds that I am not dumb.


Eul. And what does he then?


Xan. At the first he took on grievously, thinking to shift me off with hot
words.


Eul. Did he never grow from words to blows?


Xan. Ouely at one time, the contention was so hot between us, that it was
not far from blows: he shaked his ^udgel at me, thundering at me with cruel
clamors, and thretning speeches.


Eul. And were not you afraid of him?


Xan. Afraid, faith fir no: but whatsoere I was, I set a good face on the
matter, I got a three footed stool into my hands: if he had but touched me
with his finger, he should well hau^ known that I had not bin lame in my hands.


Eul. A new kind of buckler indeed, you wanted a buckled girdle for a lance.


Xa. He should have found a virago of me, I warrant him.


Eul. Ah my Xantippe, this does not becom^ you.


Xant. What becomes me not? if he do not count of me as his wife, neither will
I account of him as my husband.


Eul. But saint Paul does teach, that wives ought to submit themselves to their
husbands with all reverence. And saint Peter does propound unto us the example
of Sarah, who called her husband Abraham, her lord.


Xa. I know that well enough: but the same Paul does teach also, that men ought
to love their wives, as Christ loved the Church his Spouse: let him do his
duty, and I Will do mine.


Eul. But for all that, when the matter is grown to that pass, that one must
yield, it is fittest that the wife should yield unto her husband.


Xant. Shall I call him husband that takes me for his servant? *] All that
follow^th after this mark * til you come unto the like mark again is not in
Erasmus.



Eul. Ah my good Xantippe, though you be his wife, yet you must not think
scorn to serve him, for you gave him your promise before God and his church,
that you would obey him, and thereunto pledged your troth.


Xant. What, must he have me at commandment? his ser^ant can be no more.


Eul. Surely we must be at our husband^s commandments, if we be, we must
obey our husbands, for even our band of obedience does argue a certain
soueraignetie and power in them over us, whereby they may command us any
honest and lawful thing. And (...) that, Almighty God himself has set it
down for a law, that our desires shall be subject to the desires of our
hus^ds.


Xa. What Is that? I know not ^he ma^ning of these words.


Eula. Yes Xantippe, you know it well enough, but perhaps you list not know it,
because you like it not, the meaning is plain, that we must not desire any
thing that stands not with our husbands liking: and whatsoever they affect and
like, that must we like and obey.


Xant. I promise you I d^ not like, that there should be no difference
between me and my servant with my husband, by that reckoning you would have
my husband to be my master, as he is over his servant, I like not that.


Eula. No, I knew that well enough: for by nature we^ cannot abide subjection
of all things, we desire to bear^rule, until God shall (by his grace)
regenerate our hearts, and give us humble spirits.


Xant. I hope I am regenerate, and have the grace of God, though I suffer not
my husband to be my master.


Eula. Therein you deceive your self: for if we be truly regenerate, and borne
anew by the spirit of grace, we will never think much to submit our selves to
the ordinance of God, who has set it down, that we must be in subjection to
our husbands.


Xant. That is true indeed: but by Gods ordinance I am his wife, and not his
servant.


Eula. Yes Xantippe, therefore you ought to serve him, because you are his
wise, or else, when you were married unto him, why did you make him such a
solemn promise of obedience: and for the performaunce thereof, pawn your
troth? Now if we make no conscience of such a solemn promise, whereunto God,
and Gods Angels, and Gods Church, are witnesses; then is our tr^th forfeyted,
and we are to be held for false creatures, neither is any word that ever we
speak to be held of any credit.


Xant. Well, yet for all that, he should use me as his wife, and not as his
servant.


Eula. Oh that word servant sticks sore in your stomach, but mark, my good
Xantippe, of servants there be two sorts, bond servants, and free servants: now
though you are to serve and obey your husband, yet it is not the nature of a
bond or hired servant that serves only for wages, but as a free servant, and
his fellow, and so long as we willingly submit our What mane^ of servants
vviues are to their husbands.
selves unto this ordinance of God, our service is no bondage, but a freedom,
for we are free of our husbands, and all that they have, and are to receive
from them again all maintenance, and protection, familiarity, and comfort,
which freedom and privilege no hired or bond servant can look for at his
masters hands.


Xant. If we be free, then are they not to command us.


Eula. Not so, good friend, now you mis-take: for though we be free of our
husbands, and all that they have, that is, of bed, and board, and familiarity,
and maintenance from them, yet it does not follow, that therefore we must not
obey them, or that we may be our own caruers of that which they have at our
pleasure, and whether they will or no.


Xant. If we be free (as you say we are) why may we not be our own caruers? or
why should we be commanded as servants?


Eula. Because we are under a law, which has made us subject to their power
and authority. For though a man be a noble man, and a Lord, and has tenants
under him, yet is he also a subject, and must obey his Prince, as one that
lives under a law: and yet though a Lord, or a freeholder are to obey the law,
and to do service for their Prince, yet are they not in the nature of the
Princes hired servants, or bond servants, which are daily about him, and take
wages, but are as free subjects, and do enjoy their goods and lands, etc. under
the Princes protection, and live in great liberty, and are called by their
Prince with sweet words of great love, and princely kindness; as, our loving
subjects, and sometimes, our trusty and well-beloved, if they be of their
Council, but not, our loving servants: so they write to those that are of
their household and serve for wages. And so a wife, though she is ^o serve her
husband, as his subject, yet he does not therefore call her his servant, but
both in writing and speaking, calls her his beloved wife, or his trusty, and
dear beloved spouse, etc. And to me this is a clear case.


Xan. This is more (I confess) than ever I heard, or considered of in all my
life, and I will find a time to consider better of it.


Eula. In so doing, you shall do well. *] But tell me, my Xantippe, afterward
your husband left threatening to beat you, did he not?


Xant. Yes that he did, and was the wiser man for that, or else he would have
been beaten himself.


Eula. But you did not give over brawling with him.


Xant. No, nor never will, if he give me cause.


Eula. That is not well spoken, for we must bear: but what does he in the
mean time while you chide and brawle?


Xant. What? sometimes he sleeps, sometimes he does nothing but laugh, and
sometimes he takes his Lute, and sits thrumming on that as loud as he can, when
it has scarce 3. strings upon it, and al to interrupt my speeches, or drown
my voice.


Eula. And does not that anger you?


Xant. Anger me (quoth you?) I cannot express how much he vexes me, I am so
chafed with it, that it goes even to the heart of me, sometime I have much ado
to hold my hands.


Eula. My good Xantippe, will you give me leave to speak freely unto you?


Xant. I do give you leave, say on.


Eula. What manner of man soever your husband be, yet think this with your
self, there is no changing for another. Sometimes were co^ tentio^s where
unappeasable, divorce is used as the last remedy: now that in such cases is
quite taken away, even unto the hour of death he must be your husband, and you
must be his wife. Now there is nothing remaining, but that each of you, by
applying your selves to each others conditions, do study to live in concord.


Xant. Can I make him a new man?


Eula. It is not of little force, that wives may do to make their husbands such
as they should be.


Xant. You then agree well with your husband belike.


Eula. Now all is well between us.


Xant. Then belike ye had somewhat to do at the beginning.


Eula. Never any tempest (I thank God) but yet (as it is often amongst men)
some clouds did now and then arise, which might have bred a storm, if we had
not by bearing one with another, prevented the same. Every one has his
fashio^s, and every one has his mind or opinion by himself: and if we will
confess the truth, every one has his faults; which if it be lawful at any
time to take notice of without any hatred of them, or to see and not see, then
surely in marriage it is lawful.


Xan. Your speech is good.


Eula. And it often times comes to pass, that mutual good will between man
and wife, may be broken off, besore one do well know another conditions, that
must be well looked unto at the first: for when contention and heart burning is
once sprung up, hearty reconciliation is hardly wrought, especially if the
matter be grown to bitter reproaches, as things that are glewed together, if
they be presently shaken, they do easily fall asunder: but when the glue is
through dry, then nothing is surer. Therefore at the beginning all means must
be used whereby goodwil between the husband and the wife may grow, and be
strongly confirmed: and that is done cheefely, by observing each others
conditions, and fitting of manners accordingly. As for that love that is
grounded only upon beauty and riches, etc. it is mere temporary, and will
fail when beauty or riches do fail, or when it sees another A similitude.
fairer or richer, and is like a fire that is kindled of straw, which will make
a blaze for a time, but is soon out.


Xan. But I pray you tell us by what means you drew your husband to your
fashions?


Eul. I will tell you, to that end you may imitate me.


Xan. I will if I can.


Eula. It is a most easy thing to do, if you list, and it is not yet too
late: for he is a young man, and you are a young woman. My cheifest care was
still to be pleasant and merry with my h^sband, and to see that there were
nathing that might offend his mind, I observed his affection and meaning in
every thing, and I observed my times, as Abigail did, when he was merry, and
when he was angry, as they are wont to do that would tame Elephants, or Lions,
or the like beasts, which cannot be won by force.


Xan. Such a one I have at home.


Eula. They that go to Elephants, wear no white raiment, nor they red which
go to bulls, because it is found by Similitudes.
experience, that such creatures by such colors are made more wild, even as
Tigres also at the sound of bells, are so enraged, that they are ready to tear
their own flesh. And they that go about horses, have words of purpose,
smacking with their lips, and handling of them gently, and all to mittigate
their fury, when they are in a chase. How much more does it become us to use
such Arts and devises toward our husbands, with whom we must live, will we,
nill we, in one house and bed together, so long as we live.


Xant. Well, go on with that you began.


Eulali. Having well observed these things, I framed my self to his humor,
taking great heed, that no offense did grow.


Xant. How could you do that?


Eula. First, in my care of domestical affairs, which is the peculiar province
of Matrons, I was very vigilant and careful, not only that nothing was
pretermitted, but also, that every thing was a greeable to his liking, even in
the smalest things: as for example; If my husband loved this or that meat
better then another, or i^ he had rather have it dressed this way, than that,
or if he would have his bed made thus, or thus, I would be sure to fit him.


Xan. But how could you frame your self to please him that is seldom at home,
and comes drunken home?


Eula. Nay, stay a while, I went thus far. If at any time I saw my husband
sad, or very heavy, and that there was no ^t time to talk with them: I did
not then laugh and toy with him, as the manner of many women is to do; but
then did I look as heavily as he: For as a looking-glass if it be true, does
always show a perfect image of him that looks in it, so it becomes a good
wife to frame her self to the affection of her husband, that she be not merry,
when he is mourning, nor sad when he is merry. But if at any time I saw him
much moved, and very angry indeed, either by some flattering, or intreatin^
speeches, I would alay his anger, or by silence I would give place unto it,
until fit time was offered, (when his heat was past) either to clear my
self, or to admonish him. The same course I took, if at any time I saw him
come home more in drink then ordinary. And for that time I would speak of
nothing but pleasant matters, and only by flattering and fair speeches, I
would draw him to bed.


Xan. But unhappy is the state of wines, if they must be obedient and diligent
to please their husbands, that are angry, drunk, and given to all naughtiness.


Eula. As though this care were not mutual. For they also are compelled to
bear with many things in our behavior: but there is a time when a woman may
in good earnest admonish her husband, if it be in a weighty matter: for at
light matters it is better to wink than to see.


Xan. When is that?


Eulalia When his mind is free from study, from anger, from care, and drink,
then alone when there is no body by, How wives must admonish their husbands.
he is sweetly to be admonished, or entreated rath^r, that in this, or that,
he would take a better course for his wealth, or his health, or his credit
and good fame. And this same admonition also ought to be powdered with pleasant
ieasts, and delightful speeches. O^tentimes I would use some preface unto my
matter, and obtain of him, that he would not be angry with me, if a foolish
woman did admonish him, or put him in mind, of that which might seem to
make for his credit, for his health, or for his salvation. And when I had
said what I would, I would cut off my speech, and would set my self to
speak of more pleasant matters. For this is commonly our fault my Xantipp^,
that when we once begin a matter, we cannot tell when to make an end.


Xan. So they say indeed.


Eula. But this one thing amongst all the rest, I did most precisely take heed
of; that I would never chide with my husband before company, nor carry any
complaints against him out of my house. But if there be any thing that cannot
be endured, nor yet by the wives admonition amended, it is more civil for the
wife to go and complain to her husbands parents, or kindred, then to his
acquaintance and friends, that resort to his house, or before any of his
family, and so to temper her complaint, that she may not seem to hate her
husbands person, but his sin: neither let her power out all, that so he in
silence may acknowledge and love his wives ciuility and modesty.


Xan. She must be a very wise woman that shall perform all this.


Eula. Yea, and by such deeds we shall draw our husbands to the like ciuility.


Xan. There be some that cannot be amended by any civility.


Eula. Truly I do not think so. But grant there be such: First let us think
this, that our husband is to be borne withal whatsoever he be. It is therefore
better to bear him, being like himself, or made better by our courteous
behavior, then by our furious and extreme dealing, to make him daily worse
and worse? What if I can bring forth such husbands, as by the like ciuility
have amended their wives? How much more does it become us to perform the like
toward our husbands?


Xant. Then you will show an example of one that is nothing like my husband.


Eula. Now, if I might not be too troublesome, I would tell you of a certain
thing that happened of late in this City.


Xan. It shall be no trouble to me, but I shall hear it with a good will.


Eula. There is a certain man, none of the meaner sort, who used to go much a
hunting. In the Country he met with a certain damsel, the daughter of a very
poor man: he began to be exceedingly in love with her, and he a man of good
years: and for her sake he did very often lie abroad all night, his pretense
was still hunting. His wife, being a singular good woman, and suspecting I wot
not what, she made a search for her husbands game, and still was at him for
that he had gotten with hunting, and went so far, that at last she came to
that rustical cosage or cabine of turfes, where he used to lie, and fished out
all his business, the place where he slept, what he drunk, what provision
there was made for him: there was no household stuff but meeee poverty. This
matron went home, and by and by came again thither, and brought with her a
good bed, and all furniture belonging to it, and plate to drink out of, and
money to buy things withal, praying them that if he came th^ther any more, they
should use him more ciuilly then they had done, dissembling all this while that
she was his wife, and feig^ed her self to be his sister. After a few days,
her husband came thither again by stealth, and saw every thing more plentiful,
and hansomer than it was wont to be, he asked how all that came about: they
said, there was a certain honest matron of kindred to him, that had brought
those things thither, and charged them to entertain him in the best manner
that they could. By and by his conscience was touched, and he began to
suspect that this was his wives doing. Being returned home, he asked her if she
had not been there, she did not deny it: then he demanded of her to what end
she sent that stuff thither? husband (quoth she) you are used to lie and fare
better at home, I saw that you were but homely used there, and I thought it my
duty, (when your pleasure was to lie there) to see you have better
entertainment.


Xan. O matron, too good for such a hunter! If it had been my case, I should
have sooner have laid him a bundle of nettles or bushes, than a bed to lie upon.


Eula. But hear the end. The man perceiving his wives honesty and kindness to
be so great, wo^ld never after go steal a lodging abroad any more, but
contented him self at home with his own wife, and loved her most dearly to
his dying day. You knew Gilbert Batauus, did you not?


Xan. Yes, I knew him well.


Eula. He (as you know) in his flourishing age, married one of good years.


Xan. It may be he married her portion, not her person.


Eula. Well, so it is, he being weary of his wife, loved another woman, with
whom he did often solace himself abroad: seldom did he dine or ^up at home:
What would you have done in this case?


Xan. What? If I had been his wife, I would have flowne in his beloueds face,
and torn her hair off her head, and when he had gone out to dinner or supper
with her, I would have crowned him with a pis-pot, that so he might have gone
anointed to his banquet.


Eula. But his wife took a wiser cour^e then so. She invited that woman (which
her husband loved) home to her house, and used her in all kindness, and so
without any sorceries drew her husband home also: and if at any time he supped
abroad with her, she sent thither some one mess or other of some good thing,
willing them to be merry witha^l.


Xan. I should rather die, than be a bawd to my husband.


Eula. But in the mean time consider the matter it self well: Was not this
far better, than i^ by her furious rigor she had wholly ^straunged her
hus^ands mind from her, and so should have led her whole life after in brawles
and contentions? She knew that some kind of inconuentence was to be pr^ferred
before a mischief. And so long as she saw nor kn^w no ^uil by them, she in her
wisdom did charitably consier all things to the best.


Xan. I know she chose the less evil of the two: but I could not do so.


Eula. I will add only one more, and then I have done with examples. Our next
neighbor, a very honest kind man, but somewhat hasty and impatient when he
was moved, on a certain time beat his wife, who was also a very good woman.
She presently got her self into the inwardest cham^er in all the house, and
there weeping and sobbing, she digested the grief of her mind. A little
while after, vpp^n some occasion her husband went into the same room, he finds
his wi^e weeping: Why do you sit here (quoth he) weeping and sobbing like a
child? Then she wisely answered him: what, (said she) is it not better for me
to deplore an^ bewail my hard estate here in secret, than to run forth and
cry out in the open streets, as some women use to do? With this speech (so
well beseeming a wife) the man's heart was broken and overcome, and giving her
his right hand, he promised her, that he would never strike her more: and he
was as good as his word.


Xan. But I have gotten that of my husband by a clean contrary way.


Eulalia It may be so: but in the mean time, there is a perpetual war
between you, and it is a hundred to one that he will never love you for it.


Xan. What then would you have me to do?


Eula. First, you must swallow up all injuries that your husband offer you, and
his affection must be by little and little won, by duties, and kindness,
and meekness, and mildness, and so you shall at last, either overcome him,
or use him more commodiously than now you can.


Xan. He is too stowt and hard-harted, to be won by any duty or kindness.


Eula. Oh say not so. There is no wild beast so fierce, but may be ^amed by
gentle handling, do not despair of the man, make trial some months, blame
me if you find not this course good for you. There be many faults also that
you must wink at; and above all, beware that you move no brawles in chamber
or in bed: but be careful that there all things be pleasant and merry.
For if that place which is consecrated to the putting away of all offenses, and
to the restoring of love, be profaned with strife and grief, then all remedies
of reconciliation are gone.

And there be some women so froward, that even in the very act of generation,
they will be brawling, or sullen, and malcontented, and by their tedious and
irke some conditions, do make that pleasure unpleasant, which should purge
men's minds from all gree^e and dislike, corrupting and spoiling the physic
whereby offenses might have been healed.


X^n. Truly this has been my case.


Eula. No marvel then though your husband cannot love you. At no time a woman
should be loath some or greeu^us to her husband: but at such a meeting,
especially she should do all her endeavor to be amiable and pleasing to her
good man.


Xan. I have to do with a beast, and not a man.


Eula. Oh leave these railing and uncivil speeches: for the most part it is
through our own default, that men be no better than they are.


Xan. I would I could make him better, but it passes my skill.


Eulalia If you will be as good as your skill, you can do it: he must be
yours, and you must be his, do what you can; and the better you make him, the
better it will be for your self. But you always look upon his faults, and
those you aggrauate, and they increase your hatr^d, and then you take the pot
by that ear that will not hold: rather fa^en your eyes upon those things that
are good in him, and that is a handle by which he may be held and used. Before
you did marry him, you had time to consider what faults he had: now is the time
of healing, and not of wounding, of clearing, and not of accusing: and you
ought to have chosen your husband as well by your ears, as by your eyes.


Xan^ippe What woman did ever choose a husband by her ^ares?


Eula. She chooses only by the eye, who respects nothing but the beauty,
and making of the body; but she chooses by the care, that does diligently
obse^ue what report and ^ame goes of him.


Xan. Your warning is good, but i^ comes too late.


Eula. But it is not too late to study how to amend your husband, and that you
may do yet, if you will but temper your self accordingly. What do others
report of your husband, his friends and acquaintance with whom he does daily
converse?


Xan. They say he is of marvelous good behavior, courteous, liberal,
kind-hearted, and friendly to his friend.


Eul. And that makes me of good hope, that he will prove such a one as we
desire.


X^n. But to me only he is not so.


Eul. Do you but show your self to him in such manner as I have showed you,
and never trust me more, if he pr^oue not Of Divorce.
such to you also. And there is no talking of being divorced from him now.


Xan. But that has been often in my mind.


Eul. When that cogitation comes into your mind, think first with your self,
of how small reckoning a woman is that is divorced from her husband. The
chiefest ornament of a wife, is to be duetifull to her husband, and studious to
please him: so has Nature provided, and so God will have it, that we depend
wholly upon our husbands. Again, thin^e of your children which are common to
you both, what do you mean to do with them? If you take them with you, y^u
de^raude your husband of his possession. If you leave them behind you, then
you bereave your self of that which is most (...) unto you. Last of all, tell
me, have you any that bear you evil will?


Xan. I have a mother in law, and my own mother, both which do wish me dead.


Eul. And what can be more acceptable unto them than to see you divorced from
your husband, to live a widow, nay, worse then a widow, for widows may marry
again.


Xan. Truly I like your counsel well, but I shall be weary of such a daily
labor.


Eul. But think with your self what a deal of labor you must take before
you can teach this Parrot to speak like a man. And shall it grieve you to take
pains in reforming of your husband, with whom you may live sweetly all the
days of your life?


Xan. What shall I do?


Eul. I have already told you: first use daily and earnest prayer to God, then
be careful that all things be clean, and sweet, and decent at home, that
there be no loathsomeness or sluttishnesse to make him weary of his house,
show your self gentle and loving unto him, and always remember a certain
reverence that a wife owes to her husband: put away sadness and
malecontentednesse, and put away all sawcines and impudent repr^chfulnes, be
not sluttish, nor toyish, and lasciu^ous, let all your provision at home be
neat and trim. You know your husbands diet, that that he likes best,
provide for him, and let it be after his own mind. And moreover, show your
self friendly and affable to those he loves. At the table let there be no
complaining, nor finding of fault, but let all be full of mirth and joy, so
shall you inure your husband to tarry at home, and save charges. Then shall he
begin to think with himself thus: Truly I am a very fool to live abroad with
the great expense of my wealth and credit, having at home so pleasant and loving
a wife, with whom I may enjoy all things in honest, decent, and good sort.


Xan. Do you think I should have good success if I tried?


Eul. I make no doubt of it: in the mean time I will go to your husband, and
will admonish him of his duty.


Xant. I like your counsel, but take heed that none of our talk come to his
ear, for if you do, he will take on as if heaven and earth should go
together.


Eul. Fear not, I will so wind within him by circumstances, that he shall tell
me all the stir that is between you himself. After that, I shall handle him
after my manner most finely. And I hope you shall find him more to your liking
than ever before. And as occasiou shall serve, I will belie you, and tell him
how well and kindly you spoke of him.


Xan. I pray God prosper that we go about.


Eul. No doubt but he will, if you be not wanting to your self.


FINIS.
A pithy Dialogue between a Harlot and a godly young man: showing how she
going about to catch him in her snares, was (by his forcible persuasions)
caught her self, and converted to an honest woman.
The Speakers names.
Lucreti^. Sophroniu^.
Lucreti^. WEll done, my most pleasant friend Sophronius, that you are come
unto us at the last, for me think it is a long time since I saw you: at the
first sight I did scarce know you.


Soph. Why so, my Lucretia?


Lu. Because the last time I saw you, you had no beard, and now you have a
little one. What is the matter, my sweet heart? me think you look more sowrely
than you were wont.


Sop. I desire to talk more ^amiliarly with you alon^.


Lu. What, are we not alone, my dear heart?


Sop. Let us go into a more secret place.


Lu. Go to then, let us go into the inner chamber, if you list to do any
thing.


Sop. This place (as I take it) is not secret enough.


Lu. From whence comes this new bashfulnes? here is a closet where I lay all
my apparel, so dark a place, that I can scarce see thee, or thou me.


So. Look round about that there be no chinks in the wall.


Lu. There is not one.


So. Is there no body in the next room that can hear us?


Lucr. Not a fly truly, my sweet heart: what do doubt? why do thou
make such delays?


Sop. Can we here escape the eyes of God?


Luc. No, he sees all things.


Sop. Nor his Angels?


Luc. We cannot avoid their presence.


Sop. And what is the reason that men are not ashamed to do those things
before the eyes of God, and his holy Angels, which they are ashamed to do in
the sight of men?


Lucr. What new matter is this? what, art thou come hither to preach? put on a
hoode, and get thee into the Pulpit, and there we will hear you, with your
little beard.


Sop. Surely, I would not stick to do that, if I thought I might reclaim you
from this kind of life you lead, not only the most filthy, but also the most
miserable.


Lucr. And why so, goodman? we must live by one means or another. Every man
lives by his trade, this is our trade, and this is our lands.


Sop. I could wish (my Lucretia) that this lightness of mind being shaken off,
you would with me consider better of the matter.


Luc. I pr^y thee keep thy Sermon till another time, let us now live and be
merry, my Sophronius.


Soph. You do all that you do for lucre, do you not?


Lucr. You have hit the nail on the head.


Sophr. You shall loose no penny of that you look for, I will give you four
times so much, if you will but only hearken unto me.


Lucr. Say what you will.


Soph. First then answer me to this question, Have you any that wish you evil?


Lucr. Not one.


Sophr. Is there none that you do hate?


Lucr. No otherwise than they deserve.


Sophr. If you could do them a good turn, would you do it?


Lucr. I would first temper them a cup of poison.


Soph. But now consider with your self, whether you can do any thing that can
be more acceptable unto them, than to let them see you live this shameful and
miserable life. And what could you do that could more grieve them that wi^h
you well?


Luc. This was my lot.


Sophr. Now that which was wont to be the hardest thing of all other to
banished persons, or to those that are carried over into the Islands, or cast
out into the furthest parts of the world amongst the barbarous people, that
have you chosen to your self of your own accord.


Lucr. What is that?


Sop. Have not yo^ voluntarily renounced all natural affection, yea your
father and mother, your brethren and sisters, and all others, whom by nature
you are bound unto? for they are all ashamed of thee, and thou dare not come
in their sight.


Lucr. Yea, I have most happily changed my affection, for in stead of a few
friends, I now have many, of whom I always reckon thee for one, that is to me
in stead of a brother.


Sophr. Leave these iestings, and consider the matter in good earnest as it is.
She that has so many friends, has never a friend, believe me, (my Lucretia.)
For they that resort unto thee, do not account of thee as their friend, but
rather as a chamber pot. Behold how far thou have rejected thy self, thou
miserable creature. Christ did so dearly love thee, that he redeemed thee
with his blood, to make thee a fellow-heire with him of the inheritance of
heaven, and do thou make thy self a common sincke, or iakes, for every
base, filthy, and scabby companion to resort unto, and to empty his
filthiness in thee? And if you be yet free from the contagion of that
leprousie which they call the Spani^h Scab, or French pox, you cannot long be
without it: which if it should happen unto thee, what more unhappy or
miserable than thou, although the rest were safe, I do mean thy goods, and
good name? What else can thou be but a living carcass, or a carrion? You
were loath to obey your mother, now do you serve a most filthy bawd. You
scorned to hear the admonition^ of your parents: here you must be continually
beaten of drunken and mad who r^maisters. It grieved you to do any work at
home, where by you might get your living, and here, what tumult? what sturres?
what hurly-burlies? what brawli^gs and quarellings, what night watchings, must
you endure? Besides that, continually afraid of the Constable, and suspecting
every one that knocks to be an Officer sent to apprehend you.


Lu. From whence comes this new preacher to us?


Sop. Now consider of another thing with me, and leave thy scoffing. The flower
of thy beauty which gets thee so many lovers, shall fade in a very short
time, what will thou do then, thou miserable creature? what dunghill will be
more vile, what Toad more loathsome then thou? Peradventure of a Strumpet you
will become a Bawd, yet every one comes not to that dignity: but say that
you do, what thing more wicked, or that can come more near unto the malice,
and nature of the Devil him self?


Lu. They are true indeed, my Sophronius, almost all that thou say. But
where gatest thou this sanctimonie, which were wont to be the wantonnest of
all wantons? No man did ever more often resort hither, or at more unseasonable
hours than thou have done. I hear say you have been at Rome.


So. I have so indeed.


Lu. But from thence men were wont to return worse than they went, how
comes the contrary to pass with you?


So. I will tell you: because I went not thither in that manner, nor to that end
that others do. Others for the most part go thither, that they may return
worse then they went, and there they shall want no occasions, nor
prouocations. I went with an honest man, by whose persuasion I sold my Flaggon
Bottle, and bought me a little Book, the new Testament of Erasmus translation.


Lu. Erasmu^? they lay he is half an heretic.


So. Have you seen the man?


Lu. Never: but I wish I might see him of whom I hau^ heard so much evil.


Sop. It may be of evil person^.


Luc. Nay of reverent men.


So. Who, I pray you?


Lu. Nay, I may not tell.


So. Why so?


Lu. Because if you should blabbe, and it should come to their ears, I should
loose no small portion of my gain.


So. I thought what reverend ones they were. But fear not, you shall tell it
to a stone.


Lu. Hearken then in your ear.


So. O foolish woman, what need I lay my ear to whisper in, when we are alone?
Can God hear us? But now I see that you are a godly whore, that can help
beggars with your alms.


Lu. But by such beggars I gain more, then by you rich folk.


So. I know that well enough, for they spoil honest matrones to bestow it upon
wicked harlots.


Lu. But go on with your book.


So. So I will, and it is best of all. There Saint Paul (who cannot lie) taught
me, that neither whoremongers, nor fornicatours shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven. When I had read that, I began thus to think with my self: It is but a
small thing that I look to get by my fathers inheritance, and yet I had rather
renounce all whoredoms, and harlots, then to be dis-inherited of my father.
How much more should I take heed that I be not dis-inherited of my heavenly
father? And yet against my father (if he should dis* inherit me) I might be
relieved by the laws of men; but if God should dis-inherite me, I have no
refuge to fly unto. Therefore I did fully resolve with my self wholly to
renounce all harlots.


Lu. If you can contain your self, it is well.


So. It is a good part of continency, to be willing from the heart to be
continent. Last of all, there remains another remedy against this mischief,
an^ that is marriage: There was a good man at Rome, who with many good words
exhorted me to purity of mind and body, to holy readings, to often prayers,
and sobriety o^ life: for my penance he enjoined me nothing but to ask God
forgiuene^se upon my knees, if I had any store of money, to give to some poor
body one Caroline. I maruailed that for so many faults that I had committed
with harlots, he would enjoin me no harder penance: he answered me pleasantly
and said; My son, if thou do truly r^pent, and change thy life, I stand
not upon penance: but if thou continuest in thy sin, even thy filthy lust it
self will put thee to penance, and pain more then enough, yea though the
priest enjoin thee none. For Solomon says, That the wicked man shall be taken
with his own iniquity, and shall be Prou 5.
bound with the cords of his own sin: so that he shall need none else to
pursue him, or to apprehend him, or to bind him, his own sin shall do all.
And again in the same Chapter, he says: That though the lips of a harlot
drop as the honey comb, and her words be softer than Oil, yet her feet go
down to death, and her steps take hold of hell, and her end will be more
bitter than wormwood, and sharper than a two edged sword, and he that is
deceived by her shall mourn in the end, and say, I have given mine honor to
the straung^r, and my strength to the cruel, and wasted my substance, and my
goods are found in the house of the stranger. How have I hated instruction,
and my soul despised correction? I am brought unto all evil, in the midst of
the Congregation. And look upon me (quoth that father) you see me, how blind I
am, my eyes continually running with water, I shake and am crooked, and
sometime I was such a one as you say your self hauebeene hitherto. So I
repented, and have ta ken a n^w course.


Lu. Then I perceive I have lost my Sophronius.


So. Nay, you have gained him rather. For before, he was lost, and was neither
his own friend, nor thine, but now he does truly love thee, and thirsts
after thy salvation.


Lu. What then, do you persuade me unto my good, Sophroni^s?


So. That with all speed you give over this kind of life. Yet you be young,
the stains that hitherto you have gotten, may, by hearty repentance, and
faith in Christ, be wiped away: or marry some honest man, and we will help you
to some thing toward your dowry: or else leave this place, and get into the
service of some honest matrone. To which of these you have most mind, you
shall have my bent furtherance.


Lucr. In good earnest, my Sophronius, look me out a service, and I will
follow your counsel.


So. But in the mean time remove your selse from hence.


Lucr. What, so soon?


Sophr. Why not to day as well as to morrow? delay is dangerous.


Lucr. Whither shall I go?


Sophr. Gather up all your apparel, and I will keep it for this night, my
servant shall bring you to an honest ma^rone, where you shall be a while at my
charge, until I shall oth^rwise provide for you, which shall not be long.


Lucr. Go to then, my good Sophronius, I do wholly commit my self unto thy
fidelity.


So. Thereof you shall never repent your self by the grace of God.


A Dialogue of a Womanin Childe-bed.
The Speakers names.
Eutrapilus Fabulla.
Eutrapilu^. GOd save you my dear Fabulla.


Fab. And you too Eutrapilus, but what is the matter that you come now to
salute me, which none of us have seen this three year full?


Eut. I will tell you, by chance I (passing by these houses) saw the crow or
the ring of the door bound about with a white linen cloth, and I marvelled
what the reason of it should be.


Fab. Are you such a stranger in this country, that you do not know the
reason of that? do not you know that it is a sign that there is a woman
lying in where that is?


Eut. O wonderful! is it not a prodigious thing to see a white crow? but in
good sadness, I knewwel enough, that that is the manner where a woman lies in,
but I could not once i^uspect that, you being so young a damsel, scarce yet
sixteen years old, had so soon learned that most difficult Art of getting
children, which other women do hardly learn before they be thirty years
old.


Fab. You are always like your self, you have not your n^me i^or naught, you
may well be called Eutrapilus, for you love to be giving and ieasting.


Eutr. So may you well be called Fabulla, for you are never without a fable. But
as I was thus musing at the matter, in good time I met with him that has had
so many wives.


Fab. What, he that s^ lately buried his tenth wife?


Eutr. The very same: but i will tell you, (that which perhaps you are ignorant of)
he goes a wooing again as prowdly and lustily as if he had never bin married:
And I asked of him the reason of this white crow. There is (quoth he) in this
house, a woman cut in two, or divided by the middle, what heinous offense
(said I) has she committed? And if it be true (quoth he) is bruited by the
common rumor of the people, the good wife of the house has flead her husband,
and with that went laughing away.


Fab. He is a pleasant companion after his rude manner.


Eutr. I came forthwith in, to gratulate or rejoice with you for your happy
birth.


Fab. So you may if you will Eutrapilus, but then you will rejoice for my happy
birth, when you shall see in that which I have brought forth, a token of a
good man.


Eutr. Thou speak both godly and truly, my Fabulla.


Fab. No sir, I am no man's Fabulla, but Petronius only.


Eut. To Petronius only, you bring forth, but I suppose you do not live to him
alone. But for this also am I glad, and do rejoice with you, that you have
brought forth a man child.


Fab. But why do you think me more happy for having a man child than a
woman child^?


Eutr. Nay rather Fabulla, let me learn that of you, why you women are
gladder when you bear a son, than when you bear a daughter.


Fab. What others think is unknown to me, but at this time I am glad of a
son, because it seemed good unto God to have it so: if his will were to give
me a daughter, I should be as well pleased as I am.


Eutr. Do you think that God is at leisure to look to thos^ that bear
children?


Fa. What can his majesty rather do then to preserve that by propagation which
he has created?


Eutr. What can he rather ^oe good woman? yea, if God were not God indeed, I
do not think that he could sufficiently provide for so many businesses as he
does. There is the king of Denmark a godly favorer of the Gospel, he lives
in banishment. There is Francis the French king, he lives as a ghest or
stranger amongst the Spaniardes, I know not whether it be with his will, or
against his will, but surely he is a man worthy of better fortune. Charles
he goes about to make a new Monarchy of the whole world. Fe^dinandus has
as much to do in Germany about his own matters as he can. All Courtiers are
gnawne with an insatiable hunger of money: the countrymen, they raise very
dangerous commotions, neither can they be terrified from their atempts by so
many slaughters and ruins as they have suffered, all the people thinks of
nothing but an Anarchie, or confusion of all things: the house of the Church is
shaken with dangerous factions: this way and that way is the seamelesse coat
of Christ tor^e in pieces. The Lords Uineyarde is now wasted, not by one boar
alone: the authority also of Priests and the dignity of Divines, together
wi^h their tithes and maintenance is going to wrack, the constitutions of the
Bishops do ^aint and languish, the Eucharist or Sacrament of Chr^sts bo^y and
blood is called in qu^stion, antichrist is exspect^d, and the whole world does
travel of (I know not what) some great ^ischiefe. In the mean time the
Turks (...) and domineere, and will make havoc of all, if they go^ on as they
begin. And do thou ask what God can do b^tter than to have a care of
women in Childebed? yea, I think it high time for him to look to his own
kingdom, and that in time too.


Fab. Peradventure that which seem^th great unto men, is unto God a matt^r of
no moment. But (if you will) let us from this talk ^clude the person of God,
and tell in good earn^st what moves you to think me more happy for having
alo^ne than a daughter.


Eutr. It is the part of a godly mind to judge that the best which our good
God shall give without al doubt. But if God should give you a cristall cup,
would you not give him great thanks?


^ab. ^ would indeed.


^utra. But what if he should give you but a glass pot, wo^ld you give him
the like thanks? But while I stand disput^g of these matters, I fear me that
I am not comfortabl^, but troublesome unto you.


^ab. Not so: Fabulla cannot now take any harm by talking, this is the fourth
week since I lay down, and now I am strong enough eu^n to wrestle.


Eut. Why then do you not fly abroad from your neast?


Fab. ^he King has forbidden it.


Eut. What King?


Fab. A tyrant.


Eut. Wh^ I pray you?


Fab. I will tell you in one syllable: Custom. Custom is a tyrant.



Eut. See how many things this King exacteth beside all right and reason, let
us then go on with our discourse of cristall and glass.


Fab. The man (as I conjecture) you judge to be of a more excellent and firm
nature than the woman.


Eutr. So I think indeed. Whether the man or the woman be the more excellent.



Fab. Forsooth, if men may be Judges, whether then are men longer liu^d then
women? or whether are they free from diseases?


Eu. Not so, but in their kind they are stronger than women.


Fab. But therein a camel goes beyond a man.


Eut. Yea but the man was first created.


Fab. S^ was ^dam cr^ated before Christ, is he therefore more excellent? And
workmen are wont in their last works to ^xcell thems^lues.


Eutr. But God has made the woman subject to the man.


Fab. He is not by and by the bett^r which commands another. And God has
not subjected the woman, but the married woman. and again, he has so
subjected the married woman unto her hus^and* that whereas each has power over
others body, he would have the woman to yield obedience unto her husband, not
as unto the more excellent, but as unto the more ^ierce and unruly. Speak
Eutrapilus, whether is the weaker, he that yeeld^th unto an other, or he to
whom the way is yielded?


Eutr. Truly here I will yield unto you, if you will declare unto me what was
saint Paul's meaning when he says, That Christ is the head of the man, and that
the man is the head of 1. Corin. 11.
the woman. And again, when he says, That the man is the image and glory of
God, and the woman is the glory of the man.


Fa^. That I shall soon resolve you of, if you will but show me, whether it be
granted unto men only to be the members of Christ.


Eut. God forbid, that is given to all, both men and women by faith.


Fab. How comes it then to pass, that when the head is but one, it may not
be counted common to all the members? Again, when God made man to his own
image, whether did he expr^sse that image in the figure or form of the body,
or in the gifts of the mind?


Eut. In the gifts of the mind.


Fa. And in these, (when you have said what you can) wherein do men excel us? In
either sex are to be found vices inow, drunkenness, brawlings, fightings,
slaughters, wars, rapines, and adulteries, etc.


Eut. But only we men fight for our Country.


Fab. But you do more often leave your place, and fly with shame enough,
neither is it always for your Country that you fight, but most commonly for a
base stipend: you forsake both wife and children, and worse than cutthroats,
when you need not, you expose your bodies to a seruil^ necessity, either of
killing or being killed. Now for all the great brag you make of your
martial valor, there is none of you all, but if you had once tried what it is
to bear a child, he had rather stand and fight ten times in the army, then
once to undergo the pain and sorrow that we have experience of daily. In the
wars it comes not always to handie blows: and if it do, yet every part of
the army is not endaungered alike: such as you be, are placed in the middle of
the camp, some are in the out-shifts, and some after the first stroke is
stricken, go their way, and sit down where they are ^afe enough. And to
conclude, many save themselves by yielding, our surrendering: but as for us, we
must encounter with death even hand to hand.


Eut. This is not the first time I have heard of these things, but are they as
truly as commonly reported?


Fab. They are too true.


Eut. Will you have me then to persuade your husband, that from henceforth be
shall not meddle with you? For so shall you be sure to be free from this danger,
Fabula.


Fab. Surely I desire nothing more willingly, if you can bring it to pass.


Eut. What reward shall that Orator have that can persuade this matter?


Fab. Sure I will give him ten Neates tongues dried in the smoke.


E^t. I had rather yet have them than ten Nightingales A bargain.
tongues. Well, I refuse not the offer: but I would not hau^ this bargain to
take effect, until there be some solemn covenant or band drawn.


Fab. If you please to have it so, let it be so, and whatsoever caution or
assurance else you can devise.


Eut. That shall be done according to your own mind, after your month is
expired.


Fab. And why may it not be done now rather, according to my mind?


Eut. I will tell you, because I fear that after a month, you will be of
another mind, and then both you must double your reward, and my pains also
will be doubled in persuading and dissuading.


Fab. Well then, let it be even as you will for me: but in the mean time go
forward, and show why the male sex should be more excellent then the female?


Eut. Oh, I perceive Fabulla, that you have studied this matter, and come
prepared for this combat, and therefore for this time I think it my best
course, even to give you the Bucklers, I will deal with you after an other
manner, and I will be armed too, neither will I come without a Soldier to
help me, for when the matter is tried only by the tongue, surely one woman
will be too hard for seven men.


Fab. Certainly nature has armed us with this weapon, although you men be not
tongue-tied.


Eut. It may be so: but where is the boy?


Fab. In the next Chamber.


Eut. What does he there? Does he sees Coleworts, or look to the pottage pot?


Fab. Away trifler: he is with his nurse.


Eut. What nurse do you speak of? has he any other nurse then his own
mother?


Fab. Yea, why not? that is the common manner now.


Eut. When you speak of the common manner, Fabulla, you name the woorst author
that can be, of a thing that should be well done: for commonly men sin, the
common manner is to play at Dice; the common manner is to go to whoorehouses;
the common manner is to deceive, to be drunken, and to riot.


Fab. It seemed good to my friends to have it so, for they thought it meet to
spare me yet, being of so tender years.


Eut. But if nature has made you able to conceive, and O^ putting orth
children o nurse.
bring forth, no doubt but that Nature has also made you able to give suck.


Fab. Truly that is very probable.


Eut. Tell me what you think, is not the name of Mother a most sweet name?


Fab. Yes, I do believe it.


Eut. Therefore if it were possible, you should let another woman be the Mother
of your child.


Fab. In faith sir no.


Eut. Why then do you willingly resign more then half your title of Mother
unto another woman?


Fab. Good words Eutrapilos, I divide not my son, I am the whole and sole
mother.


Eut. Nay Fabulla, here even Nature it self does gainsay you, and check you
to your face: Why is the earth called Nature it self is against putting forth
children to nurse.
the mother of all things? is it for that it brings them forth? yea, but much
more because it nourishes those things which it brings forth. Whatsoever the
water breeds, is also brought up in the same waters. In the earth there is no
kind of thing inge^dred, whether it be li^g creature, or plant, but the same
earth does nonrish it with her moisture. Neither is there any kind of living
creature, but it does nourish his own young ones: the Owels* the Lions, and
Uipers do norish their own young ones: and do men and women cast off theirs? I
pray you, what is more cruel then those, that for the tediousness that is in
education, do expose or cast out their young ones to the wide world?


Fab. You speak of things to be abhorred.


Eut. Yea, but men for all that do not so abhor the fact as they should: for
it is not a kind of exposing or casting o^t ^o take a little (...) in^ant, yet
warm (...) (...) mother, yea that (...) of the mother, yea and (...), or
crying for help of the mother, with that v^ice that is said (...) move even
the wild beasts, and to commit it over unto a woman, perhaps scarce sound in
her body, nor yet in her conditions, with whom a little money is more respected
than all thy child.


Fab. Yea, but we have made choice of a nurse that is o^ ^ sound constitution
of her body.


Eut. This can the Physicians better judge of than you. But here suppose that
the woman you speak of, be not only Strangersmilk and heat is not like the
mothers, whereunto the infant has been accustomed in the womb. Similies of
Wheat, Vines, Plants.
equal to your self, but if you will, alittle above you: yet do you think it
no matter, whether the tender infant do such of that milk that it has been
^amiliarly acquainted unto, and to be nourished with that natural heat that it
was used unto in the womb, or be compelled to accustom it self unto other
milk, and other heat? Wheat being sown in a strange ground, does degenerate
into (...), or winter wheat: a vine being translated from his native soil to
another hill, does change his nature: a little plant being plucked from his
native earth, does hang down his head, and droope, and in a manner die: and
therefore, as much as lies in men, they never remove them without their own
native earth about the roots of them.


Fab. Yea, but they say, that plants removed, and new s^t Object.
in other ground, do loose their wild nature, and bring forth more noble
fruit.


Eut. True, but they are not removed presently (good woman) so soon as they
are borne. And this time will come too Answer.
one day, (if God will) that you must put forth your young son abroad, to be
endued with learning, and more (...) kind of government, or discipline, which
duty does rather belong unto the father, than to the mother: but now his
tender age is to be favored, and cherished. And further, where as it makes
much to the health and strength of the bo^y, to s^ what manner of meat it be
fed withal, then is it a thing (...) ^o be regarded, what juice that young and
tender little body o^ the infan^ be nourished withal. For in this case it
will prove true which Horace says; Look wherewith the pot is once
seas^ed, of that will it smell a long time after.


Fa. For the body I take not so much care, so that the mind may be such as we
des^re.


Eut. Truly your speech has m^re piety than Philosophy.


Fab. Why so?


Eu^rap. Then when you cut herbs, why do you complain that your knifes edge
is blunt, and command it to be sharpened? And why do you refuse to sow with a
dull needle, seeing that does diminish nothing from your skill?


Fab. There wants not Art, but a fit instrument.


Eut. Why do they avoid Darnel and Onions, which have need of a ^harpe sight?


Fab. Because they hurt the eyes.


Eut. And is it not the mind that sees?


Fab. Yes, for they that have no mind* have no sight, and they that mind
nothing, see nothing: But what ^an a workman do with a bad tool?


Eut. Then you confess the body to be the instrument of the mind.


Fab. That is certain. When the body is at fault, the mind is at fault.



Eut. And you also confess, that when the body is at fault, the mind cannot
work, or it works but untowardly.


Fab. It is true that you say.


Eut. Go to then, me thinks now I have gotten a pretty Philosophical wit.
Imagine therefore, that the mind of a man might go into the body of a dunghill
cock: could it then utter such a voice as now it does?


Fab. No.


Eut. What should be the let?


Fab. Because there are wanting lips and teeth, and such a tongue as we have, as
also the wesel-pipe, or flap of the throat: there are also wanting the three
gristles which are moved of the three muscles, unto which do belong the
sinews that come from the brain, neither has a cork such ^ mouth and ^awes,
as we have.


Eut. What if the soul of man should go into a swi^ body?


Fab. It should grunt like a swine.


Eut. What if it were in the body of a Camel?


Fab. It would cry like a Camel.


Eut. What if it were in the body of an Ass?


Fab. It would bray like an Ass.


Eut. Surely this did Ap^leius a Philosopher of A^hens confess, when he
desired to call upon Caesar, though he drew his lips together as much as he
could, yet he could scarce sound O Caesar, by no means could he pronounce.
The same Apuleius, when he desired to remember a tale that he had heard, he
desired to have it written, and he condemned such an a^se-headed conceit, when
he did see whole hoofes.


Fab. And worthily.


Eu^rapilus Therefore, with eyes that run, or are bloodshotten, the soul
sees worse than when the eyes ar^ clear, it hears the worse when the ears
are full of filth* it smells the worse when fleame does possess the brain,
it feels the worse when any member is astonyed, it tastes the worse when
the tongue is corrupted with ill humors.


Fab. It cannot be denied.


Eut. Only because the instrument is corrupted.


Fab. So I judge it.


Eut. Neither do you deny, but that for the most part it is corrupted by meat
and drink.


Fab. I grant it: But what hurt does this to a good mi^e?


Eut. Therefore what does Darnell to clear eyes?


Fa. It corrupts the eye which is the minds instrument.


Eut. You answer rightly* but tell me one thing. What is the reason that one man
has a quicker v^rstanding, and a surer memory th^n (...), and that one is
sooner angry and more moderate in his a^ger than another?


Fab. Because the mind is so framed.


Eut. You shall not so carry it away. What is the cause that he which was
sometime of a quick wit, and of a rich memory, does afterward become forgetful
and dull, and that without blow, without fall, or disease, or old age?


Fab. Now you seem to play the Sophister with me.


Eut. Therefore on the other side do you also play the Sophister, and find
out my Sophistry.


Fab. I think this is your meaning; that as the soul does hear and see by
the ears and the eyes, so by certain organs or instruments, it understands,
and remembers, and loves, and hates, it is angry, and pleased.


Eut. You conjecture right.


Fab. But after all this now, what be those instruments, and where be they?


Eut. You see where the eyes be.


Fab. That is true, and the ears too, and nosthrills I see, and where the
palate is I know, and in all the whole body I see there is a fellow-feeling,
unless any member be benumbed or astonished.


Eut. Though a foot be cut off, yet the mind understands.


Fab. It does so, although a hand be cut off.


Eut. But he that receives a sore blow upon the temples of his head, or in the
nape of the neck, falls down like a dead man, and is void of sense.


Fab. This have I seen in my time.


Eut. By this you may perceive, that within the brainepanne do lie the
instruments of understanding, of will and memory, which be not so gross or
thick, as the ears and eyes, but yet material. For as much as they be spirits
which we have in our body, that be most subtle and corporeal, that is, of a
most thin, fine, and tender substance.


Fab. And are these also corrupted by meats and drinks?


Eut. Uery much.


Fab. Why the brain is far from the stomach.


Eut. And so is the top of the tunnel of a chimney, far from the fire in
the chi^y: but if you (...) there you shall feel a vapor.


Fab. I do not mean to try.


E^t* But if you will not credit me, inquire of the Storks. Therefore it is
very material what spirits and vapors do fly up into the brain and
instruments of the mind: for if these b^ raw and cold, they fall down again
into the stomach.


Fab. In truth now you describe unto me the manner of a still, by which we
receive the juice of hearbe^ and ^owers, breathing or vapouring upward.


Eut. Your coniecturing is not amiss. For the l^er whereunto the gall
cleaves, is in the place of the fire, the stomach is a pan, the
braine-panne is the top of the high butte or still, and so if you will, the
nose is in the steed of the spowt. Therefore from this mutual flowing and
ebbing of humors, grows whatsoever is the cause of any disease, even as
diverse humors do diversely fall, now into the eyes, now into the stomach, one
while into the shoulders, another while into the neck, or elsewhere. Whereby
you may also perceive why exce^siue wine drinkers have bad memories, and why
those that feed upon meats of more pure and subtile^ spirits, are not so
dull witted. And why Coriander helps memory, and Langwort or Neesewort
purges the mind: and why great fullness brings the falling sickness, which
at once deadeth or benummeth all the senses, as if they were cast into some
deep fleepe. And to concl^de, as too much hunger or thirst in children, does
blunt the edge of their wit and memory, so too much meat does make the^
blockish and dull witted, if we may credit Aristo^le, because that little
spark of the mind is as it were ouer*whelmed with undigested matter.


Fab. Is then the mind a bodily substance, that it may be affected with
bodily things.


Eu^. ^he very nature of the reasonable soul, is not cor^ (...), but her
original instruments being corrupted, her force an^ (...) is hin^ered: as it
booteth not a wo^keman to excel in his Art, if he want ^t tools to work
withal.


Fab. Of what quantity or shape is the soul?


Eut. What a ridiculous question is that, seeing you confess it to be without
body?


Fab. I mean a body that may ^e felt.


Eut. But those things are most pe^t which are not selt, as God and Angels.


Fab. I hear that God and Angels are called spirits, but a spirit we feel.


Eut. The holy Scriptures in using this word, do but st^mmer as it were for our
rude understanding sake, meaning thereby, a mind pure and free from all
comerc^ and society of sensible things.


Fab. What difference then is there between Angels and The difference betwee^e
an Angel and a soul.
souls?


Eut. Even the same that is between a dew snaile, and a shel snaile.


Fab. Then the body is rather the souls house, than the souls instrument.


Eutrap. There is no let to the contrary, but that one and the same thing may
be called both an instrument, and a house. But of this matter the Philosophers
do not agree, some call the body the souls garment, some the souls house,
some the s^ules instrument, and some the souls harmony. Now What the soul is
to the body.
which soever of all these you list to call it, it will follow thereupon, that
the actions of the mind are hindered by the affections of the body. First, if
the body be that to the soul which the garment is to the body: how much the
garment makes to the health of the body, Hercules has showed: to say nothing
of the colors of hairs and kinds of skins. But whether one soul may
suffice to we are out many bodies, as one body does to wear out many garments,
I leave that to Pythagoras to tell.


Fabulla It were not amiss if (according to the opinion of Pythagoras) it were
lawful to change souls as well as garments: then in winter a man might have a
fat body, and w^ll lined, and in summer a lean.


Eut. But I think it were not very commodious, if as when many garments are
worn, the body it self at last wears: so, many bodies being worn, at last
the soul should wax old, and we are too.


Fab. No truly.


Eut. Now as it makes much to the health and agility of the body, to see with
what garment it be clad: so is it very material what body the soul carries
about with it.


Fab. Truly, if the body be the garment of the soul, I see many men very
diversely clad.


Eut. So it is: and yet the greatest part of this matter rests in us, to see
how ^itly the soul be clothed.


Fab. Therefore let go the garment, and say something of the house.


Eutrap. I will. But lest that I say unto thee may seem a fable, Fabulla, the
Lord Jesus himself calls his body a Temple. And Peter the Apostle calls
his body a tabernacle. And some stick not to call the body the souls
sepulcher. Some call it the minds prison: and many call it a Tower. Now (...),
quasi (...).
hear the reasons: That mind that is pure in all parts, dwells in a temple:
that soul that is not captive to the love of corporal things, dwells in a
tabernacle, and would willingly remove out of it, if her Commander would call
for her: that soul that is blinded with most filthy lusts, that it can never
aspire to the wholesome liberty of the Gospel, that lies in a sepulcher. But
they which painefully wrestle with their sins, and as yet cannot do as they
would, their souls dwell in a prison, still crying unto him that is the
deliverer of all his servants, saying; Bring my soul out of prison, that it
may praise thy name O Lord. They which fiercely fight with Satan, watching his
sleights, who goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour,
their soul lives, as it were, in a Garrison or Camp, from whence it is in no
wise lawful to depart, without warrant from the General and Commander of
the field.


Fab. If the body be the souls lodging, I see many whose souls are but sorily
lodged.


Eut. It is very true, even in houses that ^e (...) dropping, da^ke, and
dus^ish, subject to all w^nde and weather, ^moky, filthy, flegmatique,
rhumatike, torn and ruinous, rotten and inf^cted: and yet Cato does judge it
the first part of happiness, to dwell well.


Fab. It were somewhat tolerable, if it were lawful to go out of one house
into another.


Eut. To remove is not lawful, until the Landlord that placed the soul shall
call for it. But though it be not lawful to let the soul out of her dwelling:
yet it is very lawful and fit too, by Art and Care, to make the souls
dwelling house more commodious and hansome than it is, as in houses we see the
windows are altered, the ground is raised, the walls are plaistered, the dust
is swept out, and the rooms are cleansed with fire and perfume. This to do in
an old body, all ruinated and ready to drop down, is most hard. But it is to
great purpose, if a child be looked unto as it ought to be from his birth.


Fab. You would have a woman to be both mother, and nurse, and Physician too.


Eut. I would so indeed, as touching ^he choice and moderation of meat and
drink, and of exercise, and of sleep, and Note tha^ well.
bathing, and anointing, and rubbing, and dressing, and clothing. How many
think you are subject to most grievous diseases and vices, as the
falling sickness, lea^enesse, weakness, ^afenesse, their loins broken,
their members pulled ^way, their brains weak, and their minds dull and
sottish, and all through the gross ignorance or unconscionable negligence of
nurses.


Fab. It is marvel that you were not made a Franciscane Friar in steed of a
Painter, you preach so well.


Eut. When I see you become a St. Clare, then will I be a Franciscan, and
p^each unto you.


Fab. Tr^ely I am very desirous to know what the soul is, of which we hear
and talk so much, seeing no man ever saw it.


Eutr. Nay, there is none that has eyes but has seen it.


Fab. I see souls pictured like a little infant, but why have they not wings
like Angels?


Eut. Because when they fell from heaven, they brake their wings, if there be
any credit to be given to the ^ables of Socrates.


Fab. How then are they said to fly up into heaven?


Eutr. Because ^aith and charity have caused them to have The wings of the
soul.
new wings. These wings did he desire, that being weary of the cottage of his
body, cried out, Who shall give unto me the wings of a Dove, that I may fly
from hence, and take my rest? for other wings the soul has none, being
incorporeall, neither has it any shape that can be seen with bodily eyes, but
those things are more certainly discerned, which we see with the eyes of our
mind. Do you believe that there is a God?


Fab. That I do most steadfastly.


Eutr. But nothing can be less seen than God.


Fab. He is seen in things created.


Eutr. In like manner is the soul seen in the actions of the How thesoule is
seen.
soul: if thou demaundest what it does in a living body, do but look upon
a dead body. When you see a man feel, see, hear, move, understand,
remember, and discourse, you do more certainly see the soul in presence,
than you do now see this same pot, for one sense may be deceived, but so
many arguments drawn from all the senses, can by no means fail.


Fab. Well then, if you cannot show me the ^oule, then describe it unto me by
certain marks, as you would describe Caesar, whom I have not seen.


Eutr. Aristotle's definition I have ready for you.


Fab. What Is that? for they say he is a very good descipherer of all things.


Eutr. The soul (says he) is An act of an Organicall and natural bod^e,
having life in power. Aristotle's definition of the soul examined.



Fab. Why does he call it an Act, rather tha^ a Journey, or a Way?


Eut. Here is no warning given to Carters, or horsemen, but the state or manner
of the soul is defined. And the act he calls the Form, the nature whereof
is to do, when the nature of any matter is to suffer: And every natural
motion of the body proceeds from the soul: and the motion of the body is
diverse.


Fab. I understand it, but why does he add Organicall?


Eut. Because the soul does nothing but by means of the instruments of the
body.


Fab. Why does he add Natural?


Eutr. Because Daedalus would counterfeit such a body, but in vain: and
therefore he adds, having life in power. Every thing receives not form, but
only such matter as is capable of form.


Fab. What if an Angel should enter into the body of a man?


Eutr. He might work indeed, but not by natural organs, or instruments of
nature: neither could he give life unto the body, the soul being away.


Fabu. Have I now the whole definition and manner of the soul?


Eutr. According to Aristotle you have.


Fab. Truly I have heard great speaking of him, as of a famous Philosopher, but
I fear, that if a centurie of wise men should so write unto me, I may charge
them with heres^e, if I may gainesay them, or freely speak my mind. Otherwise,
whatsoever he has said of the soul of man, may be said of an ass, and an ox.


Eut. Yea of a beetle, and of a snaile.


Fab. What difference then is there between the soul of a beast, and the
soul of a man?


Eut. They that say the soul is nothing else than a harmony of the qualities
of the body, do not make any great difference. For if it be so, then this
forsooth will ^ollowe, the harmony being broken, the souls of both do perish
alike. It is not reason it self surely that distinguishes the soul of a man
from the soul of a beast, but this we may say, that the soul (...) a beast
knows or vnderftandeth less than the soul of a man, even as we see some men
also to know and understand less than a beast. Es^y 1.



Fab. Surely they have but a beastly mind.


Eutr. But this you know Fabul^a, that according to the nature of the Lute,
the harmony is the sweeter.


Fab. I grant that.


Eutr. Neither does it alittle skill, of what wood and fashion the Lute be made.


Fab. And you say true, for some wood is better than some, and the fashioning
of a thing is a great matter.


E^trap. Neither are the strings made of every beasts intrales.


Fab. So I have heard.


Eut. And these strings also, through the drienesse or moisture of the air
that incloseth them, are often times shrunk up, or rotten, and by that
means will not hold the straining.


Fab. That I have seen oftener than once.


Eutr. By this then you may be able to perform no small help to your little
infant, that his mind may have an instrument well tempered, and tuned, that it
be not loose by sloth, nor too shril through wrath, nor hoarce through
drunkenness, for oftenti^es these affections are graffed in us by education and
want of good diet.


Fab. I do take your admonition in good part: but I look how you can defend
Arist^tle.


Eutr. Truly, he did but in general terms describe the soul, living,
growing and feeling. The soul giu^th life, Of the li^e of tre^s.
but it is not forthwith a living creature that l^th: for trees do both live
and wax old, and die, but they feel nothing: though some do attribute unto
them a certain kind of stupide sense: In the clifts or ioynt^ there is scarce
any sense perc^iued, but in sponge there is, w^ it is plucked off: In trees,
those that are fellers of timber do discern some since, ((...) we may believe
them) for they say, that if one do strike (...) tree with the palm of his
hand, which h^ would fell (as timber men use to do) it is the more hardly
cut down, because for fear (forsooth) it has s^runke it self, together:
but that that A very jest.
has life and sense is a living creature. And there is no let to the contrary,
but that may be v^getable, or growing, which wants sense, as do mushromes,
beetes, and colewortes, etc.


Fab. If these things do feel, or live, in any sort, if they be mou^d when
they grow ripe, what (...) that they may not be called living creatures?


Eutr. It did not seem good unto our Ancestors to have it so, and it is not
lawful for us to be wiser than our forefathers, neither is it any thing to the
matter that we have in hand.


Fab. But I can not endure, that the life of a scarabee, or beetle fly, and
the soul of a man should be all ^ne.


Eutrap. They are not all one, good woman, but after a sort, thy soul does
give life, and growing, and sense unto thy body: and so does the soul of a
scarabee in his body: for whereas the soul of a man does something which the
soul of the scarabee cannot do, the cause is in the matter, that can neither
sing nor say, because it w^nteth fit instruments for those ^ffices.


Fab. This then you say, that if the soul of a scarabee should pass into the
body of a man, it should do the same things that the soul of a man does.


Eutr. Nay nor yet the soul of an Angel (as I have showed) but there is no
difference (...) an Angel and the soul of a man, saving that the soul of
man was created to live and move in a humane body furnished with natural
instruments, and to govern the same: and in like manner the soul of a
scarabee, to move only the body of a scarabee. Angels be not created to that
end that they should give life unto bodies, but to understand without bodily
instruments.


Fab. And can not the soul of man do the same, I pray you?


Eutrapilus Yes truly, when it is parted from the body.


Fab. Belike then he is not his own man, (as they say) while he is in the
body.


Eutr. Truly no, unless something ha^pen be^de the common course of nature.


Fab. But me think, that for one soul, you have powered Obi^.
me out many souls, as one that gives life, an other that causes to grow,
another that gives sense, another that affoordeth understanding, another that
bestows memory, another that is the guider of the will, an other that
kindles anger, and another that begets lust: One had been enough for me.


Eut. One and the same soul effects diverse a^tions, and Answer.
in respect of those it has diverse surnames (as it were) as a thinking so^le,
a sensible soul, an understanding soul, etc.


Fab. I do not well understand you.


Eutr. But I will cause you to understand me, you are in A similitude.
your bed chamber a wife, in your shop a weauer of tapistry, in your ware house
a seller of tapistry, in your kitchen a cook, among your servants a mistress,
and among your children a mother, and yet notwithstanding all these, you are in
one and the same house.


Fab. So then belike the mind is in the body, as I am in my house.


Eut. Right.


Fab. But when I work in my shop, I play not the cook in my kitchen.


Eut. That is because you are not all soul, but you have a soul that carries
a body about with it, and your body cannot be in many places at once: the
soul, because it is not a compound, but a simple form, is so in the whole
body, that it is whole in every part of the body, although it cannot effect the
same thing by every part, neither can she effect the same things which she
effects in the same manner always, howsoever her instruments be affected: for
she understands and reme^breth in the brain, she is angry in the heart, she
lusts in the liver, she hearet^ in the ears, sees in the eyes, smells in
the nostrils, tastes in the palate and tongue, and feels in all the parts of
the body, that have any sinewy matter adjoining: for neither does she feel in
the hairs of the head, nor in the nails of the fingers, neither can the
lights, or the liver feel of themselves, nor peradventure the spl^ne.


Fab. Therefore it quickens and refreshes only in certain parts of the
body.


Eut. So it seems.


Fab. If one and the same soul effects all these things in one man, then it
follows that the Infant in the womb, so Whether the soul performs all her
offices in an Infant or no.
soon as it increases, which is a sign of life, it does also at the same
instant feel and understand, etc. unless perhaps at the beginning of one man
there be many souls, and afterward, (all the rest giving place) one only
does all, so that first a man shall be a plant, and then a living creature,
and last of all, a man.


Eut. That which you say seems not very absurd unto Aristotle: but to us it
is more probable, that together with the life is infused a reasonable soul, or
a soul endued with reason, but that which as a little fire, drenched out of
measure with abundance of moist matter, cannot as yet show forth his force and
strength.


Fab. The soul therefore is bound to that body which it rul^th, and moves,
is it not?


Eut. No otherwise then a Snaile is to her shell, which she carries about with
her.


Fab. She moves her shel indeed, yet so as she is also therwithall moved
her-selfe: as the master of a ship turns the ship which way he lists, but
in the mean time he is also moved with his ship.


Eut. Yea, or rather as a Squirrell wheeleth about the rolling Cage, and in the
mean time is moveable him self.


Fab. And so the soul both affects and is affected again.


Eut. Truly yea, as touching her operations.


Fab. Then belike, in respect of nature, the soul of a Blackm^re, is equal
with the soul of king Solomon.


Eut. True, there is no ab^urditie in that.


Fab. And so are Angels alike too, since they want matter, or material
substance, which (as you say) is the cause of inequality.


Eut. We have Philosophy enough n^w, rather let Divines canuas these points,
and let us go to the matter that we began withal. If you will be a whole
mother, look^ The duty of a mother.
your self to the little body of your tender Infant, that so, after that he
has unfolded himself of those vapors, which are as sparkles to the mind, it
may use good and fit instruments. So often as you hear your child crying
like a child, think with your self that he does instantly require it at your
hands. When you see upon your breast, these two as it were swelling fountains
of milk, and flowing of their own accord^ with that milkie liquour, then
think how nature does admonish you of your duty. Otherwise, when your child
shall learn to speak, and in his pleasant and pretty stammering language,
shall call you mother, with what face can you hear this of him to whom you,
have denied your pappes, and have turned over to a hired papp^ even as if you
had put it out to a goat or a sheep. When he shall be able to speak and know
good from evil, what if he should call you, not mother, but half mother? It
may be you will try what the rod will do^: but she is scarce half a mother,
which refuses to nurse that which she has brought forth. The better part of
mother-hood is the nur^ing of the tender babe. For it is not nursed only with
milk, but also with the sweet scent or smell of the mothers body, it craves
the same liquour that it was familiarly acquainted withal before, which it
su^ked in the body, and whereby it grew together. And I am of this mind, that
in children, wit is corrupted by the nature of the Milk which they suck; even
as we see in plants and fruits, their nature is changed, and altered, even by
the moisture of the earth which does nourish them. Do you think this Proverb
came A Proverb too true.
of nothing: This naughtiness he sucked in with his nurses milk?

Truly, I am not of the Grecians mind, who were wont to say, that nurses do
signify one that is ill fed: for they put a little chawed meat into the
Infants mouth, and swallow the greatest part thems^lues. And therefore she has
not brought forth truly, that does presently cast away that she has
travailed of; for this is not kindly to bring forth, but to come before the
time. And unto such kind of mothers may very (...), a (...), i. a non
seruand^.
well agree in my opinion that deriuation which the Grecians have given of the
Greek word which signifies mother. And that is (...) which they say comes
of (...), that is, mother of not saving: for to take altogether a hired Nurse
for a poor tender Infant, as yet warm from the mother, is a kind of
exposing, or casting it forth to hazard.


Fab. I should yield unto that you say, if there were not chosen such a woman
in whom nothing is wanting that should be in a nurse.


Eut. As if (forsooth) it were no matter what milk the tender Infant do suck,
or what slauer it swaloweth down with his meat that she has chawed and
champed before. But imagine that such a nurse may be gotten, as I know not where
such a one can be had, do you think that there is any which possibly can
digest all the weariness and irkesomnesse that is in nursing as the mother
can? Is there any that can brook all the foul hands, the sittings, the
watchings, the cryings, the diseases, and diligent care of preserving the
child, (which can neu^r b^e enough) as the mother can? If there can be found
any whose love is equal with the mothers love, then may her care also be
equal with the mothers care.

And why may not that also come to pass, that your son may love you but to
the halfes, whenas that native love is as it were distracted, and divided
between two mothers? neither can you be carried with the like natural affection
toward your son: As he grows in years, so he shall be more unwilling to obey
your commandments, and your care will be the colder toward him, in whose
behavior perhaps you shall see his nurse. And the chiefest step to learning,
is the mutual love that is between the teacher and the schaller. Therefore,
if he shall loose nothing of that sweet savor which natural affection
yields, you shall the more easily drop into him the precepts of living well:
For here the mothers help is not small, even in this respect, that she will
teach him that, which both for matter and manner, will be most pleasing, and in
all points to be imitated.


Fab. Now I perceive, that it is not so easy a matter to be a mother, as it is
commonly supposed to be.


Ent. If you do not bl^ue me, b^holde Saint Paul spe^ks plainly unto you,
(speaking of the woman he says) she 1. Tim. 2. 15.
shall be saved by bearing of children.


Fab. Then they shall be saved which she bear^th.


Eut. Not so, but he adds, if her children continue in the faith and love,
with holiness and modesty, so that you have not yet done the part of a
mother, unless you first frame aright his tender body, and then his mind as
tender as that with good education.


Fab. But this is not in the mothers power, that the children shall continue in
faith and godliness.


Eut. It may be so, but for all that, vigilant admonition is of such force,
that Paul thinks it to be laid to the mothers charge, if their children
degenerate from godly courses. And to conclude, if you shall but that do which
lies in you to perform, God will add his help unto your diligence.


Fab. Truly Eutrapilus your speech has persuaded me, if you can in like manner
pe^swade my friends, and my husband.


Eut. That will I undertake, so that you will help me with your cons^nt.


Fab. That I do assure you I will.


Eut. But may I not see your child?


F^b. Yes, that you shall most willingly. Do you hear Syrisca? Call hither
the nurse, and bid her bring the Infant with her.


Eut. A very fine child, the saying is, that the first trial must have a
pardon, but you upon the first trial, have showed even the perfection of Art.


Fab. It is no graven Image, that it should need any art.


Eut. True, for it is a molten Image, but howsoever it be, it fell out m^st
happily, I would that those Images which you make in your tapistrie work, may
have no worse success.


Fab. But you on the other side are better at painting than begetting of
children.


Eut. So it seemed good unto nature, to fit and match every man's turn: how
careful is nature that nothing may perish; see how she has represented two
persons in this one child; the nose and eyes resemble the father; the
fore-heade and chinne the mother. Can you commit such precious pledge to
another bodies trust? Me think they are double cruel that are able to do it:
for that is not done only with the peril of the Infant that is put away, but
also with their own peril, because the milk which is corrupted by change,
does oftentimes breed most perilous diseases. And therefore it falls out,
that while they provide for the fashion or beauty of one body, they neglect
the lives of two bodies, and while they go about to prevent sudden old age,
they cast themselves into an untimely death; but I will go see what I can do
with your husband and friends.


Fab. I pray God you may prevail.


A pleasant Dialogue of a Popish Pilgrimage: notably setting forth the glorious
felicity and admirable utility of the Catholic Religion.
The speakers names.
Menedemus a Philosopher. Ogygius, one of Thebes.
Mean. WHat news is this? Do I not see my neighbor Ogygius that has not bin
seen this six months full? The speech was, that he was dead: sure it is he,
^nlesse I be much deceived. I will go and salute him: God save you Ogygius.


Ogyg. And you also Menedemus.


Men. What region has sent you hither so safe? For the rumor went here, that
you were dead.


Ogyg. I thank God I was so well all the time of my being abroad, that I was
never better in all my life.


Men. Thus you ever prove such spreaders of rumors to be but vain men: but
what manner of apparel have you gotten there? Me think you are beset with
pearls, or wilkes like Gutter-tiles, you are full of Images, both of Ti^ne and
Lead, you are trimly decktindeed, with straw Garlands, and Serpents Eggs upon
your sleeves.


Ogyg. Oh sir, I have visited Saint Iame^ of Compostella and St James of
Compost^.
from thence I went to visit, or rather, to reuisite, that holy Uirgin, by the
sea coa^t, called our Lady of Walsingham, that is in so great account in
England: for about some three year (...) since I did visit her before.


Men. For your pleasure sake, I think.


Ogyg. Nay, for religion sake.


Men. This religion I think you learned, when you learned Greek.


Ogyg. No, good sir, but my wives mother bound her self by a vow, that if her
daughter did bring forth a son alive, I should go in mine own person, and
salute St. James of Compostella, and give him thanks for it.


Men. Did you salute the Saint only in your own name, and your mother in law?


Ogyg. Yea, in the name of all my family.


Men. Surely I think your family should have done even as well, if you had
never gone to salute Saint James: but I pray what answer did he make you, when
you thanked him for your s^nne?


Ogyg. None at all: but when I gave him my present, he seemed to smile, and a
little to nod with his head, and withal, reached me this hollow shell.


Me. Why does he bestow such gifts rather tha^ other things?


Ogyg. Because he has abundance of them, the se^ being so nea^.


Mean. A good saint indeed, which does both the part of a Midwife to women in
child bed, and is so bountifnll vnt^ strangers. But what new kind of vowing
call you this, that one that is idle should enjoin another to labor? If you
should make a vow, that if you should speed w^ll in some things that you
^oe about, I should fast twice in a week. Do you think that I must do that
which you have vowed?


Ogyg. I do not think you would do so, although you had vowed it in your
own name, for you make but a sport of it to mock the Saints, or to besmeare
their mouths: but she is my mother, and I must obey her, you know the
affections of women, and it stood me upon.


Mean. If you had not performed her vow, what had been the danger?


Ogyg. I confess that the Saint could not have sued me at law for it, bu^
hereafter he might pe^happes give but deaf ear to my prayers, or send some
calamity upon my family and never make words of the matter: you know the
fashion of princes and great persons, when they ^ake against one.


Mean. I pray tell me, how does that good man, James, how does he?


Ogyg. Much celder and poorer than he was wont to be.


M^. What Is the cause, his old ag^? I think he be very old.


Ogyg. Away tri^ler, away, you know that Saints wax not old, but this new
persuasion that is gone over all the world, is the cause that he is not so
often visited as he was wont: and if any chance to come unto him, they salute
him only, but they give him li^e or nothing. thinking that that money were
better bestowed ^on the poor fo^s, yea, and the^ will not stick to say so
too.


Men^. Oh wicked p^rswasion!


Ogyg. Alas the more is the pity. And therefore so great an ^postle, which
was wont to glister all with gold and prec^ous stones, now stands like a
wodden thing having scarce tallow candle be^re him.


Men. That's great pity: but if it be as I hear, I promise you it is very like
that all other Saints will be served with the same sauce.


Ogyg. It Is true indeed, ^r there is an ^pistle (...) which the virgin Mary her
self has written of this matter.


Mean. What Mary is that?


Og. She that has her surname of a stone.


Men. If I be not decein^d, it is she that is amongst the people of Belgi^.


Og. The very same.


Men. To whom did she write?


Og. The epistle it self shows that.


Men. By whom was it sent?


Og. No doubt, by an Angel, which when he had written it, set it up in a
pulpit where he preaches, to whom it was sent: And because you shall suspect
no fraud in the matter, you shall see the Epistle that was written with the
Angels own hand.


Mean. Do y^u so well know that Angels hand that is secretary to the virgin
Mary?


Og. Why not?


Mean. How do you know it?


Og. I have read Bedes Epitaph, which was given by an Angel, the forms of the
letters do agree in all points. And I have read a quittance sent to Saint
Giles: they all agree, is not this sufficient proof of the matter?


Mean. May I not see it?


Og. Yes, if you will promise me to be secret.


Mean. As secret as a stone.


Og. And there be stones nowadayes that are infamous in this respect, that they
can keep nothing close.


Men. Th^n you shall speak to one that is dumb if you trust not stones.


Og. Upon that condition I will read it unto you, hearken with ^oth your cares.


Men. So^ I will.


Og. The Epistle of the virgin Mary.
MAry the mother of Jesus, to Glaucoplutus sendes greeting. Whereas you
following Luther do earnestly persuade men, that it is more than need to pray
unto Saints. Know, that in this respect you are much in my favor: for until
of late I was even tyr^d with the wicked complaints and lamentations of mortal
men. To one woman they came still for every thing, as if my son should be
still an infant, because he is so painted in my bosom, and as if he should
still be at his mothers beck, and as if he durst deny me nothing that I
should demand of him, for fear (forsooth) that I should deny him my teats
when he were a thirst. And many times they crave those things of me being a
virgin, which a shamefast young man durst scarce demand of a common harlot, and
which I am ashamed to commit to writing. In the mean time the Merchants Factor
being boun^ for Spain, commits to my charge the honesty of his concubine: And
the holy Nun (forsooth) having cast away her veil, and ready to run away,
commits unto me the fame of her integrity, which she is determined to
prostitute and make common: The wicked soldier makes a pitiful cry unto me,
and when he is conducted to the slaughter house to filch and pi^er, then he
cries, O blessed virgin, give me a good booty. ^hen comes the ^icer and
gamster, and he cries, favor me O blessed saint, and thou shall have part of
our winnings. And if the dice do not favor them, then they term me with
reproaches, and curse me most ^itterly. The covetous worldling that exposes
himself to filthy lucre, he cries, send me a plentiful increase. If I deny
them any thing, straitway they exclaim against me, that I am not the mother of
pity. The prayers of some others are as foolish as impious: the unmarried
woman cries, Mary, send me a fair and rich husband: the married woman cries,
give me pretty children: she that is great Be^ C^
calls to me for a happy deliverance: the old woman cries out unto me, that
she may live long without the cough and thirst: the d^ating old man he cries,
let me be young again: the philosopher he cries, let me be able to resolve
hard questions: the priest cries, send me a fat benefice: the bishop cries,
keep my church for me: the mariner cries, give me a prosperous voyage: the
master of the ship cries, show me thy son before I die: the courtier
cries, gra^nt I may make a true confession at the hour of my death: the
country man he cries, send us rain in due season: the country woman cries,
keep my heird of cattle, and my poultry in safety: if they do not speed of
their suit, by and by I am cruel. If I send them to my son, they tell me,
that what I will, he will. Must I that am a woman alone, and a virgin, give
attendance to sailors, to soldiers, to merchants, to dicers, to married, and
unmarried, to women in child*bed, to captains, to kings, and to clownes. But
that which I have said is nothing to that which I have endured, but with these
affairs I am now nothing so much troubled as I was wont to be: in which
respect I should surely give you great thanks if this commodity did not bring
with it a greater discommoditie. I have now more ease, but No commodity witl
out a discommodity.
less honor and wealth than I was wont to have, I was w^nt to be saluted in
this manner, O Queen of heaven, Lady of the world, now I scarce hear Aue
Maria, and that but of a few neither. I was wont to be clad in gold and
precious stones: I had golden gifts, and set with pearls brought unto me, now
I have scarce half a cloak to cover me withal, and that also gnawne with
mice: my yearly revenues will hardly maintain a poor miserable house,
wherein to light a tallow candle: but these things yet might somewhat be borne,
if it were not reported that you go about greater matters: your shooting (as
they say) is at this, that whatsoever was given to the Saints, you would take
away from all religious houses. I charge you again and again, take heed what
you do: there is not wanting unto other saints wherewith to be revenged of
the injuries that shall be ^ffred unto them. If Peter be cast out of the temple,
he can shut heaven gate against you. Paul has a sword: Bartholomew a knife,
Wil^iam is all armed under a Monks habit, not without a grievous lance: but
how will you be able to ^eale against George, who is both a horseman, and armed
from top to toe, both with a spea^e and a ^erible sword? Neither is (...)
unarmed, for he has the holy fire. And the rest have either their weapons, or
their euilles, wherewith they can meet whom they list. And as for me, though
I be unarmed, yet for all that, you shall not cast me out, unless you will
also cast out my Son, whom^ I hold in my arms. I do not mean to be parte^
from him: either you shall thrust us both out, or leave us both in, unless you
will have a Temple without a Christ. These things I thought good to let you
understand. Now bethink your self of an answer, for surely this matter does
much trouble me. From our stone-house the Calends of August, in the year
after my Sons sufferings 1524.

I the blessed virgin have subscribed hereunt^ with mine ow^e hand.





Men^. Truly this is a menac^g, etc. terrible Epistle. I think Gla^coplutus
will take heed what he does.


Og. If he be wise.


Mean. Why did not that good man Saint James write to him of this matter?


Og. I cannot tell, unless it be because he dwells so far off, and nowadaies
almost all letters are intercepted.


Mean. How came thou into England?


Og. The wind being so prosperous did inuit me thither, and I had passed my
promise before to that Saint by the Sea coast, that after two years I would
see her again.


Mean. What suit had you to her?


Og. No new matter, but all ordinary, that my family might be in health, that
my wealth might increase, and that I might enjoy a long and happy life in this
world, and everlasting happiness in the world to come.


Menedemus. Could not our virgin mother at Antwerpe have done all this for
you as well as she at Walsingham? her temple at Antwerpe is far more
renowned than that by the sea coast.


Og. I do not deny but she can, but in other places she gives ^ther things,
either because it seems good unto her so to do, or else, for that (as
indeed she is a kind woman) she may apply her self to our desires.


Me. Of S. James I have heard often: but I pray thee now The Lady of W^am, he^
dominion described.
describe unto me the dominion of that Saint by the sea coast.


Ogy That will I do even as briefly as I can: her name is most famous all
England over, neither can you hardly find any one in that Island, that does
look for any good success in his business, unless he do once a year
visit her with some pre^ent.


Men. Whereaway is she?


Ogy. At the furthest part of England between the North and the West, not
above three miles from the sea. It is a town that has little else to live
upon, then of the great tumult of guests that daily r^sort thither in
pilgrimage. There is a college of canons that are called R^gular, a middle sort
between Monks and Secular Priests.


Men You tell me now of such as live as well in the water, as on the la^d, as
the Beuer.


Ogy. Yea, and so does the Crocodile: but to leave this cauelling, I will tell
you in three words that which you would know. In things that they like not,
they are Canons, but in things that favor them, they are Monks.


Men. T^is is a r^ddle, I understand it not.


Ogy. Then I will use a mathematical demonstration. If A Riddle.
the Pope shall chance to excommunicate all the ^onks, then they are Canons,
and no Monks: But if the (...) shall license all Monks to marry, then they
are Monks, and (...) Canons.


Men. O strange privileges! I would they would take my wife too.


Ogy. But to the matter. This Coll^dge has scarce an^ other revenues to live
upon, but wh^t comes by the liberality o^ this Uirgine: for their greater
rewards and gifts are kept in store. But if there be any money, or any thing of
small value given, that goes to the maintenance of the whole College, and
their ^resident, who^ they call the Prior.


Men. A very good life.


Ogy. There is no fault found with it: they grow richer by their devout piety,
than by a yearly rent. Their Church is beautiful and costly, wherein does not
dwell the Uirgine her self, but for honor sake that she has yielded unto her
Son. She has a Chapel by her self, as she is placed at the right hand of
her Son.


Men. Right hand? Which way then looks her Son?


Ogy. Well remembered, when he looks toward the West, then she has the right
hand; but when he turns himself to the East, then she has the left hand: yet
she does not dwell here neither, for her house is not yet finished, and the
place very windy on every side, the doors open, and windows open, and the
Ocean sea, the father of the winds, is hard by.


Men. That is very hard: where then does she keep?


Ogy. In that Church that is not yet finished, there is a very narrow Chapel,
floored with bordes very straight on both sides, and a very little door to let
in pilgrims. There is almost no light, but candle light of tapers and wax
candles, a most pleasant smell.


Men. All this is agreeable to their religion.


Ogy. Nay Menedemus, if you did see it, you would say it were a seat of Saints
indee^e, all things do so glister with gold and silver, and pearls, and
precious stones.


Men. You do almost persuade me to go thither.


Ogy. You would not repent you of your journey.


Men. Is there any holy oil there?


Ogy. Ah fool, that oil is to be found dropping only from the scpulchres of
Saints, as of St. Andrew and St. Ca^herine, and no where else. Mary is not yet
buried.


Men. I was in an error I c^nfesse, but make an end of your tale.


Ogy. That their religion may be spread the further abroad, other things are
showed in other places of their College.


Me. And peradventure that their gains may be the greater, according to that
common saying; By my hands the prey is quickly gotten.


Ogy. And in every place there are Mistagogues (as they Mistagogu^.
are called) that is, some special persons to show relics, and to interpret
their mysteries and ceremonies to strangers.


Men. Are they of the canons?


Ogy. No, they are not used to that end, for fear that by occasion of their
religion, they should be drawn from their religion: and while they should
attend upon a Uirgine, themselves should lose their own virginity. Only in
the inward Chapel, which I call the bedchamber of the blessed Uirgin, there
attends a certain canon at the Altar.


Men. To what end?


Ogy. To receive and to keep that which is given.


Me. Do they give that are not willing to give?


Ogy. Not so: but many ^or very shame are forced to give when they see one
stand by, which would give nothing if there were no body, or at least they
would not give so much as they do, when there is one by to see what they give.


Men. This is even the right nature of man, and that which my self have
experience o^.


Ogy. Yea more: there be some that be so devoted to the most holy Uirgin, that
when they make as if they laid down some That is plain (...).
thing upon her Altar, they can very nimbly take away that which was laid down
by another.


Me. Suppose that none were by, it is marvel that the blessed Uirgin her self
do not presently thunder against such guests.


Ogy. Why should the Uirgine do that rather then God himself, whom they fear
not to spoil of all his ornaments; yea, and to dig through his Church walls
for them?


Men. I cannot tell whether I should won^er more at their and aciousnesse, or
at his lenity.


Ogy. Therefore toward the North side, there is a certain gate, (not
belonging to the Church) but a ^uce or a wall, that keeps all the outward
yeard adjoining to the Church. And that has a very small portall or wicket,
such as you see in Noblemens great gates, that he which will enter, must be
enforced to put in, first his leg; and so to expose that to danger, and then
his head.


Men. Truly it is not safe for a thief to enter at such a door.


Ogy. You say true. The Mistagogue told me of a certain ri^er, who on a time,
sitting on his horse, rode through this door, and so escaped his enemies
hands, who followed him at the hard heels. There the m^erable man dispairing
of himself* he suddenly commended his state to the blessed Uirgine, which was
in the next room: for he was determined to fly to her Altar for refuge, if
the great gates had been open. And behold a very strange thing, suddenly the
horseman A (...), but ^o li^.
was within the Church walls, though the gates were not opened, and his enemy
stood raging and fretting without, but all in vain.


Men. But did he make this admirable tale of any credit?


Ogy. Yes that he did.


Men. That was not so easily done, you being a Philosopher and a wise man.


Ogy. He showed me nailed upon the door, a copper plate, with that horse-mans
picture upon it that was so preserved, and in the same manner of apparel,
that then was used in England, and such as we see upon ancient pictures, which
(if they lie not) do show plainly that Barbers and Tailors in those days,
were not much set by.


Men How so?


Ogy. Because he was bearded like a goat, and all his apparel was without
any plait, no bigger then his body, and sat close to his body.


Men. Now there is no doubt to be made of that matter.


O^y. Under the threshold was an iron grate, which none could, go upon but
only footmen, for it was not meet that any horse should trample upon that
place, after the former rider had consecrated it to the blessed Uirgine.


Men. No reason why he should.


Ogy. Here toward the East is a Chapel full of strange sights, thither go
I, where we met with another Mistagogue: there we prayed alittle. By and by was
^hewed us the joint of a man's finger, the bigge^t of the three, I kissed it*
then I demanded whose relics those were; he said, Saint P^ters* What, the
Apostle? he said, yea. I looked upon the hugeness of the finger, which ^eemed
to come of some Giant: I said, that S. Peter by that finger, should seem to be
a man of wond^rfull great body. At which word, one of my fellows burst forth
into a loud laughter, which grieved me not alitle: for if he had kept his
countenance, the Mistagogue had showed us all his reliqu^s, but we pleas^d him
again with a few groates. Before that little house was a ^oofe or covering,
which he said, (in winter time, when all was covered over with snow) was on a
sudden brought thither from far: under that roof were two wells full to
the top, the springs whereof, (they say) are consecrated to the blessed
Uirgine, the water is very cold, and good against the pain in the head and
stomach.


M^n. If cold water can help the head and stomach, then hereafter shall oil
quench fire.


Ggy. O good sir, you hear of a miracle: it is no miracle for cold water to
quench thirst.


Men. And this is surely one part of a ^able.


Ogy. He affirms, that that fountain did suddenly No lie.
spring out of the ground, at the commandment of the Uirgin Mary. I diligently
observing every thing, demanded of him, how many years since that little
cotage was carried thither: he said, many ages since. Otherwise (said I) the
walls do not look as if they were old: he did not gainsay it: nor these
wooden pillars (quoth I) he denied not but that they were lately set up, and
the thing was plain. Then said I, and this same thatch of reed seems to be
newer than all the rest: he did grant it. And these same beams and rafters
which bear up the thatch, seem not to be many years old: he did also
grant that to be true. And when I had now examined every part of that cabine, I
said unto him: how then does it appear, that this house was man age^ since
brought from afar?


Men. And I pray how did the Mistagogue vnti^ this knotte?


Ogygius Forsoothe he presently showed us a very old Bears skin, fastened
to the rafters, and in a manner derided our dullness and slewnesse to believe
so manifest a proof: so we being persuaded, craved pardon for our unbelief,
and so turned our selves to behold the heavenly ^he blessed Vi^gins milk^.
milk of the blessed Uirgin.


Men. Such a son, such a mother: h^e has left us so much of his blood upon
earth, as is wonderful, and she so much of her milk, as is sc^rce credible to
come o^ one woman, having but one child, though the infant had never sucked
any of it away.


O. And so they reason ab^ut the Cross whereupon Christ died, which is showed
in so many places, but privately, that if the pieces thereof were brought
together, they would load a ship: and yet Christ carried it all himself.


Men. And does not this also seem a wonder unto you?


Ogy. Somewhat strange perhaps, but no wonder, because the Lord being
omnipotent, is able to augment it at his pleasure.


Me. You make a good construction of the matter: but I fear that many such
things are devised but for lucre sake.


O. I suppose that God would not endure any that should so abuse him.


Mean. Yes surely, seeing as both mother and son, and father, and holy ghost,
(as you said) are robbed by sacrilegious persons, and yet in the mean time,
they seem to be so little moved at the matter, that neither by a beck nor
making any noise they will make those wicked persons afraid. So great is the
patience of the godhead.


O. So it is indeed, but hear the rest: That milk is kept upon a high Altar,
in the midst of which altar, stands Christ, and for honor sake, his mother
stands at his right hand, for that milk does represent his mother.


Men. Th^n it is to be ^eene.


O. Yea, but ^hut up in a crystal glass.


Men. What, is it liquid?


O. What talk you of liquid, for that which was milked above ^ue hundred
years since: it is hardened, you would think it to be chalk bruised and
tempered with the white of an egg.


Men. Why do^ they not show it naked?


O. Lest the Uirgins milk should be profaned with men's kisses.


Menedemu^ You say well, for there be some I think whose lips are neither
clean nor chaste: but go on.


Ogy. So soon as the Mistagogue saw us, he put ^n a surplice, and his stole
about his neck, and very devoutly kneeled down, and prayed, that do^e, he
reached us that sacred milk to kiss, and we very devoutly fell down at the
foot of the Altar, and having first saluted Christ, we called upon the
Uirgine Mary, with a short prayer that we had provided of purpose for her in
these words.

Uirgin mother, which have m^rited with thy virginean breast to suck thy son
Jesus, the Lord of heaven and earth: our desire is, that we being cleansed with
his blood, may grow to that happy and reasonable infancy, which being void of
all malice, fraud, and guile, does daily desire the milk of the Evangelical
doctrine, vnt^ll we come to a perfect man, and the fullness of Christ, whose
blessed fellowship thou inioyest for ever, with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
Amen.


Men. A good prayer truly, if it had been made to the right party: but what
said she?


O. They seemed both to bow unto us, unless my sight failed me: for the holy
milk s^ed to leap alittle, an^ the holy sacrament seemed to shine somewhat
brighter then before. In the mean time, the Mistagogu^ came unto us, very
silent, and reached us a little table to write on, such as the Germans offer
which take tole bridges.


Men. Truly I have oftentimes cursed those same polling tables, when I have
gone through Germany. There was a sposing quest^on indeed.



O. Well, we gave him some gr^, which ^e offered to the Uirgin. By and by I
demand^d of him as ^ly as I could, by an interpreter skilful in their language,
and a young man of a smooth and eloquent tongue, (I think his name was To: Al^ffe)
by what arguments it might be proved, that this was the milk of the bl^ssed
Uirgine. Which I did truly with an honest mind, that so I might be able to
stop the mouths of ^uch as are wont to laugh at all these things as fables. At
the first, the Mistagogue or Usher of the relics, with a lowering ^ountenance
held his peace. I bade the youth to urge it still, but v^ry mod^stly, which
indeed he performed very s^oothely: insomuch, that if he had entreated the
Mother her self with the same words, and she lying in child bed* she could
not have taken it in i^ part. But the Mistagogue, as if he had been inspired
with some certain kind of godhead, beholding as with staring eyes, (and as it
were with horro^ ex^ating a blasphemous speech) said; What need you ask such
questions, when you have an authentical table? And he se^d altogether a^ if he
would cast us out as (...), if the g^oats had not somewhat asswag^d his fury.


Men. What did you in the mean time?


Ogy. What think you? Even as (...) we had been stricken with a club, or some
thunder bolt, we slunke away, humbly craving pardon for our boldn^sse. From
thence we went to another little cabine, the bl^ssed Uirgines l^dging: as ^ee
were going thither, a certain relique-mast^r of the inferior sort of them,
shows himself, and beh^ld us, as if he were desiruus to know us: when we had
gone a little furth^r, another met us, and in like manner sta^ed upon us: by
and by, the third.


Men. It may be they were desirous to take your picture.


Ogy. But I thought ^arre (...).


Men. What did you think ^ pray you?


Ogy. Mary I was afraid, that some sacrilegious person had secretly stol^n away
some thing o^ o^r Ladies (...), and that they suspect^d me for the matter.
Therefore, when I come into the Chapel in this manner, I salut^d the Uirgin^
mother; O the only mother and Uirgin^ amongs^ women^ most happy mother, most
pure Uirgine, now w^ that are impure, do visit thee that art pure, and with
our poor pre^ents w^ do^ you (...): our desire is, that thy son ^ould grant
that we imitating thy most holy manners, may be count^d worthy through the grace
of the holy spirit, spiritually to conceive him in the bowels of our mind, and
having conceived him, never to loose him. Amen. And withal having kisse^ the
altar, I laid down certain groates and went my way.


Men. What did the virgin? did she not by a beck signify unto you, that your
prayer was heard?


Ogyg. The light was very small (as I said) and she stood in the dark at the
right side of the Altar: but lastly I was so cast down with the speech of the
former Mystagogue, that I durst not look up.


Men. Therefore the success you had in this pilgrimage was not very good.


Ogyg. Yes, most joyful.


Men. Now you have revived me: for before, my heart was even fallen down into
my knees, as your Hom^r speaks.


Ogyg. After dinner we went again to the Church.


Men. Durst you, being suspected of sacrilege?


Ogyg. It may be so: but I did not suspect my self, and a good conscience
fears nothing. And the desire I had to see that same table whereunto the
Mystagogue referrd us, drawn thither, and after long seeking we found it, but
set up so high that every body could not read it. And I have such eyes, that I
can neither be said to be sharpe-sighted, nor yet stark blind. In the mean
time, Aldrise read, I conterfeyted him with mine eyes, as if I did read,
scarce trusting him in so w^ightie a matter.


Men. Was then all your doubting shaken off?


Ogyg. I was even ashamed of my self, that had made any doubt of the matter,
the whole matter was so plainly laid before our eyes, the name, the place, and
the whole matter in order as it was done. To be short, nothing was omitted.
There was a godly man borne at Paris, they call him William, who as he is
otherwise, so in this especially religious, for searching the whole world for
the Relics of Saints. He having travailed many Countries, and seen very
many Monasteries, and Churches, at last went to Constantinople: for this
Williams brother was a Bishop there. This Bishop, when when he saw his brother
William preparing to return home again, told him of a certain holy virgin,
which had some of the Uirgin Mary's Milk: and that he were a very happy man,
if either for love or money, or by any skill, he could obtain a portion of it:
for all the other Relics which hitherto he had gotten were nothing in
comparison of this holy milk. There Will. could not be quiet till he had begd
half that milk. Having that treasure he thought himself richer than Croesus
And as wise as Wiltams c^e, that went nine mile to suck a Bull.



Men. And why not, and truly beyond all hope.


Ogyg. Well he goes directly home with his milk, but by the way he fell sick.


Men. See how nothing in humane affairs is happy long, nor in any place.


Ogyg. When he saw in what danger h^ was, he secretly sent for a Frenchman, a
most faithful companion with him in his pilgrimage; and very devoutly
requiring secrecy, commits the holy milk unto him, with this condition, that
if he come safe home, he shall set that Treasure upon the Altar of the
blessed Uirgine which is worshipped at Paris, in the great Church, that has
the River Senion running on both sides of it: which River seems also for
honor of the Uirgin Marie, of his own accord to turn out of his right
course. To be brief, William is buried, his friend plyeth A religious ^iuer.
homeward, and he also sickneth by the way. And despairing of himself, he
commits this milk to an English man, and binds him with many obtestations to
perform that he should have done. The Frenchman dies, the Englishman takes
the milk, and places it upon the Altar, the Canons of the church being
present, which then were called Regulars, of them he obtained half the milk,
that he carried into England, and by the motion of the spirit Either of God, or
the devil.
, he bestowed it upon that blessed lady of Walsing ham.


Men. Certainly this tale hangs well together.


Ogy. Yea, and to take away all doubt, the names of the Bishops were
subscribed, by consent of the mayor part, which bestowed so much of that milk
as they could give out of their own allowance, only to re^resh poor
Pilgrims that came unto them not empty handed.


Men. How much was that?


Ogy. As much as would refresh them forty days.


Men. When they have once given away all their allowance, have they any more to
give?


Ogy. No, they cannot give al away, for it does continually run, and is
continually full: not as Danaus his fatal tubbe: ^or though that be still
filled, yet is it still empty: but here if you always draw, yet there is
never the less in the tub That stands with good rea son so long as chalk
pits, and whites of eggs last, or cowes, etc.
.


Men. If they should give forty days milk to a hundred thousand men, shall
every one have so much?


Ogy. Yea, so much.


Men. What if they that receive forty days milk before dinner, should come
again for so much more before supper, is it there for them?


Ogy. Yea, if they come ten times in an hour.


Men. I would I had such a cow, or else that my casket were of that humor,
surely I wo^ld not wish to have above three groates in it, if they would
always run in that manner.


Ogy. Nay, rather wish that it might always run gold, you shall as soon have
the one as the other: but now to my table again. This was further added, that
our Ladies milk which is showed in many other places, is venerable enough: but
this is more venerable then all other, because the other is wrung out of
stones, bnt this ^owed from the very breasts of the virgin her self.


Men. How did that appear?


O. Oh, the virgin said so that gave the milk.


Men. And peradventure St. Bernard told her so.


O. So I think.


Men. He whose luck it was when he was aged to suck milk out of the same
breasts that the child Jesus sucked of, and therefore I marvel why he is said
to flow with honey rather than with milk: but how is that the virgins milk,
that came not from the virgins breasts?


Og. That also came out of her breasts, but by chance, as she was milked, it
fell upon a stone, whereupon she sat, and afterward by the will of God, it was
multiplied, as you heard before.


Men. Well, go on with your tale.


Og. After all this, while we were making ready to depart, and in the mean time
looking here and there, to see if there were any other thing worth the seeing,
we met again with Mystagogues or Relique-maisters, who looked askew at us,
they point at us with the finger, they come running toward us: then they go
away, then they come running again, they nodde at us, and they seemed as if
they were about to call us, if they had been hardy enough.


Men. Were you not then afraid?


Og. No surely, but I turned my face toward them, smiling, and beholding
them, as if I would have some of them to call me. At last one came and asked me
my name, I told him Edo then he asked me, if I were not he that about some two
years before had set up an Hebrew table concerning vows. I said, ye.


Mean. Do you write Hebrew?


Og. No, but whatsoever they understand not, they call it Hebrew. By and by
came the protos hust^ros of their college, as I take it.


Mean. What name of dignity is this? have they not an (...).
Abbot?


Og. No, because they have no skill in Hebrew.


Men. Nor bishop?


Og. No, they have no bishop, because the blessed Uirgin is not rich enough to
buy him a Crosier and a Miter.


Mean. They have a President at least, have they not?


Og. No neither, for that is a name of dignity, and not of sanctimony: and
therefore the college of Canons do reject the name of Abbot, but the name of
President they like well.


Mean. But a Protos hysteros I never heard of before.


Og. Truly you are very ignorant in your grammar.


Men. I have read of Hysteroproton amongst the tropes and figures of Rhetorike,
which signifies a naming of that first which should be last.


Og. You have hit it, he which is next to the Prior, or first, is the latter
prior.


Mean. The Sub-prior you mean.


Og. The very same: he saluted me very courteously, and told me how many did
sweat about the reading of those verses, how many spectacles were wiped, and
all in vain, when any old doctor of Divinity, or law came thither, he was
brought to those verses: one said they were Ara^icke letters, another said
they were counterfeit. At last, there was one found that could read the title,
for that was written in latin, and in great roman letters t the rest were
greek verses written in capital greek letters, which at a blush look like
great roman letters, I being requested, showed the meaning of them in latin,
word for word, they would have given me some small reward for my pains, but
I constantly refused it, affirming that there was nothing so hard, but I wo^ld
do it for the blessed virgins sake most willingly: yea if she would command me
to carry letters for her to Jerusalem.


Men. What need you be her scribe? when she has so many Angels attending
her, both to write for her, and to carry letters for her.


O. Well, the Sub prior plucked out of a purse, a fragment of wood, cut off from
a block whereupon the virgin mother was seen to fit, the marvelous smell it
had, did verily argue it to be a very sacred thing, I took it of him as a most
excellent gift, and bowing my body bare headed, after I had with great
reverence kissed it, three or four times, I put it into the purse again.


Me. May I not see it?


O. Yes, you may see it, but if yo^ be not fasting, or if you mean to lie with
your wife at night, I would not wish you to see it.


Me. Why? show it man, there is no danger.


O. Then behol^e it.


Me. O happy man


O. Sir, I would you should know it, that I will not give this little fragment
for all the gold in Tagus river. I mean Secreta virginis.
to set it in gold, and then put it in cristall. When the Sub-prior saw my
behauior to be so religious in taking that little gift, and judging thereby
that I was worthy to have greater matters s^ewed me: he asked me if I had seen
the virgins secrets or no? That word moved me not alittle: yet I durst not
ask him what secrets he meant, for in so holy matters, a slip of the tongue
is very dangerous, I said I had not as yet seen them, but I was very desirous
to see them, with that I was led in, and I went, me thought, as if I had been
ravished in the spirit. There was lighted diverse wax tapers, there was showed
first a little image, which was not very singular, either for quantity, or
stuff, or workemanshippe, but of great virtue.


Me. Has a block any power to work miracles? I have seen Saint Christophers
Image at Paris, equal with a great mountain, for bigness, but nothing famous
for any myracle-working that ever I could hear.


O. At the feet of the Uirgin lay a precious stone, the name whereof neither
Latins nor Greeks could ever find out. The Frenchmen call it a Toad, because
it has in it the form of a toade so lively, that no Art can make the like:
and that which is more to be wondered at, it is a very little stone, and the
image of the toade does not appear in the outside of it, but is enclosed in
the very heart of the stone.


Mean. It may be that men do imagine such a thing to be there, as in a broken
flint we imagine an Eagle, and what do not children imagine they see in the
clouds? fiery dragons, mountains burning, and armed men fighting.


O. Nay, I would you should know, that no quick toade does more evidently show
it self than there it is expressed.


Me. Hitherto I have endured all your fables: from henceforth get some body
else to pers^ade about your toade.


O. No marvel Menedemus, though you be so affected, for no man could ever have
persuaded me to have believed it, unless I had seen it with these eyes: but
in the mean time you seem too much to neglect natural things.


Me. Wherefore? because I will not believe that asses can fly.


O. Do you not see how Nature plays the Arti^cer in expressing the colors
and forms of all things? And truly, as in other things, so chiefly in
precious stones? And further, what admirable virtues she has given to the same
stones? altogether The forms of diverse precious stones.
incredible, unless Experience had given us proof thereof? Tell me, would you
ever have believed that the steel would have bin drawn of the loadstone
untouched, and to be driven back again without touching, vn^es you had seen
it.


Me. Truly not I, though ten Aristotle's had sworn it unto me.


O. Do not then altogether condemn it for a fable, if you hear of any thing,
that as yet you have not experience of. In the stone called O eraunia we see the
proportion of a thunder bolt: in the Carbuncle we see the likeness of flaming
fire: in the Chalazia there is both the shape and coldness of hail, yea
though you cast it into the midst of the fire: in the Emerald we see the
deep and clear waves of the sea: the Carcinias has the form of a sea
crabbe: the Echites has the likeness of a viper: the Scarites resembles the
fish Scarus: the Hieracites is like a hawke: the Geranites has a cranes neck:
the Aegophthalmus shows a goats eye: the Lycophthalm^ has a wolfes eye
painted in four colors, bright yellow and sanguine, black and white in the
middle: the black Cyamea has a beam in the midst: the stone Dryites has
the picture of the trunk of a tree, and burns like wood: the stone Cissites
and Narcissites has the likeness of iuie: the stone Phlegontites shows fire
within, but not without: in the stone Anthracitides you may discern certain
sparkles of fire running to and fro: the Crocias looks like saffron: the
Rhodites stone resembles a rose: the stone Chalcites is like brass: the stone
Aetides shows the shape of an Egle: the stone Taos has the picture of a
peacocke: the Chelidonian the figure of an aspe: the Myrmicites the image of an
Ant creeping: the stone Cantharias expresses a scarabee whole: and the stone
Scorpijtes a scorpion. But what do I reckon up these which be innumerable,
whenas there is no part of nature, either in the elements, or in living
creatures, or in plants, but nature has as it were lasciuiously expressed in
precious stones? And do you marvel that in this stone she has pictured a
t^ade?


Men. I marvel that nature can be at so much leisure as to recreate herself
with the counterfeiting of all things.


Og. It is but to exercise the curiosity of man's wit, and to keep us from
idleness. And yet as if there were nothing wherewith to mittigate the
tediousness of time, we doat upon fools and ieasters, and dice and iuglers
mockeries.


Mean. It Is most true that you say.


O. Some are of opinion, that if this kind of stone be put into vinegar, it
will swim, and you shall see all the members of the toad to move.


Men. That's strange, but why do they lay a toad-stone before the blessed
Uirgin?


O. Because she has overcome, troaden under foot, and quite extinguished all
filthiness, malitiousuesse, pride, covetousness, and whatsoever else
springs from eternal desires, and corrupt affections.* That's a blasphemous
lie tell it no further, for all this has Christ done, and yet but in part in
this life, but most absolutely in ^he life to come.



Men. Woe be to us that carry such a toade in our breast: but go to, go on
with your story.


O. After that he showed me diverse Images of gold and silver, one he said was
all gold, an other all silver: he also told me the weight, the value, and the
founder o^ every one: I still seemed to be very glad that the virgin was so
rich. Then quoth the Relique-maister, because I see you are a godly beholder, I
will show you all, even the most secret things that belong to the virgin, and
with that pulled out of the Altar an attire full of admirable things, which if
I should particularly recite, this day would not suffice: I was abundantly
filled with ^ights, and this inestimable gift I brought with me, a token from
the virgin herself.


Menede. Have you made no trial what virtue your wood has?


O. Yes, in a certain I^ne some three days since there was a man distracted of
his wits, and should have been bound: this wood was laid close under his
pillow, he slept a very long and a sound sleep, and in the morning when he
arose, he was well again.


Men. This was no frenzy, but some other humor, that coming by much hot
moisture is commonly as strong drink and wine, helped by sleep.


Ogy. When you will jest Menedemus, I pray choose an other matter: to jest
with the Saints is neither good nor safe. Yea the man himself told me, that in
his s^eepe there appeared a woman unto him in a strange ma^er, and offered him
a pot What pot? a drinking pot, or a chamber pot.
.


Men. I believe it was some neesing powder.


Ogy. That I know not. But this is for certain, that the man was well again.


Men. You passed over St. Thomas of Canterbury. St. Thomas (...) Ca^terb.



Ogy. Faith sir no. I made no pilgrimage with greater devotion.


Men. I would willingly hear that too, but for too much troubling of you.


Ogy. Nay, I will pray you to hear it. Kent is a part of England that is next
to France and Flanders. The chief City is Canterbury, wherein be two
Monasteries one hard by another, in both there be of the order of St. Benedict.
That which is entitled S. Austins, is the more ancient: that which is now
called S. Thomas, was sometime the Archbishops seat, where with a few choice
Monks he lived, as now also the Prebends have houses joining to the Church, but
distinct from other Can^ns houses: for sometimes there were both Bishops and
Canons. But that Church that was dedicated to S. Thomas, rises with such
majesty toward heaven, that it strikes religion into the^ that behold it
afar off: and with his beauty he e^lipseth the light of his neighbor, and
obscureth that place that in ancient time was most religious. It has 2. great
towers, saluting as it were strangers afar off, and with a wonderful r^aring
o^ brazen bells, awaking the c^untry adjoining ^oth far and near. In the Church
por^h towar^es the (...) (...) three armed men graven in stone, which with
their wicked hands kille^ that holy man Or traitor.*
and there are set over them their names, Tuscus, Fuscus, and Berus.


Men. Why is so much honor given to wicked men?


Ogy. Forsooth no other honor is given to these men, then is given to Judas,
Pilat, Caiphas, and a company of wicked souldidiers, whom we have so curiously
graven in golden Altars. Their sirnames are added, that no man may ever after
delight to be called by those names. Their eyes are put out, that no Courtier
hereafter may be so bold as to lay his hands upon Bishops, or church-liuings
For when these 3. champions had committed their wickedness, they were
straightway stricken mad, neither could they ever recover their right mind
again, vnt^l they had craved the favor of that most holy man. When we were
entered the Church, we saw a huge space, full of majesty, and there every one
walks.


Men. Was there nothing to be seen?


Ogy. Nothing but a huge mass of building, and certain books (...) to
certain pillars, in which was the Gospel of Nichodemus and a sepulcher, I know
not whose.


Men. What else.


Ogy. The entrance is so fenced with iron grates, that a man may see that space
which is between the outward church, and that which is called the quier, or
place of singing men: to that place men ascend by many steps, under which
there was a vault, that has a door to the North. There was showed us a
wooden Altar, dedicated to the holy virgin, mean, and not worth the seeing:
but for ^he antiquity of it, which seemed to reprove the excess of these
times. There the holy man (as it is said) took his leave of the holy virgin,
when death did ^pproach him. Upon the Altar is kept the point of that sword
wherewith the crown of that holy man's head was cut off, and his brain pan
pierced, that he might be the sooner dispatched Holy rust, ^irreuerence.
of his life. The h^ly rust of this sword for the love of the Martyr we kissed
most devoutly Such lips, such lettice.
. From thence we went into a secret vault under the ground, and that was not
without his Mystagogues. There was exhibited unto us first of all a scull of ^
Martyr cleft with a sword, al was clad in ^luer, saving the top of it, and that
was left bare for men to kiss^. There was also showed a plate of lead, wherein
was engraven this title, Thomas of Acres. There h^ng also in the dark the
shirts of hair, the girdles and breeches whereby this valiant cha^pion did
bring his flesh into subjection, a shame to our dainti^esse and tenderness.


Me. And peradventure also a shame to the monks themselves.


Ogy. Of that matter I ca^ say nothing, neither is it any thing to my matter.
But from thence we went into the quier: at the north side are their secrets
kept, it is marvelous to be spoken what a number of bones be there to be
seen, sculs, chins, teeth, hands, fingers, whole arms, all which we kissed,
neither had there bin any end of ^hewing, if he that went with me (being
somewhat impatient) had not interrupted the business.


Men. What was he?


Ogy. An English man, his name is Gratian, a young man, a man learned and godly,
but not so well affected to this part of religion as I could wish.


Men. Some of Wicklifes scholars, I believe.


Ogy. I think not so, although he has read his books, I know not where he
was borne.


Men. Did he offend the Mystagogue?


Ogy. There was brought forth an arm of a man having yet raw flesh and blood
upon it, which he abhorred to kiss, and with his very look showed himself
much moved at the matter, and with that the Relic master hid his secrets
again: then we went to look upon the table and ornaments of the altar, a^
very costly, you would have said, that Mydas and Croe^us had been but beggars,
if you had seen the abundance of gold and silver that was there.


Men. You did not kiss them, did you?


Og. No, but here I was moved with an other kind of douotio^


Men. What was that?


Ogy. I fetched a great sigh for grief that there were no suc^ relics at home
at my house. After that we went into the ve^rie. Good God, what pomp of
Uestures were there, all of ^lke, what abundance of golden candlestickes?
there we saw Saint Thoma^ his Miter.


Men. What, never a cross?


Og. I saw none, but we saw a cloak of silk, but of a gross thread, no
gold nor precious stones upon it. There was also a napkin, all sweaty and
bloody: these monuments of ancient frugalitie we willingly kissed.


M^n. These things are not showed to every body.


Og. Oh no, good sir.


Men. How came you into so great credit, that you saw all?


Og. I had alittle acquaintance with that reverend father William Warham
archebishoppe of Canterbury, he wrote two or three words in my behalf.


Men. I have heard of many, that he is a man of great humanity.


Ogy. You would rather say he were humanity it self, if you knew him: from
these things we were carried up aloft as i^ were into a new church: there in
a little chapel we saw the face of that good man Saint Thomas, set all in
gold, and a border of precious stones. Here a certain misc^unce unlooked for
had almost intercepted all my felicity.


Men. What ill luck was that?


Og. Here my fellow Gratian got but little favor, for after G^atian had
almost marrd all.
a little short prayer was said, he came to the Mystagogue in this manner: Do
you hear good father (quoth he) is it true that men say, that Saint Thomas was
so good a man unto the poor? It is tr^ said the Mystagogue, and began to
tell many things of his bounty toward poor men. Then said Gratian, I do not
think that that affection is changed in him, except it be for the better. That's
true, said the Mysta^ogue. The^ said Gratian again: therefore seeing that holy
man was so liberal to the poor, when yet himself was but poor, and had
need of relief himself for bodily necessities. Do you not think that he
would now be contented, being so rich, and wanting nothing, if a poor woman
that has many hunger* starued children at home, or daughters, that for want of
a good portion cannot be so well bestowd as they might, or whose husband lies
sick and succorles, should, after leave asked, be so bold as to take some
little portion of this great abundance, to relieve her poor family withal, and
taking it as it were ^m one that were willing to let her have it, either as
given, or lent, till she could pay it again? To this question when the Keeper
of the golden head made no answer, Gratian (as he is somewhat earnest) said, I
think, yea and do verily believe, that such a holy manas he was, would be glad
now when he is dead, to relieve the penury of poor men with his goods. With
that the Mystagogue frowned upon us, and put out his lips at us, and looked
upon us with Gorgonicall eyes, and I think verily that he would have spit at
us, and with all reprochful speeches have thrust us out of doors, but that he
knew we were commended by the archbishop. Howsoever it fell out, with fair
speeches we pacified the man's wrath, and told him Gratian spoke not as he
thought, but after his jesting manner, and withal we laid him down some groats.


Men. Surely I greatly commend your piety: but I often times muse to my self,
with what color they can be excused, as free from all fault, which bestow such
abundance of wealth in building, adorning, and enriching of temples, as if
there were never any end to be made. I grant there is a certain dignity due
to holy vestures, to church implements, and solemn service, or holy
solemnities: I allow that the buildings themselves should have their state and
majesty, but to what end serve so many baptisteries, or fonts, so many
candles, and candlestickes, so many golden Images, and such cost as is bestowed
upon organs: and not content with these, we must have great revenues to
maintain a musical kind of whining, neighing, and chanting, when in the mean
time our brethren and sisters, that are the lively temples of Christ, are ready
to perish with hunger and thirst.


Og. In these things there is no good mind but would wish a mean, but because
this f^lt springs of a certain exc^iue deu^tion, it deserves the m^ favor*
^specially so often as we call to mind the contrary (...) of those men that
spoil the churches of all their mai^* These things were most of them given by
princes and great persons, that would have bin worse spent in dice or war: and
to alienate any thing that was Of church ornaments.
given to the church, is ^acrilege: and again, it does not only make them
withdraw their hands that would give, but also stir them to rapine. Therefore
they are not lords but keepers of these things. Last of all, I had rather see a
temple too much Note that.
abounding with holy ornaments than to see them as some be, naked, filthy, and
more like stables than temples.


Me. We read of bishops that were commended for selling away their holy
vessels, and releeuing the poor with the money.


Og. They are commended indeed, and only commended, but to imitate them I
think it neither good nor lawful.


Me. Go on with the rest of your narration, for I exspect an end of your tale.


Og. That you shall have very briefly: in the mean time came forth the chief
Relique-maister.


Men. Who is that, the Abbot of the place?


Og. He has a Miter, and has an Abbots revenues, he wants only the title,
and they call him the Prior, because the Archbishop is in the Abbots place: for
in old time, whosoever was Archbishop of that Province, was also a Monk.


Men. Truly I cared not if they called me a Camel, if I had an Abbots
revenues.


Og. Surely to me he seemed both a godly man, and wise, and well read in Scotus
divinity, he opened a box, or a case, wherein the rest of that holy martires
body lay.


Men. Did you see his bones*


Ogy. No that we might not, neither could we without a ladder: but he showed
us a golden coffin, that was covered with a wooden coffin, which being pulled
off with ropes, we saw inestimable treasures.


Men. What were they?


Og. The worst thing there, was gold, it shined with rare and great precious
stones they did all shine and glister, some of them were bigger than a goose
egg. Round about it stood certain Monks with great reverence. The former of
them with a white rod pointed to every stone, and told us the value and the
giver of it: the chiefest of them were given by princes.


Me. He that shows all this, had need of a good memory.


Ogy. You say true, yet exercise does help him much, for he dath it often:
from thence he brought us back again to a secret va^lt under the ground:
there the Uirgin mother has a little house, but very dark, and strong, with
double grates of iron.


Men. What is she afraid of?


Ogy. Nothing but thieves: for I never saw a place more laden with riches in
all my life.


M^n. You speak of blind riches.


Ogy. When candles were brought, we saw more then a princely sight: and this
is not showed but to great persons, an^ special friends. Last of all, we were
had into the Uestry again. There was set upon a table, a black leather
casket, by and by it was opened, then we all worshipped vowing our knees.


Men. What was in it?


Ogy. Certain fragments of old lin^en, rent and torn, ragged, snotty,
handkerchers, and most of them full of sneuil and dirt, and never washed since
they were occupied: with these the good S. Thomas wiped off the sweat from his
face and his O dainty relikes, not for every one to see.
neck, and blew his nose, and whatsoever other excrements man's body yields,
he dried up with them. But there my fellow Gratian began again to be out of
favor: for he being an Englishman, and one of the Prio^s acquaintance, and a
man of good authority, the good ^rior offered him one of those lin^en rags,
thinking that he would have esteemed of it as a great gift. But Gratian not
without great loathing, took it up very gingerly between his fingers and his
thumb, and contemptuously threw it from him again, and ^macked a^ it with his
li^s, after the manner of riders that smacke to their horses: for this was his
mann^r (...), if any thing offended him, which he judged worthy to be
contemned. I was both afraid and asha^d. But the Prior, (as he was very wise)
dissembled this fact, and after he had offered us a cup of wine, he did very
courteously dismiss^ us, and then (...) were to take ship for London. M. what
were you to do when you came near the la^ding place?


Og. Something, but I would by no means land there, for it was more infamous
for cosonages, and robberies, then any Of a French boy.
rocks be for indangering of sailers. I Will tell you what I saw at my last
passage th^re. There were a company of us carried from the shore to a great
ship at Calis. Amongst these there was a poor ragged youth, of him they must
needs have half a grote, for so much they extorte of every one, if they go
never so little a way with a man. He pleades poverty, they iestingly d^mand it
still, at last they pulled off his shoos, and betwixt the soles they found x. or
xii. grotes, which they took away, making an open laughing game of the matter,
scoffing at the unhappy Frenchman.


Men. What did the youth?


Og. What could he do? he wept.


Men. Did they this by authority?


Og. By the same authority whereby they rob the packes of their passengers, and
take men's purses, when time serves the^.


Men. It is marvel that they durst do such a wicked deed in the presence of so
many.


Ogyg. They are so accustomed to it, that they think they may do it lawfully.
In the great ship there were many lookers on, in the boat were some English
^actors, that murmured at the matter, but all in vain: they, as in a meriment
boasted that they had taken a wicked Frenchman.


Me. Such Mariners as play the thieves in jest, and do Lewd mariners.
make but a sport of it, would be hanged in good earnest.


Og. And with such do both shoares abound, but here you may conjecture what
the masters will do, when their servants dare play such parts: therefore
hereafter I will rather go far about than pass such a short cut. And
moreover, as the way to hell is most easy to find, but the way from thence
is most hard, so at this haven the entrance is not very easy, but the going
out pays for all. There were certain sailers of Antwerp that tarried long at
London, with them I determined to go to sea.


Men. Has that region such holy Seamen? A good note for our En^lishmen.



Ogyg. I confess, that as an Ape is always an Ape, so a Mar^iner is always a
Mariner, but if they be compared with those that have learned to live by
theft, they are Angels.


Mean. I will remember this, if at any time I be disposed to see that Island:
but return into the way, from whence I drew you.


Ogy. As we were going toward London, not far beyond Of certa^ne begga^s
upon the high way.
Canturbury, we came to a very hollow way, and narrow, and withal, very
steep, or down hill, with such a ragged bank on both sides, that you cannot
avoid it, and there is no remedy but you must needs ride that way. On the
left hand of that way, was a begging place for certain old men that sat
there: their manner is, so soon as they see any horseman approaching, one of
them comes running out, and besprinkeleth the horse man with holy water, then
he offers him an old shoe to kiss, tied to a curtain ring, in which ring
is a glass like a counte^fet precious stone: they that kiss it must give him
some money.


Men. I rather allow old men to beg on such a way, than a company of strong
thieves.


Ogy. Gratian, he rode by me on the right hand, and was next unto the beggars,
he was besprinkeled with holy waters well, he took it after a sort: but when
the old shoe was reached him to kiss, he demanded the reason of it; the old
man said, it was Saint Thomas, his shoe: with that the man waxed angry, and
turning unto me said; What do these beasts mean, that we must kiss the
shoes of every good man? why do they not also reach us their spittle, and
other excrements of their body to kiss? I pitied the old man, and gave him
some money to comfort him withal.


Men. In my opinion Gratian had cause to be angry. If hosen and shoes were
kept as an argument of a sparing life, I should not greatly mis-like it: but it
is a very imp^dent part to offer such stuff to men to be kissed.


Ogy. To deal plainly, I am also of your mind.


Men. I marvel that you never visited Saint Patrikes Den, of which so many
monstrous things are reported, and to me altogether incredible.


Ogy. Why man? I have sailed over the river of hell, I have (...) even into the
very jaws of hell: I have seen what^ done in hell.


Men. You shall do me a pleasure if you would tell me those things.


O^y. Let this suffice for this time. Now I mean to go home to dinner, for I
have not dined yet.


Men. Why do you fast so long? sor religion sake?


Ogy. No, but of very envy.


Men. What, do you envy your belly?


Ogy. No, but the pilling Inholders and Uintners, which Vintners and Inholders.
when they will not let a man have that is fit for him, yet they are not
afraid to take out of all reason. Of such I am wont to be revenged in this
manner, if there b^ any hope of a good supper, either at my friends house, or
with my miserable Host, then I take no dinner, or a very small one. But if I
dine well, then at supper time I am not well in my stomach.


Men. Are you not ashamed to seem so sparing and misera^le?


Ogy. Menedemus, they that spend their shame in such matters, ^eleeue me, they
do ill bestow their cost. I have learned to ^eepe my shame for other uses.


Men. Now I long sor the rest of your tale, and therefore I will be a guest
with you at dinner, and then you may the more (...) make an end of it.


O^y Truly I give ^ou great thanks that you offer your self vnbidded, when
many do earn^stly refuse to come, being int. ca^ed: b^t I will give you double
thanks, if you will din^ to day at home, for now all the time that I shall have,
will be (...) enough ms^luting of my family. ^ut I have a (...) (...) my head,
that will be better for both of us: to morrow I and my wife will come and dine ^f
your house, and then ti^l (...) n^r be r^dy, I will feed you with tales, (...)
till your self shall s^y, you have enough, and if you think good, we will not
leave you t^l supper be done. What, stan^ you scratchi^g your hea^? ^o you
pr^uide, for in good sadness we mean to come.


Men. I had rather your tales were v^bought, ^ut go to, you shall have a short
dinner, not very sauory, unless you season it with good tales.


Ogy. But do you hear, do you not think long to go these pilgrimages?


Men. I cannot tell what I shall do, when you have finished your discourses.
But as I am now affected, I have enough to do to walk the Roman stations.


O. You walk the Roman stations that never saw Rome?


Mean. I will tell you how, thus I walk my stations at home: I go into my
closet, and I look to my daughters that they lose not their virginity: then I
go into my shop, and see what my servants do: and then into my kitchen, to
see what is amiss there: and then into some other place, and from one place to
another, to observe what my children do, and how my wife is employed, and
never leave till I see that every one does his duty: these b^ my Roman stations.


Ogy. And all these things would S. James do for you, if you were abroad.


Men. To ^ooke unto them my self, I have a commandment A good conclusion.
in the word of God: but to commit them over to Saints I have no warrant at all.


A very pleasant and fruitful Dialogue, she^ing what comfort a man may find
by Popery in the hour of death.
The speakers names:
Marcolph^s, Phaedru^.
Marcolphus WHence come you Phaedrus, out of Trophinius his den?


Phae. Why do you ask that question?


Mar. Because you look more sad, more unhandsome, more filthy, and more stern
than you had wont to do: you are nothing less than that you are called.


Phae. If they that be long in a Smiths shop, shall be black and grimed with
smoke, and coal dust, no marvel though I which have been so many days
together with two sick persons, yea, and at their death and burial, look
more sadly than I was wont, and especially they being both my dear^ friends.


Mar. Who are those that you say are buried?


Phae. You knew George Gunner, did you not?


Mar. By name only, not by face.


Phae. The other I am sure you knew not, his name was Cornelius Montius, he and
I have been of familiar acquaintance these many years.


M^r. It was never my hap yet to be present at any man's death.


Phae. I have, oftener than I would.


Mar. But is death so terrible a thing as it is commonly reported?


^haedr. The way to death is more hard than death it self. But if a man can
free his mind from that imagination of fear of death, he shall abate a great
part of that evil. To be short, whatsoever is bitter, either in sickness, or
in death, is made more tolerable, if a man do wholly commit himself over to
the good will of God. For as touching the feeling of death, when the soul is
pulled from the body, I think it to be either none at all, or very stupide and
blockish, because nature before it be come to that pass, does dead, and
astonish, or mortify, and as it were, cast asleep^ all the sensible parts.


Mar. We are borne without any feeling of our selves.


Phae. But not without sense or feeling of the mother.


Mar. And why do we not die in the same manner as we are borne? why would God
have death to be so bitter? Why God ^ould have death to be ^tter.



Phae. The Lord would have our birth to be gree^ous and dangerous to our
mother, to that end she might love more dearly that which she has borne. But
death he would have fearful and bitter to all, lest men should wil^ully cast
away themselves: for when we see daily so many lay violent hands upon
themselves, what think you would be done, if in death there were nothing to be
feared? So soon as a servant should receive correction, or a scholar should
be beaten, so often as a wife were angry with her husband, or that any thing
did miscarry, or that any accident should happen which were gr^euous to the
mind, straitwaies would men run to the rope, or to the sword, or to the
river, or to poisonings, or to cast themselves down headlong from some high
place, or to one mischief or another. But now the bitterness of death does
make our life the more precious and dear unto us, especially seeing Physicians
cannot cure men when life is once gone. Although, as there is not the like
chance unto all in their birth, so it happens not alike to all in their
death, some die quickly, and are soon out of pain, others do languish long
of a lingering di^ease: they that are sick of a Lethargy, do die without
sense or feeling, as if they were cast into a sleep, like those that are stung
of a Serpent. This I have observed, that there is no kind of death so bitter,
but it may be endured, if a man be resolved to depart with a bold courage.


Mar. Which of your friends deaths was the more christian like?


Phae. Me thought Georges was the more magnificent.


Mar. What, is there ambition in death?


Phae. I never saw two in all my life die s^ unlike in their death: if you be
at leisure I will describe both their departures unto you, and you shall judge
whether of their ends is the more to be desired of a christian man.


Mar. I shall most willingly harken unto you.


Ph. Then first you shall hear of Georges departure. When Of Georges death.
there appeared in him certain signs of death, all the rowt of Physicians,
which had long had him in cure, (dissembling his end) began to require their
money.


Mar. How many Physicians were there? Of his Phisitian^.



Ph^. Sometime ten, s^etime twelve, and when there were fewest, there were six.


Mar. Enough to kill a strong man.


Phae. When they had gotten their money, they secretly t^ld his neighbors that
were about him, that death was at hand, and wished them to provide for his
souls health, for as for his bodily health, there was no hope. Now the sick
man is gently admonished by his friends, to commit the cure of his body to God,
and now to think upon nothing, but of such things as might make to a happy
departure out of this world. When George heard this news, he looks upon his
Physicians with wonderful indignation, taking it very grievously, that they had
given him over. Their answer was, that they were Physicians, and not gods, and
that they had done for him whatsoever by Art they could do: but against fatal
necessity there was no remedy. This done, they went aside into the next chamber.


Marcolphus What, did they tarry after they had their money?


Phae. They could not agree upon the kind of his disease: one said it was a
dropsy, another said it was a timpany* another said it was an apostumation in
his guts, one said one thing, another said another: and all that whole time
that they handled the sick man most bitterly, they contended still about the
kind of his disease.


Marcol. Oh how happy was that patient in the mean time!


Phae. Well, to end that strife, they prayed his wife to let them make an
Anotomy of the dead body, telling her that it would be very honorable, and a
thing usual amongst great persons: and moreover, that it would be much for the
good of others, and that it would increase the heap of his merits. And last
of all, they promise to purchase thirty masses at their own cost and charge,
to be sung for his soul, which would much profit him, being dead. This the
sick man did hardly yield unto: yet at the last, by the entreaty of his wife
and his neighbors that were about him, it was granted. This being obtained,
all the Physicians took their leave: for they hold it vnlaw^ull for them that
are used to succor life, to be present at a man's death, or at his funerals.

By and by atter was Bernardine sent for to hear his confession, a man he is
(as you know) reuerendly addicted to the order of the Franciscans. But before
he had finished Four orders of Mendicants
his confession, there were in the house a company of four orders, commonly
called Mendicants, or begging Friars.


Mar. What, so many vultures to one carcass?


Phae. And then was called the Parish Priest to annoile him, and to give him
the holy Sacrament.


Mar. Uery religiously indeed.


Phae. But there had like to have been a very bloody battle between the
Monks and the parish Priest.


Mar. What, by the bed of the sick man?


Phae. Yes verily, and Christ looking on too.


Marcolphus What was the cause of such a sudden tumult?


Phae. The parish Priest, when he knew that the sick man had confessed
himself to a Franciscan, denied him both extreme unction, and the Sacrament,
yea and his burial too, unless he also might hear with his own ears, the
sick man's confession, alleging that he was the Minister of that Parish, and
that he must give an account to God for his sheep, which he could not do,
unless he knew the secrets of his conscience.


Mar. Did he not seem to speak reasonably?


Phae. Surely not to them, for they did all with a loud voice stan^ against
it, especially Bernar^ine, and Vincentius the Dominican Friar.


Mar. What reasons brought they?


Phae* They did incessantly belabor the parish Priest with great reproaches,
and withal called him Ass, and said, that h^ was worthy to be a swine-heard.
I (quoth Vincen^) am a Bachelor of ^iuinity, and am shortly to be licenciated
and intit^d Doctor: thou do scarce read ^he Gospel, so far art thou from
being able to discuss cases of conscience: but if you will needs busy your
self, go your way and see what your wife does, and your bastards at home, and
many other things which I am ashamed to r^hearse.


Mar. What said he to all this? was he mute?


Ph. Mute? nay, you would have said the grasshopper had broken his wing. I will
make (quoth he) far better batchellors of divinity than thou art, of bean
stalks. The Authors and p^incipall men of your orders were Dominicke and
Francis: where did they learn Aristotle's philosophy, or the Arguments of
Thomas Aquinas, or the Speculations of Scotus? Or where were they created
batchellors of Divinity? you have crept into the world, too ready to believe
your lies, and when you first sprang up, you were but a few, and mean enough
God wot. You did once nestle in fields and villages, within a short space you
found the way into every wealthy city. In the fields was wont to be a place
for your work, but now you are no where but in rich men's houses. You b^ast of
the title of Bishops, but your privileges are nothing worth, but when the
Bishop, or Pastor, or Uicar are idle, and do loyter, or will give place unto
you. But none of you all shall preach in my church, so long as I am Pastor, and
in health. I am no batchellor of divinity, no more was Saint Martin, and yet
he was a bishop, but look what learning I want, I will not come to you for it.
Do you think that the world is now so simple and blockish, that wheresoever
they see one clad like S. Dominicke, or Saint Francis, they should presently
^hinke their sanctimony to be there? Is it any matter to you what I do at home?
What you do in your dens, and how you use holy virgins, and nuns, the
world knows well enough. As for the houses of rich men that you haunt so
much, how little the b^tter, or the honester they are for your coming thither,
is sufficiently known to all men, even to the poreblinde and barbers. The rest
(Marcolphus) I dare not tell, surely those reverend fathers he handled very
irreverently: neither had there been any end, if George the sick had not made
a sign with his hand, that he had somewhat to say. With much adoo he obtained
silence in that brawle. Then (quoth the sick man) I pray be at peace among
your selves, I will also confess my self unto you, my Pastor: and further,
for the ringing of the Belles, for my funeral Dirges, for a Hearse, and for my
burial, you shall have your due before you go out of the house.


Mar. And did the parish Pri^st refuse that offer?


Phae. No, only he murmured somewhat of the confession which he mentioned to
the sick man, what need the same things be repeated again (quoth he) to
weary both the sick man and the Priest too? If he had confessed himself to
me in time, peradventure he would have made a b^tter will then he has done.
Now look you to it. At this equal dealing of the sick man, the monks were
ill apayd, taking it very grievously, that so much of their prey went to the
parish Pri^st: But I entreated and persuaded, that all contention might be
buried. The parish Priest he anointed the sick man, he gave him the sacrament
of the Lords body, and when he had his money, away he went.


Mar. What, was there not a calm^ after that storm?


Phae. Nay, when this ^torme was past, there presently followed Another ^torme.
another tempest, far more cruel then the former.


Mar. I pray you how?


Phae. You shall hear. There were come to the house four orders of
Mendicants, or begging Friars: by and by comes a fifth company, of
Crosse-bear^rs, against which the A good jest.
other four rose up in a great tumult, as against some mis-begotten bastard.
They asked the other, where they did ever see a Cart with five wheels, or with
what face they would have more orders of Mendicants, than there were
Evangelists, then (quoth they) bring in all the beggars that lie upon the high
way.


Mar. What said the Cross bearers to this?


Phae. They asked them again, how the Churches Cart went, when there was nane
of those orders of Mendica^s at all: and afterwa^des, how went it when there
was but one order, and after that, three? As for the number ^f Euang^lists,
they have no more affinity, or correspon^encie with our orders, then with a
Die, which shows every way four corn^rs: who ordained the Augustines to be
an order of beggars, or the Carmelites? When did Augustine, or Heli^ go a
begging? and yet these are made (forsooth) to be the authors of your orders.
These things with many mo, they did lustily thund^r out against them; but being
alone, they were too weak for the other army of four parts, and therefore
they went their way, but threatening them very sore.


Mar. Now then there was quietness, was there not?


Phae. Nay that heat against the fifth order was turned into an horrible fray
amongst themselves: for the Franci^canes, and the Dominicans did hold, that
neither the Augustines, nor Carmelites were right Mendicants, but bastards, and
counterfeites. This brawle did grow to such a heat, that I still feared they
would go to bl^wes.


Mar. Did the sick man endure all this?


Phae. These things were not done by his bed side, but without in the Court
yeard adjoining to his Chamber, but yet their noise was heard up to the sick
man, for they did not whi^per it, but set their throats as loud as they
could, and sickmen you know are swift of hearing, and the least noise that can
be, does disquiet them.


Mar. What then was the issue of this war at the last?


Phae. The sick man sent word by his wife, that they should be quiet, and he
would end their strife. And he prayed, that for that time the Augustines, and
Carmelites would depart, which if they would do, they should loose nothing by
it, for he promised that at the least they should have as much vittailes sent
them home, as they should have if they tarried still. At the fun^ral he willed
all their orders, the fifth and all, to be present, and that in money their
portion should be all alike, but at the common feast he would not have them
present, lest they should ^all out, and disturb the company.


Mar. You tell me of a notable housh^lder indeed, who even when he lay a dying,
knew how to pacify so many Seas of brawl^s.


Phae. Oh he had for many years been a Captain in the ^arres, and there are
daily such tumults raised amongst the soldiers.


Mar. He was therefore very weal^hie.


Ph^. Uerie rich.


Mar. But his riches were ill gotten, as for the most part it happens by
rapines, sacrileges, and extortions.


Phae. Indeed that is commonly the manner of Captains, neither dare I swear
that he was altogether fr^e from such faults. Unless I be much deceived in
the man, he^ got his living more by dexterity of wit, then by viol^nce.


Mar. How so?


Phae. He was skillful in Arithmeticke.


Mar. And what if he were?


Ph^. What if he were? he would ^aund of the prince, pay for thirty thousand
soldiers, when there were scant seven thousand. Again, to many soldiers he
would g^e no W^rrelike shifts.
pay at ^ll.


Mar. Tr^ly you tell me of a goodly Arithmetitian.


Phae. Moreover, he ruled the wars by art, for his manner was to demand a
monthly pay, both of hi^ enemies, as also of his friends: of his enemies, that
they might sustain no damage by his men: of his own friends, that it might be
la^ful for them to trade with the enemy.


Mar. I know the common fashion of soldiers well enough* but I pray you finish
your narration.


Phae. Then Bernardine and Vincent, with a few of their order, tarried with the
sick body. To the rest there was sent some vittaile.


Mar. They agreed well enough, which tarried t^ comfort the sick man.


Phae. Not very well: for they gruml^d ^ wot not what about the priueleges of
their Charters, but lest there should b^ any speech made of it, it was
smoothere^. Here now was pr^uision made for his Will making* and witnesses
being called, there were certain demands made of such matters as they had
agree^ upon amongst themselves.


M^r. I long to hear of those matters.


Ph^. I will tell you briefly, for it is too long a ^ory at large. His wife was
yet living, and about two and forty years of ag^, a woman truly very honest,
and wise, and two sons he had also living, the one was twenty years old,
and the other (...), and as many daughters, but both very young, under twelve.
In his will it was so provided, that his wife, because she could not be
persuaded to become a Nun, she should wear a Beghiue cloak, that is, a
middle kind of vesture between Nuns and the Laity.


Ma. The Old fox is not so easly taken with snares: say on.


Phae. His eldest son, because he would not be persuaded to become a Monk,
must (as soon as his fathers funeralles were past) go to Rome, and there, by a
dispensation from the Pope, should be made priest before he were of lawful age,
and for one whole year should every day sing mass for his fathers soul, in
the Uaticane church, and should take orders in the Laterane Church, and every
friday should creep upon his knees unto the cross.


Mar. He did willingly undergo these things, did he not?


Phae. I will not say crastily, as Asses were wont to undergo their sackes.
The younger son must be dedicated to St. Francis, his elder daughter to Saint
Clare, and his younger to Saint Katharine. This was all that could be obtained:
for Georges mind was (to that end God might be the more merciful unto him) to
have had those five that he left behind, to be divided amongst the fiu^ orders
of Mendicants, and the matter was labored very hard, but his wife and his
eldest son would by no means be persuaded.


Mar. In what manner did he bestow his inheritance?


Phae. All his living was so divided, that all the funeral charges being
deducted, twelve parts should go to his wife, whereof the one half should be
for her maintenance, the other to the place of her abode, from whence if she
should (upon her mind changing) depart, then all that part should go for ever to
that parish: another part to her son, who should have some of it presently paid
him, to bear his charges, going his iorny, and remaining at Rome, and he
should have sufficient besides to pay for his orders and dispensations: But if
he should alter his mind, and refuse holy orders, then should his part be
divided between the Franciscans and the Dominicans, which I fear he will
loose, the youth seemed so much to abhor being a Priest. Two parts should go
to the Monastery, wherein his younger son should be brought up. And two parts
likewise to the Monastcries where his two daughters should live: but with this
prouiso, that if they would not profess that kind of life, yet all their money
should remain whole and safe to their use. One part was bequeathed to
Bernardine, and as much to Vincent, and half a part to the Cartufians, to be
made partaker of all good works that should be done by their whole Order. That
which remained, was to be given in secret to the poor: Quos beneficio dignos
iudicassent Bernerdinus and Vincentius, that is, whom B^rnardine and Vincent
should think worthy of that benefit.


Mar. You should have said (as Lawyers do) Quos vel quas, that is, he or she,
male or female. And what was next?


Phae. Then they demanded of the sick man, (after they had rehearsed his
Will) in this manner: George Gunner, you being alive, and of perfect memory do
approve this your last will and testament? And he said, I do approve it. It
is your last and immutable will, is it not? He said: It is. And you make me
(quoth Bernardine) and this man Vincent Executors of this your last will? He
said, I do. Then he was required to subscribe his name.


Mar. How could he do that, lying a dying?


Phae. Barnardine guided his hand.


Mar. What did he subscribe?


Phae. Saint Francis and Saint Dominicke be enemies unto him that shall assay
to alter any part of this will: these things being thus done, his wife, and
children gave their right hands to the sick man, and were sworn to perform
that which was given them in charge. Then there was much adooe about the
funeral solemnities. At length this was concluded, that of every one of the
five orders there should nine be present at his burial, for the honor of the
five books of Moses, and the nine orders of Angels. Every order should bear
his Cross and sing mourneful songs before the coarse. Moreover, besides his A
good reason
kindred, there should be thirty other mourners, because, for so many pence
Christ was sold. The taper bearers should be in mourning apparel, and for
honors sake, they should be accompanied with twelve mourners, for this is the
holy number of the Apostolic order, after the coffin should his horse go in
mourning apparel, with his head tied so low to his knees, that he should
seem, as it were, to require his master of the ground. The upper cloth should
be set here and there with his arms, and in like manner every torch, and every
mourning garment should have his arms. And his body should be laid on the
right hand of the hie Altar in a marble toombe, which should hang over four
foot from the ground, and his picture to lie upon the top of it, carved out in
white marble, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot: he should
also have his helmet, with his crest, his crest was a Swannes neck: upon his
left arm was his buckler, with his arms graven upon the same: these were
three wild Boares heads ore, in a field argent, and upon his side his sword,
with a gilded hilt, that should be fa^ned to a gilt b^lt set with gilt bosses:
and upon his feet gilt spurs, for he was a knight, and under his feet a
leopard. And upon the face of the Tom be was a title worthy of such a man. And
his heart he would have laid up by it self in Saint Francis his cell, but his
entra^ls he bequeathed to the Priest of the Parish, to be buried honorably in
a chapel that was dedicated to our Lady.


Mar. Truly a very honorable funeral, but very costly. At U^ice you shall
see a Cobbler have more honor with less charge: One company will give a most
excellent coffin, and sometime you shall see six hundred Monks in their
coats or cloakes, accompany one man to his grave.


Phae. We have seen also, and have laughed heartily at these foolish shows
that poor men will make, there follow Fullers, and Curriers before, and Cobblers
behind, and Monks in the midst, a man would take them for monsters, or
chimny sweepers, and this was no otherwise, if you had seen it. It was also
provided by George, that the Franciscans and Dominicans should cast lots, which
of them should go foremost in the funeral show, and that the rest also after
them should do the like, for avoiding of tumult: the parish priest and his
clerks should come last of all, for the Monks would have it so.


Mar. He could order solemn sights, as well as armies.


Phae. Yea and this was also provided, that the solemn funeral which was to
be kept by the parish priest, should for honors sake be graced with alittle
music. Now whil^st these things were thus in handling, the sick man grew
very weak, and gave most evident signs that his time was come, and so comes
the last act of this story: now the bishops pardon was read unto him, whereby
he was freed from al his sins, and from all fear of Purgatory: and besides
that, all his goods were justified and approved.


Mar. What, th^se that were gotten by rapine, violence, and deceit?


Phae. Truly after the manner of the wars, but by good hap there was
present one Philip a Lawy^r, and his wifes brother. He in the pardon noted a
place otherwise put than it should have been, and suspected some falsehood in
it.


Mar. In good time, but what if that had been dissembled, if there had been
an error? I think the sick man should have been never the worse.


Phae. I grant you that: but the sick man was so troubled about that matter,
that he began to despair. There Vincent played the man, and bade him be of
good cheer, ser that he had authority to correct or put in whatsoever was
amiss, or wanting in the Pardon. And (quoth he) if any thing in the Pardon
deceive you, I pawn my soul for yours, and let yours go to heaven, and mine
to hell.


Mar. Does God allow of such exchanges to be made of souls? And if he
should, did your frien^ George deal wisely to take such a pledge? What if
Vincents soul should go to hell without any exchange at all as due to the
Devil before? Exchange of souls.



Ph^dr. I Will tell you what was done, this did Vincent, and truly the s^cke man
seemed to like it well. Then were read all those clauses wherein George was
promised to be partaker of all the good deeds that were ever done by all the
four orders Good deeds
Mendican^s, namely the Augustines, Franciscanes, Bernardines, and Dominicks*
and also of the fifth, namely the Cartusians.


Mar. I should have feared, that if I should carry such a load, it would have
pressed me down to hell.


Phae. I speak of his good deeds, which do no more trouble a soul flying
into heaven, then feathers do a bird.


Mar. To whom then did he bequeath his bad deeds?


Phae. To Captains of the wars in Germany.


Mar. By what law?


Phae. By the law of the Gospel: To him that has shall be given. There was
also recited the number of Masses and Psalters that should accompany the soul
of the dead man, and that was huge. After this was rehearsed his confession,
and the Priests absolution was given him.


Mar. And did he so yield up the Ghost?


Phae. Not yet. There was spread upon the ground a Mat of Bulrushes, and at the
beginning before it was unfolded, it was like a Pillow in fashion.


Mar. What was now to be done?


Phae. That they strewed with ashes, but very thin: and Here was stuff indeed
enough to have infected a sound body.
upon it they laid the body of the sick man, then was spread upon him a
Franciscans Coat, but first consecrated with prayers, and holy water. A Friars
Cool was put under his head, for then it could not be put on, and withal was
laid his pardon, and all his prouisoes.


Mar. This is a new kind of death indeed.


Phae. And they had that, the Devil has no power over them that die in that
manner, so they say, that among others, St. Martin, and St. Francis died.


Mar. But their life was answerable to their death. And I pray, what then?


Phae. Then there was reached to the sick man the Image of the Cross, and a
wax Candle: when the Cross was taken him, he said, I was wont in war to be
defended with my Buckler, but now I will oppose this buckler against my enemy:
and when he had kissed it, laid it upon his left shoulder; but to the holy
Candle he said, sometimes with my spear I have prevailed against the enemies
of my body, but now I will shake this spear at the enemies of my soul And
with that they all fled away, as a dog does from a gammon of bacon, when he is
through ly a hungered.
.


Mar. This was warrelike enough.


Phae. These were the last words that he uttered: for presently death was in
his tongue, and he began to breathe out his soul. Bernard standing at his
right hand, and Vincent at his left hand; the one showed him the image of Saint
Francis, and the other the Image of Saint Dominicke. The rest that were in the
Chamber murmured certain Psalms with a murmuring voice. Bernard with great
and loud voice stood roaring in his right ear: and Vincent the like in his
left ear.


Mar. What did they cry?


Phae. To this effect cried Bernard: George Gunner, if now you like of that we
have done, turn your head to the right O miserable comforters. Not a word all this while what Christ did for him.
hand: and he did so. On the other side, Vincent cried: fear not George, thou
have Francis, and Dominicke to fight for thee. Be secure, and take no care for
any thing. Think what abundance of merits thou have, what a pardon thou have:
and last of all, remember that I have pawned my soul for thine if there should
be any danger, if thou do believe and like these things, then turn thy head
to the left hand, and so he did. Again with the like noise they cried; if thou
beleeuest these things, crush my hand, says the one, and mine, said the other,
and so he did. And so with turning of his head this way and that way, and
crushing of their haudes there were almost three hours spent, since George
began to gasp for breath. Here Bernard standing upright, pronounced his
absolution again; but before he could finish it, George was gone. This was
about midnight; in the morning they went about their anatomy: and after dinner
they finished the burial in manner aforesaid.


Mar. I never heard of a more laborious death, nor yet of a more ambicious
funeral: but I think you will not publish this tale abroad.


Phae. Why? there is no danger in it; for if the things which I have told be
good, and godly, it is sit for the people to know them, if not, all good men
will give me thanks for bewraying them, to that end that some being corr^cted
with shame, may no more do the like, and the simple may beware that they be not
overtaken with the like error.


Mar. You speak both truly and stoutly, and now I desire Of Cornelius ^s end.
to hear what end Cornelius made.


Phae. As he lived hurtful to none, so he died: he had every year a fever,
which came unto him at certain times in the year. Now that, (whether it were
by reason of oppressing old age, for he was above three score, or whether it
were of some other cause I know not) did more urge the man then it was wont to
do. And he ^eemed to feel the day of his dissolution to approach near at
hand: therefore four days before he died, on the Lords day he went to Church,
he conferred with his Minister, he heard the holy Sermon, and Service, he
reverently received the Lord^s Supper, and so returned home again.


Mar. Did he use no Physicians help?


Phae. Yes, only one he was advised by, both a good Physician, and a good man.
His name is Jacob Castrutius, he told Cornelius that he would do the best good
that he could for his friend but said withal, that there was more help in God
then in Physicians. Cornelius received this speech in as good part as if he had
given him most certain hope of life. Therefore though he were ever to his
ability good to the poor, yet now whatsoever he could spare, after he had
taken order for his wife and children, he gave it to the needy, not to these
proud beggars, that are in every place, but to the honest poor, who wrought
hard for their living, and yet were poor, their charges being greater then
their labor could supply, I prayed him to go to his bed, and to send for the
Minister, rather then by walking up and down to weary his thin wasted body.
His answer was, that his care was always rather to be helpful, than
troublesome to his friends, if it were possible, and that he would not be
unlike himself at his death. And truly he did not keep his bed above one day,
and part of a night, before he left this world. In the mean time, for the
weakness of his body, he leaned on a staff, or sat in a Chair, seldom
would he lie in his bed, but upon his bed sometime, and sit right up. At this
time he did ever give something in charge of looking to those that were known
to be honest poor folk, or read on some holy Book, which might stir up
his mind to trust in God, and might also set forth the love of God to usward.
If through weariness he were not able to read, he would hear some friend
rea^e unto him. He did often with marvelous zeal exhort his family to
concord and mutual love, and to the study of true godliness: and those that
took care for his death, he did comfort most lovingly. He did also admonish
them all, and all his friends to pay every man his own.


Mar. Did he not make a Will?


Phae. Yes, he did that before, when he was whole and strong. For he was of
opinion, that they are not Wills, but dotings, or dreams rather, which men make
when they lie a dying.


Mar. Did he give nothing to the Monasteries, and Mendicant Friars?


Phae. Not a farthing: I have (said he) to my ability disposed all my little
substance: now as I leave to others the possession of my goods: so I also
leave them the dispensation of them, And I hope they will see them better
employed then I have done.


Mar. Did he not send for religious men to be about him as George did?


Phae. Truly there was not one more then his own family, and two of his
special friends: for he said he would not trouble any more at his death, then
he did at his birth.


Mar. I expect an end of this story.


Phae. You shall have it presently: he sent for his pastor, who gave him the
holy communion, but without any secret confession: for he said that his mind
was not troubled with any thing. Near his pastor began to deal with him
about his burial, and asked him, where, and in what manner he would be buried?
Bury me (said the other) even as you would bury a christian man of the most
inferior sort, neither do I care where you lay this body of mine, it will be
found out well enough in the last day wheresoever it be laid, and as for
funeral pomp I regard it not. Then there was mention made of the ringing of
belles, of yearly dirges to be sung, of a pardon, and the communion of merits
to be purchased: to which his answer was, My pastor, I shall be never the worse,
if there be no bell rung for me: if you bestow any solemn funeral on me, it
is more than need: or if there be any other thing that the public custom of
the church requires, if it may be omitted without offense to the weak ones, I
leave it to your discretion. Neither is it my purpose, either to buy any man's
prayers, or to spoil any man of his merits, Christ has merited sufficiently
for me, and I hope the prayers of the church will not alittle prosite me while
I am alive. My whole trust is, that the prince of Pastors the Lord Jesus, has
done away all my sins, and fastened them unto his Cross, and that he has
written and sealed my pardon with his most precious blood, whereby he has made
us assured of eternal life, if we put all our trust in him. For God forbid
that I with man's merits and pardons should provoke my God to enter into
judgment with his servant, being most assured, that in his sight no flesh
living shall be justified, I appeal from his justice to his mercy, which is
great and unspeakable. Having spoken these things the Minister departed.
Cornelius having conceived great hope of salvation, with great joy and
cheerefulnes, wills some things to be read unto him out of the Bible, which
tend to prove the resurrection of the dead, and the reward of immortallitie,
as that out of Esaias concerning the death of Hezechia, together with his song:
then the fifteenth chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians: then of the
death of Lazarus, out of John, but especially the history of Christ's passion
out of the Gospel. Oh how greedily did he devour (as it were) every thing in
his mind? at some things sighing, at some lifting up his hands with
thanksgiving, rejoicing at some, and at many things that were read unto him,
he would cast forth certain short prayers. After dinner, when he had slept a
while, he willed the twelfth chapter of John to be read unto him, even to the
end: here you would have said he had been a man transfigurated, and inspired
with a new spirit. Now it grew toward the evening, he called for his wife and
children, and raising up himself so well as he could, he spak^ unto them after
this manner. Most dee^e wise, whom God has before joined together, the same
God does now put asunder, but only in body, and that but for a short time.
That care, and love, and godliness which heretofore thou have showed to me and
these sweet pledges, bestow whally on these the fruit of our marriage, which
God has given unto us, maintain them and briug them up in such sort as they
may be compted worthy of Christ, which if thou shall do, as I trust thou wi^t,
there shall be no cause why they should be compted orphans. But if thou
chance to marry again, (at which word she burst out into great weeping, and
began to swear that she would never set her mind upon marriage again.) But
here Cornelius interrupted her, and said, My most dear sister in Christ, if
the Lord Jesus shall vouchsafe to bestow this strength of spirit upon thee,
be not thou wanting to his heavenly gift, but embrace it: for it will be better
both for thee and thy children: but if the infirmity of the flesh shall call
thee to the married state, then know that my death does set thee free from
that power which I have had over thee, but not from that faithfulness, which
both in respect of me and thee, thou owe unto all the children common to us
both. As touching matrimony, use that liberty which the Lord has permitted
unto thee: only this I request, and admonish thee of, that thou choose a man
of those conditions: and thou also to show thy self in such sort toward him,
that he may either by his own goodness be drawn, or by thy commodity may be
provoked to love his sons in law. And moreover, beware that thou do not
bind thy self by any vow: Keep thy self free to God and our children, whom
I would have thee so to train up in all piety, that they may not addict
themselves unto my trade, until by their years and experience of things, it
shall appear for what kind of life they are most fit. Then turning to his
children, he exhorted them to the study of godliness, to obey their mother,
and to have mutual love and concord amongst themselves. Having ended these
sayings, he kissed his wife, and his children, and prayed God to bless them.
After all this, he looking upon the rest that were present, he said, before to
morrow morning, the Lord Jesus which rose again in the morning, will vouchsafe
of his great mercy to call this soul out of the sepulcher of this body, and
out of the darkness of this mortality, into his heavenly light. I will not
weary my tender age with needless watchings. And let the rest also go take
their rest, one shall ^ustics to be with me, to put me in mind of some of
those holy instructions which have been read. The night being past, about
four of the clock, all his family being about him, he willed the whole Psalm
to be read unto him, which the Lord Jesus praying rchearsed upon the cross.
That done, he said, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear?
The Lord is the protector of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Then he
folded his hands upon his breast in manner of a supplicant, and lifting his eyes
toward heaven, he said, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And forthwith closed up
his eyes, as one about to sleep, and with a little sigh yielded up the ghost,
you would have said he had been asleep.


Mar. I never heard of a more easy departure.


Phae. And so he was in all his life. They were both my friends, p^raduenture I
shall not judge indifferently which of them died the more Christian-like, you
which are of sounder judgment, can tell better than I.


Mar. That I will, but at my leisure.


FINIS.

