Here folowith a scorneful Image or monstrus shape of a marvelous strange
figure called, Sileni alcibiadis presentyng ye state and condition of this
present world / and inespeciall of the Spirituallte how far they be from ye
perfect trade and life of Criste, wryte^ in the laten tongue / by that famous
clarke Erasmus / and lately translated in to English.



Sileni Alcibiadis.
THis sayng among lernyd men is taken for a proverb / which may
conveniently be vsyd / either for a thing which outwardly / and as they say
at the first flusshe semyth to be of no value and scornful / yet if a man
look nerer to it and behold the inward part hit apperith great and
wonderful / or for that man / whose behauoure and countenance shewyth far wide
from the inward entente of the heart and mind / some say that Sileni were
certain Images karuen and graven and made after such a fasshio^ that they
might be opened and closed again / which when they were close had a scorneful
and monsterous shape / and when they were opened suddenly they shewid as gods
These facio^ of Images was taken of the scorned Scilenus scole master to
Baccus. Silenus was a fool of the Poets gods. Moreover Alcibiades going
about to praise Scocrates when he dyned with plato did lyken him to such
manner image because he fer otherwise seemed to them that inwardly beheld his
fasshio^ then to them that no thing regardid saw his outward shape / whose
skyne as they say if a man would have set to sell seemed not to be worth one
fardyng he was rude favored / sour countenau^sed / crokenosed / and full of
snyuell / a man would have recounted him a fool both by his speaking and
doing / his apperell not worth a groote / his speech very rusticall / as one
that lately came from the carte / sowter craft / or sinythes forge / his
substance very thynne he had such a wife as scarfly a colyar would be content
to live with At that time when the folysshe desire to be named a wise and
co^nynge man wexed marvelous veruent among men that eueriche dysdayned or
could not suffer an others praises / when also there were many which not a
little bosted that they knew allthynges.

This man then only said that he knew well this one thing or that he knew
nothing / he seemed a fool and vnexperte in every thing conceruynge the commyn
welthe / in so much that on a time when he be ganne to do a thing he knew not
what he did. In the common house his master was dasshed out of cou^ tenaunce /
and he him self lawghed to scorn of every man there present. But if a man had
behylde the inward party of this Image so lawghen to scorn / he should have
found as yt had been rather a god then a man. A mind of great vaew and full
of wysdom. A dispyser of all such things / as other mortal men labor for,
sweat for, strive for / war for, by see and land, never vnpaciented with
any wrong, Nor over maysteryd with fortune or myschaunse. A man that fered
nothing / not death / which is to every man fereful, wherefore even at that time
when all the world was replenisshed with wise men. This fool was only
auctorised a wise man by the reuelacion of the gods / and was esteemed to know
much more / which said he knew nothing / then they which said they knew all
things / yea and for that one thing he was esteemed to know more then the other
/ because that he only said that he knew nothing Such an Image was Antisthenes
whose staff / scripe / and cloak / excelled the riches of the best fortuned
kings. such an Image was Diogenes counted among the comonaultye as a dog /
in whom yet Alexandre the great / among all princes as he thought of himself
the most excellent parceyued and saw some goodly thing which also when he
consyderyd the maruaylous wisdom of his mind / said if I were not Alexandre
I would wysshe to be Diogenes. But after my mind / seeing he was Alexandre he
should not wysshe to change his name with Diogenes. But rather to wisshe to
have such mind as Diogenes had. Such an Image was Epichetus sarua^t and
bondeman / a poor man and a lame man. As his Epitaphi shewith. But which is
most fortunate of al he is derely beloved of the gods / which things the
profet Helyas of his life joined with wisdom openly declaryth. Such is
vndoutdily the nature of ye true persit things / that what so ever they have
of value or worthy to be folowid / that is surely hid and kept preuy in the
iner part. And that / that is vile and of no value / settyth yt self forth
before every man's syghte / for such is the favor of the frail and common
semblance of goodness / which at the first chop peace they say apperyth to
every man that yt metyth wythall. But if a man Inwardely from the rote mark
them / that is for other wise in doing then yt apperyth in semeyng. was not
crist a wonderful Image / if a man may so boldly after such manner speak of
him. and verily / I see no cause why but every man that is a chrystyan may /
might / and should speak of him and declare him after what facio^ so ever he
will / so that he hurt not the christian faith / If you behold the outward
face of this image what is there / after the come^ course estemyd more vile or
abject his parents were pour and of low birth / his house very simple / him
self as bare as could be / had but few disciples and those very pour not
called from kings courts / nor from the pharices chayres / nor from the
philosophers scoles / but even from the toll house and even from the fysshers
craft then his life / how far was yt from all pleasures which through hungre
/ werynes bobynges / scorns / scourgeynges yea and at the last / payned on
the cross and suffered death. This part of them behylde the mystical prophet
/ when he disceyued his shape sayng he had no fairenes nor beautye / we saw
him / and we behylde not / we desired to be with him that was most dispecte /
and menyst of all men / And many other things which follow such like purpose
But now if yt happen a man to be hold the inward part of this Image / if yt
vouche safe to show yt self to the pure and cleue light of our mind. O
Immortal god / what an vnspecable tresure a man shall find there / what
preciouse stone in such vile place / what hye and exceeding gretnes / in so
low and lyttel thing / what marvelous riches in so pour a thing / what
excellent strength in so weak a thing / what honorable glory in so
shameful and abiecte a thing what absolute rest in so paynful labors / and
to be short / what everlasting fountain or well of Immortallytye in so
bitter and cruel death / why now abhor they this Image / which yet boste them
self in the title of him / that is to say to be called christians / vndoutidly
yt was but a small thing for christ to bring about to make himself chief
reuler of all the world / and to pocesse that / that in old time / the
reulers of Rome vaynely went about to win to pass christ in nu^bre of his
guard that ever was / to excelle Cresus in riches / ye and stop the wysest
philosophers mouth that ever was / yet this kind of shape and image pleasyd
him best whom he would that his disciples and friends / that is to say
christians / should always have before there face / this philosophy did he chufe
chyefly / for that on every side varyeth from the philosophers decrees and
worldely wysdom / which alonly geuyth us that thing that they by sundry ways
goo about to get / that is felicite. Such Images were the prophets which
lived as outelawes wandering in wyldernes, whose meat where vile herbs and
roots / their drink water / there clothing shhepes felles and gotes skynnes /
but he that looked in the inner parts of the Images said that the world was
not worthy to have them. Such an image was John^ the Baptyst which couerid
with a Camels skin and gyrde with and heryn gyrdell passed all the rich
appereyl of kings / and eating honey focles excelled all the deyntye fare of
princes for verily he knew what treasure was hyd under that rude and vile
garment / which with his inco^perable praise, said among the children of
women, there has not risen one greter then John^ the Baptyst / such Images
were the apostels / pour / ill shapen / unlearned, of low birth, weak,
nothing setby To be short, scorned and hated, al most of all the world / but
open the se Images, behold the iner part and what king or tyrant may in
might or power be co^paryd to the^ which with a word over master dyuels,
the cruel tempests of the rageyng see, and call the deed to life again / what
Cresus semyth not pour in comparison of them, which even with the shado bring
health to the sick, which also with the only touch of their hands give the
holy gooste, what Aristotle is not counted a fool unlearned and a tryfeler in
respect of them which have drawn the heavenly wysdom given from the very
fountain, to the regard of which all men's wysoom is more folysshenes,
Such an Image was the buss hoppe Marten cou^tyd and scorned. Such pmages were
the old byss hoppes hye in mekenes / rich in pouertye and Gloriouse in
disposyd glory. There are also now a days such Images, but O Lord god over
few, for the most part of men shows this Image out of his nature If a man
would throwly behold the iner strength and nature of thing es, he shall find
none farther from the very wysdom then those which with magnified tytles,
furred hoddes, shynyng gyrdels and rings set full of precious stones, process
absolute wysdom. In somoch that a man shall perceive more very treu wysdom in
one named of the common people, A wretch an ydiot or half a fool, whose mind
has been instructed not with the arguments of the subtle Doctor as thy call
him Scotus, But with the heavenly spririt of christ then in many of our hye
doctors of divinity, and great wise masters, whose belyes swellyth with the
Aristole, and are full of the rafle of the magistral definicions, conclusions,
and preposicions. A man shall also find now here less true noblenes then in
those Thrasoes, which far the old Auncestres, for the golden chains and for
their glorious names boste not a little of their hye noblenes. And that none are
farther from true strength then they for there folyshe hardynes and proud
ferce lokes are esteemed of the people most mighty and not vanquysshable, None
more abiecte, nor bond saruantes then they which reken them self gods and
lords of al other men None so wrechedful then they that seem most welthyest,
None more beggarly begars / whom the com munaltye reverence as rich men None
more unlike to bysshoppes then they which among bysshoppes covet to hold ye
chyefe rowme And that none ar more oftentimes farther from true relygion, which
thing I would were untrue, then they which in name apparral and ceremonies
profess absolute and parfyt relygion. So now what noblenes, excellentnes,
goodness so ever be in any thing / that is always lest in syghte and sylden
myste apperyth outewardely, In trees the flowers and leuys show fair outwardly
to the sight. The stock or stem apperyth very great and large / but the
shade in whom is the stre^gthe of all, how lyttel thing is yt / how preuely
hyd / how little co^fortyth se we, how little bostyth yt or shewyth yt his
bare Nature. hands hid, gold preciouse stones in deep veins of the earth,
Among es the elements as they call them which so ever is most noble and of
most value, that is farthest set from our feleyng parceuerance / as the air /
and the fire amongst bestes / what so ever beast and most effectuell that is
hyd in the inner pertes in a man what is most goodli and immortal / that only
can we not see In every kind of things the vylest part most apperith to the
sentence / And that / that is most chyefe is farthest from the sentence. Now
may we also find many such Images in the sacraments of the church. Thou
see the water / thou see the oil and salt / thou herest the words that
is but the outward party of the Image / for if thou nether here nor see the
heaven ly strength and virtue sent from above in to the i^ner parts of these
images all the resydue or no other things be but very tryfles and of no value
The holy scripture has also such images if thou stay in in the utter part,
the matter is often vile and scorneful / but if thou search the inner part
thou shalt wonder and reverence the goodly wysdom / For verily to speak of
the old testament / if thou mark nothing but the hystory, And herist Adam
formed of claye, Eve preuely taken out of the sleapeynge manes side, the
serpent entysynge the woman to eat the apple god passing by the air, The tow
egyd sword hanging before the door, least the banisshed should enter in
again / would thou not think that yt were one of Homers fables If thou red
the Incest of Loath, the adultry of Dauyd, The woman lyyng on the breast of the
cold old man. Osees marriage to an harlot, would not they that little force
the hereynge of such shameful matters not return them away / dysdaynyng to
here so bawdy a tale. But under this shameful folly. O Immortal god how
excellent and florysshed wysdom is hyd, If thou regard but the utter part of
the Euangelyke parables who would not reken them to be some foles sayynge. But
if thou break the nutte vndoutydly thou shalt find the preuy and very wisdom.
And to be short the more excellent any natural or mystical thing is the
farther hyd is set in the inner part and farther from the outward syghte,
likewise in knowledge of things the kyndely truth always lies preuy in depthe
which another lyghtely nor of many is found out. The gross multitude because
yt has a perverse judgment estemyng al thing by those things which chyefely
meant with the sensys of the body slydeth and every where fallyth in error and
is deluded with the false similytudes of good things and ill, turneyng the
image as they say in and out as which then they wo^dre and maruelously
behold, I speak of such as be ill, I will not hurt the good, no, nor the ill
verily. For as much as a general declaracion of virtue hurtyth no man, would
to God there were fewer in whom these things might be laid, when thou see
the Septer the bages, the guard, when thou he rest the tythis, Most noble,
most excellent, most victorious, most dreadful and such like, Honourist
thou not a prince and thynkest not that thou haste seen as yt were an erthly
god, and a thing more then a man, but open this image and mark the inner
part, Thou shall find a Tyrant, an enmy of the City an hater of the common
pease, a sower of discord, an oppresser of good men, a myscheuer of the law,
a distroter of Towns, a pyller of churches, a thief Sacryleger, an adulterer,
a dycer. To be short as the Greeks proucrbe is a head of all my styef there or
that in name and countenance show them self as hye rulers and maynteners of
the common welthe, when yet in deed they aren wolfes and robbers of the City.
There aren also whose shorn heddes if a man only consider he would reverence
them as prestes parauenture also if you mark their inward fasshon, shall find
them as ill or worse then ye lay, peradventure also a man may find some
bysshoppes whose solemone consecracion if thou mark, if thou behold the
apparel, the might with gold and preciouse stones / the staff also set with
Iouels, then would thou reken that thou hadest seen a man comen from heaven /
or rather a thing more then a man, but behold the iner part of this image,
then shalt thou find a warrioure, a marchante, a Tirante. And then shalt
thou say that all this noble apparel is but as yt were dysguysynge There are
beside these I would there were not so many, that if a man would Judge them by
their long berdes, by their colors, by their hattes / by the facion of
their gesture and cou^tenau^ce / he might well account them for angels or
pawles. But if thou mark the inner part thou shall find them renagates,
brawlers, sklanderers, flaterers, yea both thieves and tyrants but after an
other fasshon. And for that so much more pestilent as hit is hyd covered and
cloked with hypocrysy. And to be short instead of gold as the proverb is,
thou shalt find coals. I now again desire that no man take displesur with
this my saying / seeing I name no man, but touch ye vices / who soever
offends not / let him not think any of this to be spoken again him, but if
he have offendid / let him think hymfelfe rather warned to amend / then
rebuked. The one may greatly rejoice / the other ought to so say me
godamercy. There are in every kind of men in whom if thou behold the shape
of the body / thou wylt call the^ men / ye and verily godly men but if thou
look on the inward part of them / paraduenture thou shalt find a Sow / a
Lion / a Bear or an Ass / thou shalt find a thing quite contrary to that,
that the poets feign to be in them that are be wiched with Circes / for
allthoughe they have outwardly the shape of beasts, yet had they all way
inwardly the mind of man but they have outwardly a manes shape and inwardly
more then a beastly sense. Of the other part there are whom by their outward
shape as before is said / thou would reken scarsely for men, when yet in
their iner part restith an a^gelycal mind. Hereof now spryngeth the diversity
between the worldli man and the treu christen man / for that that the one
chefely wo^derith and folowith the most grosist things which happen to come
in his syghte. And all other things either he dispiseth or countyth them to be
had in best regard. The other only folowyth such things which are farthyst
from the corporal nature / which also in no wise can be seen with our
outewarde yes / all other thing other over passed / or less favored
countynge the true judgment of every thing to be taken from the inward party
of all good things for so Aristotell callyth it, which properly partaineth
not to man. Riches is the meanyst But among the common sort / yea almost
among al men he is most reuerensed and countyd most happy which possedeth
them, what so ever way they were gotten. For them strive, For them feyghte /
for them kill we. For them labor we as they say through out fire and water.
The next place to riches has the the noblenes of kynred, If for no other
purpose / yet for the folysh and vain glorious name. He is counted for half a
god / which ca^ show a lyneall discente / from Codrus of Athenis to himself
or from Brute of Troy. I know not wether ever any such was Borne or not / or
from Hercules that is somoche spoken of and is he worthy no name which only
deseruyth yt by lerneynge and virtue. He is reconed for a noble man whose
graunfathers grau^father played the ma^ly murderer in war. And is he cou^tyd
among the vilest sort who se good mind and wysdom has proprieted the
world. In the third place are set the commodities and propertyes of the body.
As high grown / Strong / mighty / fair. welfauoured / and such like / who
soever has any of these is not excluded from the nombre of the fortunat sort
/ so now riches obtain the soueraynte. Next is the noblenes of blood / thirdly
the bodily perpretyes, and the regard of that mind lest of all. Now if thou
divide this man as Paul does in three parts. The flesh / the soul, and
the spyryt, thou shalt se how paruersely the common sort take them.

To speak after Paul's words, the worste part which is all way in syghte,
whom the Appostell disalowyth the multitude chefely enbrasyth. The myddell
part whom the Appostell alowyth so that yt be referred to the spryt many
praise. The spryte which is our best part of whom as of the lively
fountain, all our felycytye spryngeth fourth / by whom also we are coupelyd
to god / is not so much had in regard of the multitude that they once inquire
not / whether there be any such or not / or what is the spririt of whom yet
Paul so often speakith hereof puttyth out the paruers Judgment of the
multitude which give most honor to such things as ar lest to be
reuerensed / most hyely coveting those things which are most in contempt
/ hereof also co^yth that money is more set by then lerneyng. The ancient of
kynred then goodness. The fayrenes of the body then the lowlynes of mind. The
ceremonies then the free love toward god / the humayne tradicions then
christ's p^ceptes. The dys guysynge things then the truth The shadows then
ye very things. The dysceptfull / then the true. The variable then ye
steadfast. The waueryng, then the eternal. More over of these froward
Iugementes aryseth the paruerse nameyng of things / calling that is hye low
/ that is bitter, sweet. That is preciouse, vile. that is life death. To speak
of such things by name. They are called lovers which either be over much
favor corrupt or lay in wait to depreue ye woman from her chastyte and
good fame / when nothing can be more like an envy / they called yt Justice /
when one ill is acquitted with another / when one offense is reco^pensed with an
other / when one word is with double damage paid home again. This fasshon in
matrymony is now allowed best that defoyleth co^sanguynite / and as nere to
virgynite. They call him a traytoure / and an enemy to the prince which would
that he should do no thing above his laws or besides right / which would
that he should use himself as a very prince. And as far as might be to
dyffer from a Tyrante. Than which is / no booste is most horrible or
fearful. Of the other part he is called a wise cou^seloure. A friend and a
faythfulle lege man which corruptith the princes manners with worse counsel
which infeatyth the minds with folysshe oppinions / which contynually
flateryth and dalyeth with them which that if counselours draws them in to
the hate of their comunaltye which entyce them to war and other folysshe
busynes. They say that the kings majesty and hyenes is greatly incresyd when
any thing is won by tyrany / by great portion of excedyng mysthief / He is
called a robber of the kings money which spekyth one word again any
demandid tribute. But now seeing that a prince has three chief things by
which he representith god which is the only very king Goodness wysdom and
power / seems he a friend to the king which would beryue him of two the
pryncipall things / goodness and wysdom, and only leave them pouer / which is
not only false but yet also not of himself, for as much as the only power
of a prince lyttel avails without his commons aid. For verily power oneles
yt be co^ioyned with wysdom and goodness is Tirany, and no power which also the
peoples consent may even as they gave yt / so take yt away again, when yet
goodness and wysdom shall abide with the king banysshed out of his realm / It is
treason to use the kings badge otherwise then besemeth. And are they rewarded
that violat his mind causeynge him to be for a good man / a cruel man. For a
wise man a subtyl / and for a man of power a Tyrant, One death is to little
for him that enterpryseth to put poison in the Kings cup, And receives he a
reward / that with most pestylent oppinions corruptyth and poysonyth his
mind and infectyth as yt were the welthe of the common welthe / to ye great
myschefe of all ye realm, He is called a king which has in his possessyon
great dominions and riches / when vndoutely to play the very king is is none
other thing, but justly to mynyster the common welthe. The affynites between
princes / and than the renou^syd consyderacyons are called the ioynyng together
of the thrysten pease / wha^ yet we se, wha^ these wells spring all over. All
strife, all debate, yea and all myschefe of the common welthe they call it a
just war / when the princes for collusyon to polle and oppress there
comes welthe / They call it pease wha^ that ended they conspyted togethers.
They commit the realm greatly increasyd when any town or city which the
prince by what time soever it be, claymeth his won or rather bought with so
great pyllage or accyons of the cytezens with so great inorther / by which are
made over many wydowes and fatherles childerne. After like tacyon, they call
the church priests, bysshopes, and popes / wha^ verily they are no other
thing but even the mynysters of the church. For the church is the christen
people whom Christ him self calls greatter than the bysshoppes can mynyster
under / being unable in service / but otherwise greatter if they as well by
following the manners and living, as by succession of dygnyte represents
which yet when he was in all things lord and ruler of al men, use them self
as a servant, and not as a lord. The greattest exco^munycatyon shall be
publysshed again them, as enemies to the church / yea and are counted almost
heretykes that takes any money out of a priests purse. I speak not to bold
any man in such doing. I would no man should take my saying so. But if a
enemy of the church ought to be hated, tell on / whether there can be any
enemy more hurteful or more dedely, than an ungodly prelate. If any of the
spirytuall lands or annuyties be dymynysshed, they cry with one voice the
churches right is oppressed. But when the world is styred to war when
through the the opon ill life of priests many thousand sorts are brought to
dystruccyon. No man bewayleth ye churches chance wha^ yet now is the church
verily a meruaylous fair church / not when the people refuse charytie or love
toward god / when vices decrese, when goodness increases / or wha^ the holy
doctrine is in strength. But when the alters shine with gold and precious
stones / yea wha^ that not regarded. The priests in lands, household,
voluptuosytle, moyles, horses, in su^ptuous building of houses or rather
places and other such like things may teache or rather excel tyrants. we dare
not speak one word of the^ which spend or rather bestow, as they call it
the churches rentes in ill and peruers uses, to the great hurt and occasyon of
ill insamples gyuyng of ye rude multitude. If any thing be given to them, we
rejoice and give great thanks for it, saying that Christ's church is inryched
/ wha^ vndoutly the true and highest gaynes of the church is the profetynge
of the christen life, they call it blasphemye / if a man speak with little
reverence of Chrystofer or George / and will not take every story of them or
such other even for ye gospel. But Paul calls that blasphemy as often as
throughout the occasyon of ye Chrystyans manners / it happeth yt the name of god
is blasphemed, for what shall ye enemies of ye chrystyan relygyon say / wha^
they se in ye Eua^gelike letters that Christ holely exorteth to contempne
riches, to exyle voluptuosyte to despise all honor. And of ye other part
wha^ they se ye heads and chief rulers of yt christen professyon live after
such a fassyon, that in laboring to gather riches in love of voluptuosyte in
gorgeous apparel and exquisyte deintye far in cruel deuysyng and setting
forth of war and almost in all other myschefes. Math. yea also excel the
very hethens. The wise reder perceyueth well what I perceive here on spoken /
for honor of ye christen name, and wherefore I search to myschefe, how seyth
scornefully, how mockyngly / Trowest thou to ieste on us wha^ these in the
gospel that Christ's servant commanded us to have clothing with meat or other
ceremonies but only by these. i. If they be joined together with inseparable
charity / than after perceive that we in nothing agree among our selfs / In
so much yt the infydels never stryued nor warred for more fylthy or peruicyous
cause. One prince warreth with another. One city fyghteth with another. One
kynseman agrees not with another / nor one relygyon as they now call it I.
with another. All things among us is full of debates, dyscencyons and stryues
/ Call they it not heresye if a man speak or write any thing yt might dysagre
from the magystrall preposycyons of ye deuyne doctors, and yet not that
heresye which set that a lofte or take that thing as the chief part of man's
felycyte, which Christ him self every where teaches to be despised and set
at naught, which brings in a manner a living man clean contrary to the
euangelyke precepts and oppostels instytucyons, which again the word of
Christ armeth the apostels going forth to preche the gospel, not with the
sword of the spyryte which all worldly affeccyo^s set at naught, only
causes yt they should need no sword nor with an iron wepyn, whereby they may
dyffende the^ self again their persecuters. i. And no doubt under the name of
the sword, he would gonnes, crosbowes and other wepyns mete for war should
be comprehended, than have they a scryppe to bear money in, because they should
lack nothing. And under the name of this scryppe, he would that every thing
pertaining to the of this life, should be understand to this purpose / the
great noble wise man Lire worthy to be allowed and preferred before many /
Ieromes interpe the words of Luke. It is an vnexperyable sacrylege if a man
take any thing out of the hallowed place, and it is counted a light offense to
pylle to defraude, to oppress wydowes and other poor folk, which are the
living temples of god, which thing is commonly used of P. and R. he is
accounted profane, which by fyghtyng or otherwise causes ye church to be
suspe^ded / and is he not a cursyd which violateth corrupts, and polluteth by
flaterig gifts, vain promyses and other such baudy things to pure and chaste
vyrgyns which is ye temple of the holy ghost / yet he which does such things
is counted and taken among ye multitude for a merry and iely fellow I speak not
to give occasion to ill doers as I haueher to sure protested but to show how
yt the multitude much more regards these thing / yt are seen with ye eye / tha^
those things which are so much more true as they, or less seen with the eye:
thou see ye co^secracyon of ye stony temple, but ye dedycacyons of ye mind
because you see it not, thou settyst little by it, for defense of ye temples
orname^tes you fyghtest with all thy power, but for ye keeping chaste manners and
perfyte living, no man ones takes yt Eua^gelike sword, whom Christ
commands to be bought even with sellyng yt cote from ye back / it is called
most hye love toward god, they be counted most swetest encreasyng of ye
spirytuall riches or realm / fight and be most cruel war myngle ye holy and
profane togethers and yet for ye love of spirytuall riches / vndoutely a thing
most vile is reue^ged / how great and excedyng flowt, or rather a se of
myschefe is thereby committed, namely when a open warreis for yt purpost
admytted / for what myschefe can there be veuysed, which in war is not
exercysed. But peraue^ture ye reder p^uely to himself thikyng for what purpose
keeps he so shamfully saying would thou yt a prince should be such as plato would
yt Gardeynes should be in his book called de republica, the kepers the pale
spirit from rule auctoryte, dygnytie, honor, and riches / and reuokest them
to the apostels scryppe and staff, Not so good sir I spoil the^ not / but
inryche the^ with far better riches, I put them not from their possessions,
but provoke to better. I pray ye which of us gives hyer thank or perceyueth
more of the kings majesty / thou which gives him liberty to do what he
will, ye which would have him rather a Tyrant than a prince / which fyllest
him full with all voluptuosytie / which drownest him in auoutry, fornycacyon
incest and such like / which make him bound and subject to all couetysnes
which would he should have no more governance than one of his mean
subjects, which burdenest him with such things the which disdayneth the
Hethens / always despise and count them worthy praise and honor, that at no
time regards him, or else I which covet ye prince image he represe^teth in
wysedom / which is the proper praise of kings to excel all other / to be
far from all fylthy affeccyons and diseases of the mind which the rude
multitude so much marvel at, to wonder at no vile or low thing / to set
no great delight in riches / brefely to do that thing in the co^mynalte in the
realm yt the mind is in the body, and that god in the hole / which of us
both intrulyer Imagyneth on the Bysshoppes dygnytie, thou which burdenest
them with erthely riches, which wrappest them in filthy and vile cares
which tornest theynto peryllous storms of cruel war / or I which coueyte to
be Christ's vycare and the keeper of Christ's spouse / to be most clean and
quyete from the pestylente stalle of all yerthely desires / and as nere as
might to be like him, whose place and auctoryte he occupyeth and whose person
also he here in earth represents. The Stoyktes say, that no man can be a
good man, but he that lacks the disease of the mind / the disease of the
mind they call covetousness and affeccyons / so much more now ought the
Christen men to be free from such dyseases but namelest princes / yet most
of all the hedes and fathers of the church Q. I. the B. I will that priests
should tule and raygne, but I count this worldely dygnytie, which be profit
or honor less worthy, thanne that of an heavenly man should be burdened with
it. I will that the bishop should have most excellent tryumphe, but not
such in blody tryumphes as that ungracious Mareus, as the ungodly Julius had
so vain that they are spoken again of in scornful Satius / what if ye
mouerytours had beholden them / he would have killed him self with laughing,
in such praise worthy and apostolyke Tryumphes, as the appostell the
warryout, and far more polytyke Capytayne Alexaunder the great dyscrybeth as
it were bostynge his own praise said in many labors in prisons / more
habundaunt in strypes above measure, in death often of the Jews five times
received? yea every time fortye strypes, one excepted / thryse was he beaten with
rods / ones was he stoned, thryse he suffered shyprake night and day / I have been in the deep of ye see in journey, often i^ parels of waters, in parels of
robers, in parels of my own nacyon in Empyres among the hethen / I have been i
parels in cytyes in wilderness, in parels in the sea, in parell among false
brethren, in labor and travail, in often watchynges, in hunger and thruste,
in in fastings, often in cold and in nakydnes besides ye things which
outwardely happen to me. I am combred daily and care for all congregacyons /
who is sick and I am not sick, who is hurt in the faith, and my heart
burns not again little therefore let us says he in all things behave our
selfs as the mynysters of god / in much pacyence, in afflyccyons, in
necessytyes, in anguysshe, in strypes, in prysonment, in strife, in labor, in
watch, in fasting, in knowledge in long sufferynge, in kyndnesse in the holy
ghost, in love unfeigned in ye words of truth, in the power of god, by the
armoure of ryghtwysenes on the right hand / and and at the left hand in
honor and dyshonoure, in ill report and good report / as disceyuers and yet be
true / and unknown, and yet known / as dyenge, and behold me ye a live / as
chastened, and not killed / as sorowynge, and yet always merry / as poor, and
yet make many rich / as having nothing, and yet poscessynge all things.

Se thou now what honouce, what tryumphe comes of the apostelles war /
this is that glory which Paul as by an holy thing often warred for / these are
ye noble acts for which he trusted that any mortal crown was kept for him /
they will not I think dysdayne to walk after ye apostels steps, which
claymeth and take on them the apostelles rowme and auctoryte. I would that the
bysshoppes should be rich but with the Eua^gelyke matter / but with the
heavenly riches / which the larglyer they dystrybute abroad among all men / ye
more yet have they in their own keeping. I will that they should have defense
but with the apostels weapyns, and with the buckeler of faith / with the helmyt
of Justice / with the sword of health, which is the word of god / I will
that they should keep contynuall war. But again, the very enemies of ye
church / Symony, pride, and lechery / desire of honor, wroth, envy, and
other like ungodliness. These are the veryest turks that the christen men
should always take heed of / and always fight again: To such war the
bysshoppes should be both exortours and chief capytaynes. I will the priests
should be regarded among the chief, not for the tyranus romblynges, but for the
excellency of holy doctrine. And for their prestable virtues, I that they should
be received not for their glorious names or tragycal vesture, but for their
holy living and sad demeanor. I will that they be fered not as tyrants, but
as fathers. To be short I will that they should be rich / but in such thing
as the rude multitude not known, not regards / and for yt the more sure swet
and profitable / will thou here the true riches of the hye bishop. Here now
what the chefest next to Christ / said gold and silver I have none / that I
have that give I the in the name of Jesus / a rise and walk will thou fere the
beautefulnesse of the posterike name which passes all worldly glorious names
/ which excels all yerthely shapes and images. Here what that noble Paul
says / we be the good odor of Christ to god in every place / wylt thou here
more than a princes power, I am able and can do all things says he in him
which comfort me / will thou here the glory ye or my joy and my crown in
ye lord / will thou here the tytles worthy for a bishop, and the true
pontyfycall vesture. Paul dyscrybeth them to be sobre ornate, prudent, chaste,
keeping hospytalyte, a techer, no fyghter / but soberly doing no stryuer not
new fangled which has good report, which also has a good judgment of
such thing as are at the utter side / that he run not opprobriously in to
the snare of the devil. Mark well with what ornaments Moses adorned the
bysshope Aron, with what riches he inryched them / with what colors he
painted them with how innumerable precious stones, he innobyled them with how
great substance of splender gold he magnyfyed them all, which things what
they sygnyfye / if thou will know the interpretacyon of it, look Orygynes and
Jerome / and there vndoutly thou shall perceive what stuff ye very true
bysshoppes should provide and seek for / whom should the bishops rather
follow in living than them whom they express in lead, whom they represent
in name whose rowme and auctoryte they occupye / is it more conuenyent for
christ's vycare to follow Julius, Alexander, Cresia, and xerxes, which are no
other but very strange and great thieves. i. Than Christ him self whom
should be the successors of the apostels, rather fellow than the chief and ye
head of thapostels. Christ openly denies yt his kingdom is of this world,
and countest thou it conuenpent that Christ's successor should not only
admytte, but also couete the worldly kingdom / and for conqueryng thereof
should as they say move every stone and leave none unturned. In this world
there are as it were two works in all thing between them self, dysagreyng by
one gross and corporal / the other heavenly and as much as it may, thinking
to be that thing that here after it shall come to / in ye one he is taken for
ye chefest that most refusing the very good things and laden with false
riches as it were an hethen king, passes all other in lechery, wa^ton
pleasures, vyolence, pride, presumpcyon, riches, rapyn, and such like. And so
is he counted for the chefest yt has the most part of these euyls and lest
part of wisdom / temperaunce, sobernes, justice, and other which are the very
good things. In the other walks he that is chefest is lest vnquointed with
these vile and gross riches and most couete togethers the heavenly and very
perfyte riches. More over why would thou that a prince should be yt thing
that the hethen Philosophers always dyspraysed and despised / why settyst thou
his majesty in such things which are condemned of ye Infydels / why
measurest thou him, be those things by which thieves are rich and tyrants
great. A priest is a heavenly thing and thanne a man / there is nothing worthy
for his hyghnes but an heavenly thing / why dyshonestes thou his dygnytie with
so simple and vile common things / why vntamynatest his pureness with worldly
fylthynesse / why suffer not him to be rich in his own realm / why
suffer not him to be noble in his glory to be reuerensyd in his majesty /
to be rich in his own riches / them has the heavenly spirit chosen even
from the heavenly body / that is to say, the church to the most hye perfyte
rowme and dygnytie / why than drawest thou him to the furyous and romblynge
business of Cyrannus war. Paul reioysed that he was segrogated from the
common sort, why than ploungest thou the heavenly bishop in ye fylthe of ye
rude multitude / why deiectyst him to the vsurars / why leadest yt deuyne man
to such busynes / as skars ye vylest of ye multitude will do, why mesuryst yt
the felicyte of christen priests in such ges which Democritus laughed at as
most folysshe / which Heraclitus wayled at as most wretched which Diogenes
dispysed as most frenelous / which Crates castyd from him as a thing troblous
/ which the holy saints always refuse, always as pestylent: why estemest you
Peter's successor by these riches, which Peter him self reioysed that he had
not / why will thou that the apostels were always ready and delygente to trede
under fete / why call that Peter's patrimony which Peter him self never had
and greatly reioysed that ever possessyd it? why entangelyst thou Christ's
vycars with riches which Christ him self called thorons, why buthenyst him
whose chief and appropryate office is to sewe seed of gods word with riches,
by which the good seed sewen is chauked / why will that the techer and judge
of rightwysenesse should be obedyent to ye wicked Mamon / why make the
mynister of the heavenly sacraments a perceyuer of most vile and abiecte
things of him / all the Christen world looks for the food of holy doctrine,
looks for wholesome counsel / looks for fatherly comfort / looks to know
how it may live perfytly: why than seeing that he is destynated and chosen to
so noble dygnyte, sets heaven in the mids of the vile world, with
troubles, care, for worldly fylthe, both spoyleth ye bisshoppe from his
dignytie and the people from the bishop. Christ has his realm far more
exident, than yt it should be poluted by any hethyn kyngedome, or to speak
trulyer by tyranny, He has his noblenes, he has his riches and his
pleasures / why now myngle we together things that are always so clean
contrary and always dysngreynge. why confound we the erly thing with the
heavenly, the meanest with the highest, the porest with the rychest / the hethen
with the chrystyane / the profame with the sacred.

Great and excellent are the gifts of the most rich and benygne spyryte /
the gifts of doings, the gifts of prophesye / the gifts of health, the
gifts of knowledge / the gifts of wisdom / the gifts of lernyng / the
deuisyon of spirytes / the exortacyon and comfort, with these holy gifts /
why ioyneste the profame gifts of the world / why ghost about to join
Christ with Mamam / to join Belyall by the spirit of Christ / what has
the inyter to do with the helmet / the holy Paul with the cote armonye,
blessings with Gonnes / I meke herd, with the vice armoure / what has
preesthode to do with war / why with polyces overthrow hye towns and
Castelles, which has the key of heuenlye kingdom / how agrees it that he
which should teache charytie and save the people with peace, should be the
begynner and doer of myscheuous war. How shall he teach the chrystyan
people to dyspyce riches which sets all his mind and thought upon money /
how shall he teache, which Christ both taught and executed / the apostell
also so often spoke of yt no ill should be resysted / but to show for an injury
a benefyte to the enemy. And to good to him yt is oppressyd with the calamytes
of the world, always doing good for ill / another for claymynge of one little
town, or payment of trybute denayed, move all ye world to strife and
discencyon, murder, war, and other pestylent mischefes. How can he gyde the
kngdome of heaven, for so christ calls his church, which is all together
occupied in the kingdom of the world, but thou berest favor to ye church /
thou will adhorne the church with the chance of such riches / I would allow
it, were it not that the church should with that little profit take and
receive also a great company of mischeues, when thou haste given a lordeshyp to
ye church. Thou haste with yt given thy care and stodye to heap riches
together / thou have given a Tyronnus guard an harness, host, serchers,
horses, moyles, tru^pettes, war, murder, tryumphes, stryues, dyscencyons, and
battle / to be short all things without which a lordshyppe can not be
mayntayned and kept after the worldly appetyte. when shall he have leaser or
mind to use the apostolyke rowme, which is holden back and intangeled with a
thousand cares and troubles, will the muster of soldyours is taken / while
truce are made and broken again / while they are ponisshed which are traitors
/ while they are retained which find new deuyses / while the enemies are
assauted with battle / while the castles are watched and kept / while the
audet is hard, while profane imbassadours are a handelynge, while friends are
promoted to honor, while one assendeth by fauer, and another descended by
displeasure / while one thing and other is a handelynge which I can not
rehearse. Seems he to understand the exylency of the Pope and Cardynalles,
which receives it / more meter to withdraw them fro prayer by which they
talk with god from holy contemplacyon / by which they are accompanied among
aungelles, from the most florysshynge feldes of ye holy scripture, to these
fylthy worldly things / or he which would draw them from so great felycyte and
tranquylyte of life into besy rumblynge and stryuynge myschefes. For verily
seeing that a realm by it self is indaungered to much infyrmyte and labors
/ therefore chaunseth it far more for the spirytuall ruler in these cases to
commit areuncy to the temporal, and that for two causes / parfytly for that,
that the commynaltie gladlyer will obey the temporal rulers than the
spirytuall / parfytly for that, that the temporal rulers stey and endeuer to
make the realm rich and florysshynge / not only for them selfs, but also
much more for their heirs that shall inioye after them. Of the other part the
spirytualtye for that, they are well stryken in age ye in the later days
before they be called to rule. And for that, ye only the rule for them self,
and can not leave ye rule to their heirs. Therefore regard not the commynaltye
nor the welthe of the multitude as the te^porall does. More over wha^ the
temporal ruler rayneth, perauenter than ones wars moved they are promoted
and inryched, whom the prynes favors / but when the spirytual rules than
almost every year war they for defense or claim of tytell / than this manner
puts him from his promocyon and possessyon / that ye other gave and brought
him to / the successor thrusts him down who^ his predecessor auaunsyd.
Than other new men must be enryched to the great inpouerysshement of the
common welthe. Now is this also a thing that the people sooner obey his
commandment, whom they have been accustomed to / all though his
commandment be hard / which prince when he is deed, the people yet seem to
stand always in a suretye, gyuynge the same reverence to his sone and heir.
And they recon yt he is not changed but rather renewed to them by his sone and
children often represents their fathers in manners / namely such as are
brought up under their fathers / of which perte when ye rule of a realm is
co^mytmytted to the spirytualtie comes for the most part a sudden change of
all things. Also the temporal prince comes to ye rule as one instytuted and
exercysed in the thing given from his cradell. The spirytual most often besyed
any lykelyhode of promocyon, chaunseth to attain to high auctoryte, as one yt
fortune auaunseth to dyngnytie, whom nature brought forth from the carte and
donghyll / in conclusion it can no otherwise be, that as Arcules was not of
power to rule two Monsters sarpens at ones. No more is one man able to rule two
things most deffuse and contrary. It is the dyffusest thing yt can be to
play the true and good prince. But it is much more goodly and deffuse to play
ye good priest / comes it not than to pas wha^ one takes on him / the office
of both ye he can fulfill his duetye in neither of them. Hereof comes it as
gese / that when we se the cytyes of the temporal rulers florysshe more and
more in riches, building, and people, than the towns of the spyrytuall rulers
/ for what purpose now needs it to labor and procure for such thing which
are accompanied with many great myschefes, fear thou yt Christ shall not, yea
and is not all ready rich enough with his own riches / except some lay Tyrant
give them part of his lordshyppe, receyuest him to be not ornate enough,
except some profane warryour let the te^porall rulers have ye rowme and
auctoryte in temporal things / that that is meanest in a bishop passes
the highest rowme of all temporal kingdoms. The more the spirytualte receive of
the worldly possessions, the less shall it receive of the goodness of god / the
poorer that it is of the one, the rycher shall it be of the other. Thou see
now how every thing shows contrary to the utter syghte if thou mark and
behold the inner fassyon. Such as seemed most true and faithful to the
prince, are often proved for traitors and his enemies. And such as seemed to
maintain and praise most the bysshoppes dygnyte most often decays and
defayleth it. But I speak not this for that purpose / yt whatsoever land or
rent chance to the spirytualtie should be plucked and taken from them. But
verily I would they should have remembrance and knowledge of their excellent
hyghnes, that ever they should utterly cast fro them these common fylthy
things and hethen riches / or else they should at ye lest set no store by them.
And as Paul says, they should have them as they had them not. Farthermore I
would they should be so much inflamed with Christ's riches, that what so ever
they receive of the worldly treasures, should either be darked with the
bryghtnesse of the letter, or received for vile or abiecte in regard of ye
other / so shall it end that what so ever they poscesse / they shall possess
it with more joy and suretye / neither shall they fear or be troubled, lest
any man will take them from them.

Finis.
Imprynted at London by me John^ Goughe. Cum priuilegio regali.

And also be for to sell in Fletestrete between the two Temples, in the shop
of Hary Smythe Stacyoner.


