^ their hope in the mercy of our lord, and reprehendynge (as it were somewhat
in my way) ye great folysshe ambycyon of rich men vtteryng their superfluyte
and arroga^cy after death, which at the vttermoste, death should have fynys^hed.
Also I somewhat sharply rebuke their vice, which for their own advantage, does
abuse y^ folyshnesse of rich men, which they ought specially to ^ebuke. For
who dare be so bold to monyss^e lyberally men of great power and richesse, if
such as profess the^ deed from the world do flatter their vices / be it
there be no such as I have dyscrybed, yet notwtstandynge I have here showed an
example which they ^ught to eschew. But and if there be many things spoken
comynly among the people much more detestable than these which I have written /
t^an men indifferent may se therein my cyu^lyte, and correct their own vice.
and such as be not culpable may amend and cause to refrayn the^ which does
other wise. Truly I have spoken nothing to the reproach of any state, onel^sse
ye will say, that he sclaundrech all ye chrystianite, which speaks any thing
(and that by way of monytion) against the corrupt manners of christen men. But
it were their part in especyall: whom the honor of their order so much
m^ue^h, to restrain them which with their noughty deeds does so much
dishonest their order. But in so much now as they acknowledge such their
faithful felawes, and moreover gretely estemeth, and defe^deth them. How can
they than for shame complain or say that the estymacyon of their order is any
thing empeched of him y^ does monysshe them for their profit? Here in I
suppose good reder the intent of our ^utour, in this said dyaloge was to show
rather a love toward relygyo^ and all good relygious men, whithe thing caused
me the rather to traduct this matter in to our english tongue / than as some
(whose iugementes I do not gretely regard) says yt he writes against them /
far dyfferyng from the opinion and mind of ye good relygious father saint
Hierome, in whose mouth this saying was often. Where vice is but generally
rebuked there no person has injury or wrong. Which lesson after my mind,
were much more mete for every christen man, than unthankfully to repyne at
such as be studyous to do them good. Following rather the example of ye unkind
Greeks against their good and valiant capytayn Agamemnon, than (as we should
all) the christen charity. But I will no longer hyndre you from our dyaloge.

Mercolphus. Phedrus. Pulcher.
MErcolphus. Fro whens came hither Phedrus, suppose ye not from Trophon^us dene.


Phedrus. Wherefore do thou ask that questyon?


Merc. For because you art much sadder than thou art wont, more deformed,
more fylthy, more ferse, to make few word^s, nothy^g at all after thy name.


Phed. If (as we se by experye^ce) they which co^tynew any space in Fou^ders
shoppes, draws to them some blaknesse. What great cause have you to merueyle,
if I being contynually so many days with two seek men, dyeng and buried be more
pensyf than I am wont. and also much the more when they were both my special
fre^des?


Merc. Who do you tell me was buried.


Phed. Dydest you know one George balearyke?


Merc. Only I have herd of him for to my knowledge I never saw his face.


Phe. The other I am sure thou know nothing at all / He was called
Cornelius montius, with whom I had great famylyaryte many years.


Merc. It was never my chance to be ps^nt at any man's death.


Phed. I have been more of ten tha^ I would.


Merc. I pray the tell me^ is death so horrible a thing as it is comy^ly said?


Phed. The passage toward death is more hard and paynfull tha^ death it self.
but he which casts out of his mind ye ferefulnesse and ymagynacion of
death: to him is released a gr^te part of ye pain. To speak brefely, all that
is paynfull, either in sickness, or in death, is made more tolerable if a man
commit himself holly to the will of god^ For as concerning ye felyng of death,
(when the very time the soul is departing from the body) after my judgment is
nothing at all / or (if there be any) that it is very dull / for because nature
(before that come to pass) bry^geth in a slombre, and makes amassed all the
sensyble parties.


Merc. We are all borne without felyng of our selves.


Phed. But not without felyng of our mother.


Merc^ Why dye we not in likewise? Wherefore has god appointed death to be so
cruciable and paynful a thing?


Phed. He so ordained yt our natyuytees should be paynfull and full of peryls
to the mother, that she might so much more love yt, which she had brought
forth. Contrary wise it was his pleasure that death should be ferefull / lest
every where men should infere their own death. For in so much yt when we may se
daily many which do slay themselves, what thy^kest thou to come, if death had
nothing horrible? as often as a man rebukes his servant either his child /
yea, as often as the wife should take dyspleasure with her husband, as often as
any manner of thing did myscary, or any thing chanced being sorrowful to ye
mind, by and by men would ren^e to hang themselves, to kill them with sword,
to draw them to some conuenyent place where they might cast themselves down
heedlynges, either to poison / now the bytternesse of death makes us yt we
love better our life / in especyal when physycie^s can not heal a man ones
deed. Albeit like as we all have not like chance in our natyuyte / even so
there be diverse manners and ways of death. Some short and swyft death delivers
hens, some other wastes away with slow death. Lethargic^ yt is to say such as
has th^sekenes of forgetfulness. In likewise they which be stong of the
venymous Aspys altogyder in a slo^bryng, dies without any felyng of themself. I
have observed this thing in especyall, that there is no kind of death so
paynful but it is tolerable after yt a man has with a fully fyxed mind decreed
for to go hens.


Merc. Whither of these dethes thynkest you to be most like the death of a
chrystyan?


Phed. Me seems the death of George more honorable.


Merc. But I pray you has death also his covetousness of honor?


Phed. I did never se two persons dyeng so unlike a dethe^ if ye have so
much leisure to here, I will show you plainly y^ departing of both twain.
but it shall be thy part to judge which of the dethes is most to be wysshed
to a christen man.


Merc. yea, mary I pray the that you wylt not think it grievous to tell / for I
wold^ here nothing more gladly^


Phed. Therefore here first of G^orge. After that death had showed certain and
sure tokens of himself the flock of phisicions which of long time had take
cure of this pacient, nothing being a known of the despair of life began to
ask their stypendes.


Merc. How many were they?


Phed. So^tymes ten, and sometime twelve, and syx when they were fewest.


Merc. There was ynow to kyl a man in good health.


Phed. After the time they had their money / t^^^ ^^rned they pryuely such as
were about the seek man, that death was at hand. And y^ they should prepayre,
and make ready all such things as should parteyne unto y^ health of the soul
/ seeing that there was no hope at all of any bodyly welthe. And thereupon the
seek man was louyngly, by such as were his spaecial friends, monysshed that he
should commit ye cure of his body to god^ and that he should only mind those
things which perteyned to depart well hens. As soon as George herd these
things: he looked, and that very fers^y, upon the physicions / and as it were
one sore dyspleased that they should all give him up, they said to him again,
that they were physycions and no gods / and that they had done so much as
they could by their science. albeit that there was no medycyne which could
remedy against the ordinance of god. This done, they go in to y^ next chamber.


Merc. What? did they tarry still after that they had received their wages?


Phed. They were not yet agreed what kind of sickness it was. One affyrmed y^
it was a dropsy / another said it was a tympany. some said it was apostome in
ye inner parts. some said it was one disease / some another. and all the time
they took in governance the pacyent they dysputed styfly what manner of sekenes
it should be.


Merc. O, how happy was the pacyent in y^ mean time?


Phed. But because at length to end their co^tencyon they desired his wife to
ask of such as were his friends to suffer an Anothomye or section to be mad^
of the deed body. and that it should cause much honor to be spoken / and also
y^ it was so accustomed to be done for honors sake in great noble men. And
moreover that the thing it self should be helthfull to many / and also
merytoryous to the seek man. And the rather to optayn their purpose they
promised to bye of their own charges a trentall of masses, for the profit of
the deed. This request hardly, but at the length with intreatynge of the wife
and certain of his kynsmen was opteyned. These matters done the guard of
physiciens did wind themselves away / for they say comynly, yt it is not
conuenyent that they which be wont to help life: should be y^ beholders of
death, or be pres^t at buryalles. Anon was called for one Bernardinus a
reverend father as ye know well enough, keeper of one of saint fra^ceys
flocks, to here his co^fessyon. Before the confession was all together
fynysshed a multitude of the.iiij. ordres, whom y^ people call the beggyng
ordres was come in to the house.


Merc. So many deuouri^g Uultures to one poor pyece of caryon?


Phed. Than afterward the parysshe priest was called for to anoyle the man,
and to give him the sacrament of our lords body.


Merc. Devoutly.


Phed. But there was almoost a blody fray betwyxte ye parysshe priest and the
other solytary fathers.


Merc. At the seek man's bed?


Phed. And also Christ himself lokyng upon them.


Merc. What caused all the business so suddenly?


Phed. The parisshe priest (after that he knew the seek man was confessed to
ye Francyscane) said that he would neither mynystre the sacrament of anoylyng
nor of the altar / or any buryeng / onelesse that he herd with his ears the
seek man's confession. He said moreover, that he was the parysshe priest / and
that he must give account to god for his little sheep. but yt he said he could
not do if only he were ignorant of the secrets of his conscience.


Merc. Seemed he not to speak reasonably?


Phed. Not unto them verily. For they all cried against him, and in especy all
Bernardinus, and Uincentius the domynycan.


Merc. What reasons brought they?


Phed. They set upon the poor priest with great rebukes and raylynges^ calling
hy^ often ass, and a mete keeper for hogs. I said Uincentius, am a bacheler
of dyuynyte formate / and shortly shall belycencyate / and also shall be
promoted with the title of a doctor. Thou art scarcely come to the redyng of
the gospel. How is it than possible that thou can excuse, and judge the
secrets of any man's conscience? But and if thou list for to be besyed, goo
see what thy harlottes, and bastard brattes do at home. and many other
obprobryous things which I am greatly ashamed to show.


Merc. What said he / was he domme at those words?


Phed. Domme? yea, thou would have said he had been as the proverb says. A
greshop taken by the wings. I said he, shall make of bean stalks much better
bachelors than thou art. The ^utours and capytaynes of your ordres Domynyke
and Frau^ceys, where learned they I pray you Aristoteles phylophy / or the
arguments of Thomas / either Scotus speculacio^s? or where I pray you were
they made bachelors? ye creped in to ye world, than easy to believe your
superstycions / but than ye were but a few and lowly^ and some also meke and
well learned men. Than your nestes were in the feldes and poor cotages / but
shortly after ye flitted thens, both in to ye rychest cytees and in to the
fairest parts of the^. Seeing there be so many poor vyllages in y^ country
abroad which can not find a shepeherde / there should ye bestow your labours^
there were conuenyent places for you to labor in / but now ye will be nowhere
but in ye houses of rich men. ye face and crake under the name of popes / but
your pryuyleges be not worth a straw: but where as the bishop, parsone, or
vycare does not his duty. In my church shall none of you preche so long as
I am the curate and have my health. I am no bacheler, neither saint Martyn was
any bacheler, and yet he played ye very bishop. if I lack lernyng I will not
ask it of you. Suppose ye yt the world is yet so blind and folysshe, that
(whersoeuer they se saint Domynyke or Fraunceys come) they will think their
sanctymony and holiness there to be? or is it to you any matter at all what I do
at home at my house? What pageauntes ye play in your den^es, and what knavery ye
use with holy nonnes all the world knows. Also how little y^ better or
clener be the rich men's howses which ye haunt is openly known. yea as the
proverb says, both to blere eyed persons and barbours. To tell the what was
more spoken I dare not. truly he handled those reverend fathers with small
reverence. And none end should have been, oneles Georgius had sygnyfied with
waggyng of his hand, yt he would say some thing. Much adoo it was to apteyne
that their chydyng might cease so long. than said the seek man. Keep peace
between you, I will confess me again to the my curate / than after thou shall
be paid thy money or thou go out of this house / both for bell ryngynge,
dyriges, the hearse, for buryall vnd stole^ neither by any means I will give
the occasion to co^playn on me.


Merc. Did the priest refuse so equal a co^dycio^?


Phed. Nothing at all only he murmured much of the confession, which he
forgave ye seek man. What needs it, said he, in repetyng the same again to
fatygate and trouble both the seek man and the priest: in repetyng all one
thing? If he had confessed him to me in season, parauenture he should have made
his will better for his soul health, now take ye the charge. This i^dyfferency
of the seek sore agreued those solytary fathers, no^hyng contented that any
morsel of their pray should be cut out for ye parysshe priest. But I went
between them and conclud^d so y^ their strife was ended. and the priest anoyled
the seek man, and gave him our lords body. And after he was paid his money
and went his way.


Merc. Did Caromenes than fellow after so great a tempest?


Phed. Nay by saint Mary, a sharper storm followed by and by.


Merc. I pray the what was the cause?


Phed. Thou shall here. There were flocked together in one house four ordres of
beggyng freres / the fyfthe order the which be called the crooked (the crouched
freres I would say) came in among them. Against which as it had been a child
base gotten, y^ other four arose all together making no little ado. and they
asked the fyfth order when ever they did se a charyot of.v. wheles / or how
they durst make mo ordres of beggars tha^ there be Eua^gelystes. By the same
reason ^they said) bring in hyder all beggars which use to sit at brydges and
hye ways.


Merc. What said ye crouched freres to yt?


Phed. They asked the other fr^res again / how y^ charyot of the church went,
at such time when there was no order of beggers^ and again when there was
only one, and after three. for truly the nombre (said they) of ye euangelystes
has no more affynyte with our ordres than with a dyce, which on every side
shewith.iiij. corners. Who brought y^ Austyn freres in to the order of beggars?
or who y^ Carmelytes? or what time begged Augustyn or Hely? for these they make
the auctour of their ordres. These tho^derboltes with many other the crossed
freres did clatter out, and doubtless very manfully. But because they had none
to take part with them / therefore thynkyng the^ not able to resyst the
violence of.iiii. such hosts, gave place / only thretnyng them very cruelly^


Merc. Than I trow there was no more brablyng.


Phed. No mary. For this part taking and atonement against the fifth order
was turned in to an open fray. The francy scan and the domynycan contended,
that neither the augustynyans nor the carmelytes were proprely called beggars /
but rather mungrelles, and chau^gelynges. This strife did so much increase,
that plainly I was afraid leest it should come to hand grypes and strokes.


Merc. Did the seek man abide all these brablynges?


Phed. These matters were not done at his bed side, but in a court by which
joined to the chamber. But all ye words came to the seek man / for they did
not whysper the matter, but it was spoken loud enough, and with full shawmes, as
ye proverb says. And thou know most comynly y^ seek men are sharp of
heryng in especyally.


Merc. But how ended ye battle?


Phed. The seek man sent unto the^ his wife, to exhort them to keep scylence a
little while, and said that he would end this variau^ce. And so desired, that
for that time the Augustynyens and the Carmelytes would depar^e / and promised
that they should lose nothing thereby. And said more over y^ so much meat
should be sent home to their houses: as the rest which tarried still should
have. But he commanded y^ they should all four ordres be at his buryeng, and
also the fyfth, and y^ they should every one have like portion of money.
Nevertheless he would in no wise that they should al sit together at dinner, lest
any trouble should ensue at their metynge.


Merc. Thou tellest me of a right good house keeper / which at the point of
death coud set in quyetnes so many besy matters.


Phed. He had be^ many years a capytayn in wars. there are wont daily to
spryng up such clamoures among the souldyours,


Merc. Was he rich?


Phed. Uery rich.


Merc. But it was evil gotten, with spoiling and sacrylege. or robbynge holy
places / extorcions and brybes.


Phed. Such is the common facion of the capytaynes in wars: nor I dare not
styfly swear that this man was altogyder clear and differyng fro their manners.
But as far as I can perceive he gate more good with, polycy of wit than with
vyolen^e.


Merc. How so?


Phed. He understood very well arythmetike or craft of nombryng.


Merc. What thereof?


Phed. What than? To the high capytayne he would sometime account ^xxx. M.
souldyers, wha^ there were scarcely.vii.M. And more over he paid to many of
them never a deal.


Merc. Certainly you show me a worthy craft of accomptyng.


Phed. And sometime he caused the wars by craft to continue and was wont also
to receive every month money of vyllages and towns: both of his enmyes and
friends. of his en^myes: to save them harmeles, of his friends to suffer them
to make peace with their enemies.


Merc. I know of old the manners of souldyers. but go forth in your tale.


Phed. Bernarde and Uyncent with certain other of their co^panyons tarried
still with the seek man / the other which were departed had vytayles sent
them.


Merc. Did not they agree well together which tarried still in the house?


Phed^ not always, they like hogs gru^ted I wot not wherefore, of y^
preferme^tes of their bulls, but lest their deuyse should not come to pass,
they dissembled for that time. Here they brought forth his testament, and
certain demaundes were asked before witnesses, of such things which they
had concluded among themselves before.


Merc. I am very desirous to here what things they were.


Phed. I shall tell the chyef points, for ye matter is somewhat tedyous. There
remained his wife.xxxviii. years of aege / being a woman certainly very
comme^dable and wise. Two sons, the eldre was.xix. years of aege, and the
other.xv. And as many daughters, both within aege. Thus was it devised by his
testament / that his wife (because they could not enforce her to be a Nonne)
should take the habyte of a Bighyne, yt is an or^re between Nonnes and laykes.
The elder sone, because they could not entyse him to be of any solitary
professyon.


Merc. An old fox is taken but seldon in a snare.


Phed. Hastily after his faders buri^ng they determined that he should in all
haste go to Rome / and there bye ye popes dyspensacyon before his law full aege
to be made a priest, to sing daily in Uatycanes temple, for his faders soul.
And yt he should crepe on his knees every friday all ye holy stayres in
Laterane.


Merc. Did he take all this wyllyngly?


Phed. Even to be plain, as asses be wo^t to take upon them their caryages.
More^^r yt the youngest sone should be professed to saint Frau^ceys, y^ elder
daughter to saint Clare, the youngest to saint Katheryn. For they could bring
no more of their purpose ^o pass. for George was mi^ded, because he would have
god more bound to him, to have his wife and.iiii. children to be parted among
the.v. ordres of beggars / and there was great procurement thereto / but the
wife and the eldest sone were to old to agree thereto, either for fair words
or foul.


Merc. A propre facyon of dysinherytyng.


Phed. The inherytaunce altogyder was in such wise divided, that after y^
charges of the buryeng was taken out of all the hole, one part should inure to
ye wife upon this co^dycion / that she should live with the one half thereof /
the other half should be put in the place where she should oblyge herself.
Fro^whens, if she at any time hereafter departed, all the same money should
remain to yt flock: Another like portion should be given to ye eldest sone, to
whom by and by after should be enjoined a journey toward Rome / and as much
as was suffycient to bye his bulls, and to pay his costs of meat and drink
at Rome. And if he refused to be made priest, his porcio^ should than be divided
between the freres of saint Fraunceys, and of saint Domynyke / and yet I fear
me that he will not perform their iniu^ct^on / the young man appeared to abhor
so much from holy ordres. Two porcyons should be put in to the monastery which
was content to take ye youngest sone. Other two parts also to the.ii.
monasteryes where the daughters were but under this condycion / yt if they at
any time hereafter refused to profess ye life, yet all the money should be in
their custody, sauf, and in no wise dymynysshed. Again on the other side, the
good father Bernardyne must have one of the porcio^s, and Uyncent another / and
half of one of the porcyons to ye Charter monks, for co^munyon and part
taking of all good works, which should be done in all the order, All the rest
should be distrybute to poor people yt were pryuely kept / upon whom
Bernardyne and Uyncent thought it best bestowed.


Merc. you sholdest have said as ye lawyers do, Quos ve^ quas.


Phed. After the will was read / they asked hi^ under these words. George
balearike, do you being on live and hole memory approve this testament, which
you lately have made of thyn own my^de? He answered / I do approve it. and is
this thy last and i^mutable will? it is. And you do i^stytute and ordeyn me
and fader bacheler Uy^cent here: executors of thy last will? I do ordeyne. Than
they commanded him yet ones to subscrybe it with his own hand.


Merc. How coud he, than being at point of death?


Phed. Bernardinus did govern y^ seek man^es hand.


Merc. What did he subscrybe?


Phed. These words. ye high displeasure of saint Frau^ceys and saint Domynyke
may come to hy^ which gooth about to change any thing her in.


Merc. But feared they not ye action called in the law Actio officiosi
testamenti.


Phed. No, no: this action lies not in those things yt be dedycate to god /
neither I think y^ any man is so folysshe to make any trouble with god. All
these matters fynysshed, the wife and the children gave their right hands to
the seek man. sweryng that they should observe that thing which they had
received. After these things they began to common (not without strife) of the
funeral pomp. At last this sentence had ye vyctory, that.ix. of of every one
of ye.v. ordres should be present in the honor of the.v. books of Moses / and
of the.ix. ordres of au^gelles. And ye every order should have their cross
borne before them / and they should sing their mournyng songs. Moreover.xxx.
(beside such as were kyn^e to him) should be hired, (for so many pyeces of
money was our lord sold) all in black to bear ye torches. and for his
honors sake.xii. mourners. (this nombre is in ye honor of ye.xii apostles,)
should go about the corpse. Next after should follow Georges own horse all in
black, with his neck so bound down to his knees as though he would be seen to
seek his master on the earth. It was forthermore procured that the covering
which should be cast over him, should show on every party his arms. Likewise
every torche and black garment should ye same. The corpse they purposed should
be laid at the right hand of the high altar in a tomb of marble, which
should be made iiij. foot high fro the the ground. He should lie in the top of
it graven in a white marble stone / all armed fro top to toe. neither might ye
helmet lack his creste. the creste was the neck of an Anocrotale. A target in
the left arm / in the which was his arms blased in this wise, Three wild
bores heedes all of gold in a silver field. A sword by his side with a gylted
pomell. The gyrdle was gylted, and divided with studdes of precious stones.
Golden spurs to his fete, because he was a gentle man of cote armor, under
his fete should be set a leoperd, the brynk^s of his sepulker should have an
epitaphye mete for a worthy man. He was wyllyng y^ his heart should be buried
severally in a chapel of saint franceys. He committed ye other inward partys
of his body to the parysshe pressed, to be buried honorably in a chapel of our
lady.


Merc. An honorable buryenge, but very chargeable. At venyce a pore cobbler
should have more honor for a little cost. for company makes ornate and
elygant the bear, and there sometime syx hondreth monks: some in sleueles
s^oppes, and other some with copes will follow one corpse.


Phed. I have seen that myself, and have sometime laughed at such folysshe
vaynglories of poor me^. there goes fullers and curriers before: and cobblers
behynd, and monks in ye myddest. thou would say they were mo^sters / neither
here was any other thing if you had seen it. It was also provided by George, ye
Barnardyne and Uyncent should decerne by lottes which of them should have the
highest place in the great pomp. And afterward other should do so likewise,
lest any rumor or business should be for the same. The parysshe priest and
his clerks were appointed to the most inferyour place, that was to go the
formest / neither ye solytary fathers would suffer it otherwise.


Merc. He could not only or^^yn an army to battle / but also other solemn
tryu^phes and po^pes.


Phed. It was also provided that the mass of Requiem which should be done by
the parysshe priest should be in prycke song, for y^ more honor. While these
things and certain other were indeuysyng, the seek man shaked very sore, and
did give certain parfyte tokens that his last time was nygh at hand. The
last act of the comedy was therefore prepared.


Merc. Is it not yet at an end?


Phed. The popes bull was there rehearsed / in the which was granted remyssyon
of all his sins quyte and clean / and all the fear of purgatory was taken
away. Beside al these al his goods was iustyfied.


Merc. Such as was gotten by extorcyon and robbery?


Phed. Certainly even such as were gotten by ye law of battle or sowlderye.
But it fortuned to be present one Phylyp a man of law ye wyfs brother, which
marked a place in ye bull otherwise set than it ought to be / and caused
suspecyon that it was but forged.


Merc. Nay, that was not done in time. he should have rather dysse^bled it,
though there had been error therein / and the seek man should have done never
the worse.


Phed. I think the same. For the seek man was so troubled with this matter,
that he was not far of from disperacion. And there father bacheler Uynce^t
played the man. He commanded George to be of a quiet mind, he said that he
had auctoryte both to correct any thing which was falls in the bulls, either
to restore any thing y^ lacks. But if the bull deceive the, even very now I
put my soul for thine / y^ thine may come to heaven, and mine I give for ever
to the derkest pyt of hell.


Merc. But will god accept such chaungyng of souls? and if he would, was this
prouysion for George with such a guage suffycye^t? What and if the soul of
Uyncent was (without any chau^gi^g at all) due to hell.


Phed. I showed you as ye matter was / but Uyncent fynyshed tha^ ma^er. The
pacyent seemed to take a good stomach to him / by and by was red ye pardons,
wherein was promised to George to be part taker of all ye works which should
be done by the.iiii^ ordres and of the Charter monks.


Mer. I would be afraid lest I should be thurst down to the botom of hell,
if I should bear such an unprofitable burden.


Phed. I speak of their good works: which does no otherwise aggraua^e the
soul ready to depart, than feathers does the bird.


Merc. To whom bequeth they their ill works?


Phed. To the landeskneyghtes of Germany.


Merc. By what auctoryte?


Phed. Of the gospel, saying to him that has: it shall be given / and withal
was rehearsed the no^bre of masses and nocturnes, which should accompanye the
dead man's soul / truly it was an unreasonable nombre. After all these
things, he was confessed, and had absolucyon.


Merc. Dyed he thus?


Phed. Not yet. A matte of russhes was spread upon the ground, in such wise
that the upper part was lapped together, for to make as it were a similitude
of a bolster.


Merc. What me^t they by that?


Phed. They sparpled it all over with ashes, but very thynnely, and there they
laid the sick man's body. A gray freres cote was spread above him, but being
hallowed before with a certain prayers and holy water. A cowle was put under his
head, for at that time it could not be put upon him, and with all was laid the
bull and the pardons.


Merc. A new manner of death.


Phed. But they affirm sty^fely y^ he devil has no power over them which
dies in such fasshyon. So they said that both saint Martyne and saint
Frauncys dyed.


Merc. But then their lives were no less virtuous. I pray the tell me what
followed?


Phed. They reachyd the image of the cross, and a wax candell to the sick
man. At the sight of the cross he said, I was wont in batayles to be defendyd
with mine own bucklar, but now I will put this bucklar against mine enemy,
and kyssed it, and put it toward the left shulder. To the holy candell he
said: in time past I have been valyau^t in wars with spear, now I will shake
this spear against the enemy of souls.


Merc. Even like a man of war.


Phed. These words he spoke last / for by and by his tongue was taken with
death, and with all the pangys of death came upon him. Barnardyne stood hard
by him on the right hand, and Uincent on the left side, both two loud enough
/ the one showed y^ pycture of saint Fra^ceys, the other of saint Domynyke /
the other good holy fathers sparpled abroad about the chamber, mombled up
besyly certain psalms. Bernardyne with great out cries precelled his right
ear, and Uyncent the left.


Merc. What cried they?


Phed. Bernardyne said in this wise. George balearyke^ if thou now approve
those things, which we have done betwyxt us: bow down thy heed toward thy
right side. He did so. Uyncent on the other side said, be nothing adredde
George / thou have saint Fra^ceys and saint Domynyke thy defenders, care
nothing at all. Remember what a great sort of merytes, what a strong Bull.
brefely, remember that my soul is pledged for thine, If there were any
ieopardy, if thou understand what I say, and also a lowest ye same, bow down
thy heed toward the left side. He did so. And again with a like outcry, they
said both. if you thynkest surely all these things thyrste down my hand /
and with the same he thirst down his hand. And so in bowynge his heed here
and there / and putting down hands, was almoost.iii. hours past. And
shortly after when George began to gasp, there Bernardyne standing up
pronounced the absolucyon / which he could not parfitely fynysshe, before
George was departed. this was a little after mydnyght. in the morning the
Anothomy was made.


Merc. What noisome thing was found within him?


Phed. Thou remembrest me in good time / for it was gone out of my
remembrance. A pyece of lead cleued in the skyn^e, which closes the heart and
the lyghtes about, and does separate them from the mylte and the liver, called
Diaphragma.


Merc. How came it there?


Ph. His wife showed that he was ones stryken with a gon^e stone / and thereof
the physyciens coniectured that a pyece of ye lead moltyd, tarried still within
his body. By and by, the corpse all to cut and dilanyate as well as it would be,
was put in a gray freres cote. After dinner, the buryeng was done with such and
like solempnytye, as it was decreed before.


Merc. I never herd of a more curious death, nor a corpse more ambycyous. But I
suppose thou would not have this spoken abroode.


Phed. Wherefore?


Merc. Lest the hurnettes would be an angered.


Phed. There is no ieoperdy at all. For if these things be godly which I
show, it is their profet that the people do know them / if they be otherwise,
so many as be good among them, will give me thanks which have showed forth
such, whereby some correct with shame, may refrain like deeds. Also such as be
sy^ple, may take heed lest they be drawn in to like error / for there be
among this sort great wise men, and very godly, which has often complained
to me, that by the supersticion improbyte or lewdnes of a few, the hole order
is brought to hatred of good men.


Merc. Thou say very right, and boldly / but I am very desirous to know,
how Cornelius dyed.


Phed. Like as he lived grievous to no man, so dyed he. He was every year grieved
with the febre, coming to him at certain times. The same (both for because
he was somewhat in age: for he was past three score years) are for other causes
more than was wont infebled the man, and it apered that he felt before that his
fatal day was at hand. For the fourth day before he dyed, was Sunday, our
lords day, he went to the temple, was confessyd to his curate, he herd the
common preaching and mass / and after the mass was done, he was howseled,
and so went home.


Merc. Used he no Physycyons?


Phed. Only one he counseled, but he was no less a good man, then a good
Phisycyon, his name is Iacobus Castrutius.


Merc. I know him very well^ There is no more pure man.


Ph^d. He answered yt his friend should not lack his dylygence / but he
thought there was more socoure in god than in physyciens. Cornelius did as
gladly accept his saying, as though he had showed most certain hope of
life. Therefore albeit that after his power, he was always very lyberall toward
the po^re, even than all that might be spared from necessary aid of his wife
and children, was dystributed to ye poor and nedy men / and not to the
ambycyous beggars, which we comynly mete in every place / but to such as were
to be commended, which fought against pouerte, with all their deuyse and power.
I desired him to lie him down / and rather to call the priest to him, than to
fatygate with labor his feeble body. He gave answer, that his special study
was ever to help his friends, if he might, rather than to put the^ to pains /
neither he would be unlike to himself at the time of his dyenge / neither
truly he lay down any more, but y^ last day, and part of y^ night, wherein
he departed out of this life. Sometime for werinesse of his body he walked with
a staff / sometime reposed in a chair. He went seldom to bed, but in his
clothes, and his heed raised upward. All this time he either gave one thing or
other to relyue the poor / but ^n especyall to them which were known poor,
and dwelled nygh to him, or e^les ^e read such things in holy scripture,
which provoke a man's conscience toward god, and also declares his
charity toward us. And when he by reason of his werynesse coud not read
himself, than he herd some friend redyng before him. Often times he exhorted
with a vehement desire, his famyly to love one another, and to love ye truth.
He also louyngly conforted them which were pensyfe and sorrowful for his
death. He gave often monycion to such as he put in trust, that nothing of his
dettes should be unpaid.


Merc. Made he his will?


Phed. Yes, long before, in time of his health / for he denayed utterly that
they were called testamentes, which were made of such as lie on dyeng: but
rather folisshe dotinges.


Merc. Did he bequethe nothing to monasteryes, or to nedy men therein.


Phed. Nothy^g at all. I (said he) have for my part distrybute those little
goods which god has sent me. Therefore now as I give the possession of them
to other: so I give also the dispensacyon and orderyng. And I trust that they
will dyspose the^ more vtuously, then I have done my self.


Merc. Did he not call to him such holy me^ as George did.


Phed. Never one. Neither was there any body at all with him, saving his own
family, and two special friends of his.


Merc. I merueyll what he meant.


Phed. He said utterly that he would be onerous to no mo at his death, than he
was at his nativity.


Merc. I desire instantly to here the end of this matter.


Phed. Thou shall here it by and by. Thursday came, he lay still upon his bed,
feeling extreme werynes of his body / the curate was sent for, and anoyled him,
and by and by gave him the body of our lord, without any confession at all.
For he said there was no scrupe and doubt at all in his mind, The priest
began to ask of him, with what pomp, and in what place^ he would be buried.
He said again, bury me in such wise as ye would bury a christen man of the
lowest degree. Nor I care not in what place ye lay my wretchyd body, which
shall be found in the last day as well out of one place as other, where so ever
it be hyd / nor I regard any thing at all the pomp of burieng. Shortly after,
wha^ mention was made of ye ringyng of belles, tre^tals, and years minds, of
bulls, of bying part taky^g of merits. Tha^ answered he thus, my curate, I
shall do never ye worse, if no bell at all knoll for me. If it will please you
to sing one bare mass for me it shall be more tha^ need. Either if there be any
thing else, which (because of the common custom of the church) may without
offense of such as be infyrme persons scarcely be left out, yt I permytte to
be at your advise. Neither I am minded to bye any man^es prayers, either to
bereue any man his merytes. Haboundaunce of merytes flows over in Christ /
and also I trust that ye prayers and merytes of all thry^ten men, (if I be a
living membre) does prousfyte me / Al my hope is in.ii. bulls and pryuyleges
/ the one is of my offenses, that ye chyef pastor Jesus christ has clean
taken them away, nayly^g it to the cross. the other is that which he wrote and
sealed with his precious blood / whereby he put us in certaynte of everlasting
life, if so be that we put all our hole trust in him. God forfend that I armed
with merytes, and bulls, should provoke my lord god, to come in to judgment
with his bondsman / being certain of this^ that all which be living, shall not
be iustyfied in his sight. I do appele therefore from his justice, to his mercy
/ for so much as it is without measure, and ineffable. After he had spoken
these words, the priest departed. Cornelius being merry and glad (as though he
had conceived a great hope of health) commanded that such places of holy
scripture should be rehearsed to him, as were written to co^ferme the hope of
^esurrection, and the reward of i^mortalyte. As for example the text of Esaye
declaryng the death of Ezechias which was deferred, and the ca^tycle. Moreover
the.xv. chapter of ye first epistle of Paul to the Corynthiens. Also out of
saint John^ the euangelyst of the death of Lazarus / but namely ye history of
Christ's passion, after the euangelystes. With what a mind devoured he every
thyng^ sighyng at some things / and when he herd some other he (lyftyng up
his hands) gave thanks. At the heryng of diverse other things, he wexed very
merry, and showed him outwardly glad / and at many sayenges, he cast out many
short prayers. After dinner, when he had taken a little sleep, he commanded
that one shulder^ hearse to him the.xij. chapter of saint Iohn^s Gospel, unto
the end of the history. At which time you would have said the man had been
cler^ly transfigured and afflate with a new spirit, Now it drew toward night,
he ^alled to him his wife and children. There (his feeble body being reryd up
asmoche as he could suffer) he spoke to them in this wise: Most dear wife,
gods pleasure is now to depart them whom he has unity before / but this
separacyon shall be but bodyly, and y^ for a very short time. All thy
dylygence, love, and pytye, which thou were wont in time past to bear toward
me and those most dear chylderen, turn all toward them. Neither think that
thou cannest any wise do higher pleasure to god or me, than if thou nourysshe,
bring up, and instytute them which god has given us twain, as fruit of
our marriage: that they may become Christ's servants. As toward them
therefore double thy love, and think that the porcyon of my love is translate
all into the / which if thou do (as I doubt not but thou will) they shall
in no wise be said Orphans. But and if thou do iterate matrymonye. At that
word the wife brast out in weeping, and began for to swear deuoutely, that ^he
would never think of maryenge again. Here Cornelius said. My most dear
beloved sister in Christ, if our lord Jesus Christ will vouchsafe for to
grant the this purpose, and spyrytuall strength, slake not of thy part from
such an heavenly calling / For that shall be both more conuenyent for thyn own
self, and also these children. But if so be that the infyrmytye, and
weykenesse of the flesh call the to marye again / know thou that my death
sets the at lyberte from the law of our matrymony / but you art not at
large thereby from the faithful promise, which you have made in both our
names: to cure and bring up our common children. But as touching marriage, use
that lyberte which god has permytted the. Only I pray and put you in
remembrance both, that thou do choose a husband with such manners, and thou
also use ^he t^warde him in such wise that he may be led by his mere
goodness, or provoked through thy co^modite or towardnes to love his stepe
son^es. Take heed you do not bind thy self to any vow. Keep thyselfe at
lyberte to god and our children, whom you must so bry^g up in all meekness, yt
thou be no less cyrcu^spect / and ware lest they do addyct themselves to any
volu^tary purposed living / unto the time it may appear by their aege and
dyscrecyon, to what manner of living they be most apt. Than after he turned
toward his children, and exhor^ed them to the study of virtue, and obey their
mother, and one to love antoher. These things ended, he kyssed his wife, and to
his children he gave his blessyng, making over them the sign of the cross,
prayenge god to send them good mind, and Christ's mercy. After this, he
looked upon all that stood by^ and said: God that rose again in the morning,
will vouchsafe to morrow before the son rise, to euocate and call out this
simple soul from the sepulcher of this body, from the darkness of this
mortality, into his heavenly light. I will not that these young children shall
be fatygate and wery^d with vain watchynges. Let all other goo to bed also /
one is suffycyente to watch with me, whom I would have for to ^eherse some
holy scripture. When the night was past, a little after four of the clock, in
the presence of all that were in the house, he commanded one to read out a
^owde the hole psalm which our lord prayenge, said at the time he suffered
his pasiyon. That done, he commanded one to bring him an hallowed candell, and
the sign of the crucifyxe. He took the candell in his hand, saying, the lord
is my lightening, and my health / whom shall I fear? He also kyssyng the
cross, said: The lord is protector, and defender of my life, whom shall I
therefore be adred of^ ^y and by, he held his hands together upon his breast,
as a man in fervent prayer, lyftyng up his iyes toward heaven, said: Lord
Jesus, take my spyryte. And shortly after, he shytte his iyes, as though he
would goo to sleep / and therewith, with a soft blast, he yielded up the ghost.
Thou would rather have said he had been on sleep, than dead.


Merc. I never herd of death more quiet.


Phed. He was of like fasshyon in all his life time / both twain were my
frendys. Perchance I judge not indyfferently, whether of them departed this
life more like a christian. Thou Mercolphus, which art not parcyall, shalt
more rectetely, dyscerne.


Merc. So I will do, but at a convenient season.


Finis.
Thus ends y^ dyaloge called Funus, made by doctor Erasmus.
Erasmus.


A good and a godly admonicion or warning, very behouefull for every christen
man to look upon.
GOd has apparayled the glory of heaven to them that love him, and keep his
commandments / and to them that (of that they have and done) praise not them
self, ne be not proud thereof, and after their ability departen gladly to
the pore and nedy: and set not their hertes princypally, but in our lord: And
to them yt the euils^ the pains, and the tribulacions that com^ to them,
suffren patiently for the love of god. And for to have this great glory, ou^
lord admonesteth us that we be alway^ ready, and keep us fro sin. And that w^
put not our hertes principally in this ca^^tyfe world, which is nothing but a
ly^tell passing, full of weeping, of sorrows and of anguisshes, which we shall
leue^ And take none head of the hour without to bear any thing with us, save
the good deeds and the evil that we have done. And our body caityfe, shall be
covered with the earth, as a foul stynkynge carrion, and worms shall eat and
wrote therein. Our lord promyseth not to us to morrow, to the end that our hertes
and our principal intention be in him, and in his love. For we ought to love
god, and ^o remember often and devoutly how the sweet Jesus vouchedsafe to
humble him self for us, and descend fro his glory of heaven, into ye womb of
the glorious virgyn Mary, and become a man and our brother, and suffered d^the
and passion for us / and how he made us of naught, and semblable to him /
which might have made us (if it had pleased him) like unto toodes and other
worms. If we know well all the graces that he has done to us, and thank and
give him ^aude therefore that is the thing above all ^ther, by which we may
most soon and most lightely have his love and his grace: much pleasant is
it unto god, when one knowlegeth the graces and the benefits that he has done
for us, and when he is remercyed and thanked therefore.

Example. It is red that the great Chauntre of Paris, found on a time in a
field, a converse, ^ that is to say, a brother, and no priest, of the order of
Cisteaulx) keeping sheep, which was contemplatife and devout toward god, and
wept often in beholdynge a crapaulde or toode. The chauntre demanded him
wherefore he wept. He answered to him, saying: I ought well to weep for my
sins, and give thankynges to god, which has made me to his semblaunce. For
if it had pleased him, he had well made me like unto this crapaulde or toode.
Thus this good man thanked and remercyed god. Than let us render and give
graces and than^kynges to our lord of all his benefits, and let us enioy^ in
him, and sing we in our hertes with great joy / for we be y^ sons and the
daughters of god, made and formed to his semblaunce, brethren and siste^en of
Jesus Christ, and bought and rede^ed with his preciouse blood, fed with his
preciouse body, fellows to angels ^f heaven, Coheriters (but if it be long
of ^ur selfs) for ever more, without end, ^f the gloryouse royalme / to the
which ^rynge us the sw^te and debonayre Ie^u Christ. Amen.

At London, by Robert copland, for Johan Byddell / otherwise Salysbury. the.v.
day of January, And be for to sell at ye sign of our lady of pity next to
Flete bridge. 1.5.3.4.

Cum priuilegio regali.

Robert Coplande.


An epistell of the famous doctor Erasmus of Roterdame / unto the reverend
father and excellent prince / Christofer bishop of Basyle / concerning the
forbedynge of eating of flesh / and like constitutyons of men. etc.


