A Letter sent by I. B. Gentleman unto his very friend Maystet R. C. Esquire,
vvherin is contained a large discourse of the peopling and inhabiting the
Cuntrie called the Ardes, and other adjacent in the North of Ireland, and taken
in hand by Sir Thomas Smith one of the Queens Majesty's privy Counsel, and
Thomas Smith Esquire, his Son.

Such doubts and exceptions friend K. C. as I have heard alleged and put for
the to unable that enterprise of peopling and replenishing with the English
Nation the North of Ireland, which with the assistance of Sir Thomas Smith one
of her Majesty's Counsel, Master Thomas Smith his Son has undertook to
bring to pass, makes me that I can not hold from you my so singular freende
those arguments wherewith through conference had with him upon his said
attempt by reason of our great familiarity he has fully persuaded and
satisfied me. Chiefly because I would confirm you in that which he has a
little broke unto you, and partly because I would not have you waver in your
promise, through the vain allegations of some, which either are ignorant
altogether of his purpose or whose understanding can not stretche to a matter
of so great advice, or of such who are of base and cowardly courages in the
executions of matters of great importance: or else of envious disposition,
partly also because I would not have his most commendable enterprise in his
absence defaced for the great affection I bear him, whom I know most
sufficient to answer every point, article, and objection, can be laid against
him in this behalf, although I have nothing but that which through much
conference I have drawn from him.

And first by the way hold this for a maxim, that there has been at no time
any notable attempt taken in hand without envy, doubt, and defaring. The reason
is, that because they are actions apperteyning to the increase or furtheraunce
of a whole government, they are also much noted, wherein every man will have
his verdit. Some as is aforesaid not knowing half, will answer at the first as
they are affectionate to the party or country. Others that have bet their
brains a little to understand y^ which their conceit will not stretche unto,
take it impossible. The third that ground the lengthning of their lines term
by home dwelling, and their cuntrie service performed, if as a cipher in Agra^
they fill ye room of a man, and proserue their own, although many times they
conceive the likelyhode, and commend the thing, yet they never are inwardlye
resolved of their doubts superstitiously afraid to enter into any vnvsual
doings, but the last grieved to see honest works attempted, and likely to be
brought to pass (while they line idle) to hide their negligence, enuiouflye
slander and deface all good purposes. Such is the nature of man, but I will
now to the matter.

Ireland is a large Cuntrie, commended wonderfully for the fertilenesse and
commodious site thereof, wherein the Kings of England have had footing and
continual gouenement these four hundred years and more But so as the
barbarous Nation at no time fully subdued, through their often rebellion, have
been rather an anoy and charge to this Kealme of England, than otherwise,
which some men have imputed to the impossibility thereof, or to the evil
government of Deputies, which either have been neglygent or corrupt. But
Master Smith to see and know the truth, trauayled thither in the company of
Sir V Villiam Fitzwilliams now Lord Justice there, minding after search (...)
of made (for now began the desire of this attempt to root in his heart) to
declare his opinion, if he thought it might be accepted, and has found that
the decay of the government there has not chanced because that the planting
at the first of the English Nation (so much as it was) was not for the time
substancially done, nor by the negligence and corruptnesse of the governors
there, whereof within our remembrance has been a successiue order of noble,
just, wise, and sufficient persons. But has grown by the necessity which
has constrained the governors to give protections and pardons unto most
heinous rebels and outlawes, after they have spoiled, murthred, and made
havoc of the good Subjects, for lack of sufficient forces where with to
attache and execute the said malefactors, by reason of the spare supplye at
all times made to the^ by the Prince, who at the first inhabyting thereof
mynding more the kingdom of France and thinking all to little for that
purposed Conquest, neglected Ireland as a matter of small importance, then worst
looked to, when England it self was a prise or reward to them that best could
besturre themselves of the houses of York and Lancaster. And if you will mark
the Stories, you shall find great reasons that have moved the Prince too he
spare of charges in that cuntrie, and a consequence of decay in that government.

About the time of the first entry of the English in Ireland made that they
began to settle, arose y^ Barons wars in England, that weakened and decayed
all at home. France was chargeable too be mainteyned with many garrisos, a
great waster both of men and money, yet a thing whereto the Princes were more
bent tha^ to Ireland: so that we may easly perceive and judge, that the Jrishe
which yet remained unsubdued, taking advantage of the time, whiles the cheef
that had authority there, were called over to uphold their factions here,
possessed again their land, and expelled the new inhabitants: found without
head and scarce yet well settled, which could not be recovered again so soon,
because such as were come over after they had wasted themselves in Civil
wars, and had in the mean time lost their lands in Ireland, lost also their
credit with such as at the first adventured under them, by reason they had
forsaken and left them open to the spoil, nor the Princes being eaten out
also with civil discord and with the charges of France, unto which they were
more addicted, had the treasure to spare for the reformation thereof. Only king
Ruhard the second in his own person attemptyng the same, was overtaken with
Eiuile discension and deposed, which has ever since discouraged his
Successors personally to attempt the like. Thus home wars still increasing,
with the Armies in France, (a devouring grave of this Nation) and lastly the
loss thereof, so weakened and impouerisshed the Crown of England, that both
people and money wanted therein, much good land lying waste for lack of
inhabitaunts, that it was more time to recover by rest that which was wanting
at home than to send abroad that could not be spared. And the Princes contented
themselves if they might only preserve a footyng or entrye into Ireland with
some small charge, whereby the governors were co^streyned for want of supply
by protections and pardons to appease every rebellion, which otherwise to
repress and punish they were not sufficiently furnished. This perceived of the
Irishe, made them that upon every light occasion they will fly out, and
satisfied with blood and burning, will not without protection and pardon be
brought in. The English race ouerrumie and daily spoiled, seeing no punishment
of maletactors did buy their own peace, alied and fostred themselves with the
Irishe, and the race so nourished in the bosonie of the Irishe, perceiving
their immunitie from law and punishmente degenerated: choosing rather to
maintain themselves in the Irish man's beastly liberty, tha^ to submit
themselves and to live there alone, and not the Irish in the godly awe of the
laws of England. This degenerating and daily decay of the English manners by
little and little in the country, discorageth those that have not perfectly
wayed all that is aforesaid, to attempt any new enterprise. The Prince seeing
no man forward therein, is weryed with the continuance of the yearly great
charge which her majesty liberal above her predecessoures has borne more
willingly, and to this, the first entering of the English, their first
inhabiting, the order and manner thereof, is almost worn out of memory and
forgotten, their decay and wasting daily to be seen.

All these things when my friend being then in Ireland, had informed him self
of, by diligent inquifition, he fell to consider what way were fittest for our
time to reform the same, and if it were reformed, I mean the whole country
replenished with English men, what profit that could be to the estate of
England, has since his return told me diverse times, that he thought
Irelande once inhabited with English men, and polliced with English laws,
would be as great commodity to the Prince as the realm of England, the yearly
rent and charges saved that is now laid out to maintain a garrison therein,
for there cannot be (says he) a more fertile soil through out the world for
that climate than it is, a more pleasant, healthful, full of springs, rivers,
great fresh lakes, fish, and foul, and of most commodious herbers. England
gives nothing save fine woolle, that will not be had also most abundantly
there, it lacks only inhabitants, manurance, and policy.

As for the means how to subdue and replenishe the same (says he) they were
easy to be devised, if the Queens majesty would once take it upon her, with
army maintained at her charges: but since her highness is not bent thereto,
what other means is to be followed, he has heretofore in his first offer to
the Queens majesty's Counsel declared: which is that which he now follows,
and so many that have not in them selves the will or grace to do so well, do
impugn, which I will here defend and persuade you in as a thing most
reasonable, faisable, and commendable.

He has taken in hand without her Majesty's pay to win and replenish with
English inhabitants the country called the Ardes in the North of Irelande,
and some parts thereto adjoining: ^s there any think you, that hear only thus
much of the enterprise, and will not commend the manifest good disposition of
his toward his country and his Princes service. Yes, and if he find means
to bring it to pass without the Queens pay, his invention is the more to he
commended. But upon this do they ground all their arguments, that either are
not capable of the means, or else had rather speak against it, than learn
the likelihoode.

What (say they) it is not possible to win or inhabit any part of Irelande,
without the Queens pay, her forces and expenses. And yet the first entry with
the English men made into Irelande, was in Henry the secondes time, with his
license, by Strangbovve Earl of Chepstow at his own charges, and the charges
of his adherentes, at what time the Country was replenished with inhabitants,
and divided only into five kingdoms: who with a small number entered into ye
same, and subdued y^ kingdom which is now called Lemster, which he possessed
and held quietly, plantyng it with English inhabytants, and placing English
Laws, until the King envying his proceedings, and fearing to have so great a
Subject, enforced him to surrender his right, which he did. And this was the
first foting of English men in that Land, not by the Kings power, without
which as I have said, diverse hold an opinion, no good can be there done. Some I
say, that have been Capitaines there, will persuade you in y^ same, whom if you
will ask what good service they have done, will answer you, with xl. footmen to
have kept a Castle, and reaped the commodity of the Land adjacent in the
mids of the enemies territory, yea and with a hundred footmen and a few
Horse, to have kept whole Cuntries of the Irishe in awe and obeisance, and yet
auerre, that without the Princes pay, it is not possible to inhabit in any
Cu^trie there: as though there were more virtue in a quantity of the Princes
money, tha^ in so much of other men's, or that the like to their deeds, have
not been done in Ireland before them, and daily since, that it were a greater
matter for too bring too pass now, in that which is least Irishe, and divided
into an hundred factions, and having not the means to hold themselves
together ten days if they should assemble, than it was in Strangbowes time,
when the whole was divided intoo five parts only, in the prime of their
forces and government. But how frivolous their sayings been, you may by this
easily conjecture.

Much more then that which Strangbowe won, remains not at this day civil
in Ireland, but many parcels have been won by the English men therein, without
the Kings forces, which either by the occasions before rehearsed were lost, or
else for lack of inward policy degenerated, as great Cuntries in Munster, by
the Gerardines and Butlers. In Connalt, by the Burges. In Meth, by Nogent, in
Vlster sometimes by Lacy Earl of Lincoln, after him by Mortimer, yea a great
part of the Arde was and is possessed by the Savages, in whose offspring which
at this time hold it, save the name remains nothing English, with diverse
other parcelles which for shortness sake, I let pass. But the cause why they
lost it again or else degenerated, is declared before.

Let thus many examples suffize to show that the enterprise is possible, and
has often been done. If they will not, yet let reason serve, that if a hundred
or two of footmen, and fifty or a hundred Horse having the Queens pay to
maintain, can keep and defend the Arde, then so many horsemen and footmen
as well paid and mainteyned, can also and as sufficientlye steep and defend the
Arde, and thus by proportion, a greater number a greater Cuntrie, except there
be other mystery in the Queens pay than I can hear or perceine, where many
times four score and ten, and those not always co^plete make a good hundred.

Well (will you say) I grant that three hundred are sufficient to defend the
Arde. But when every man is retired, to dwell upon his own, then will the enemy
(which wayteth his time on every side) in the winter nights, spoil this time
one, and the next time another, so that you shall never have rest nor profit of
the soil, nor live without fear, as it happens many times upon the frontier
of the English pale, for all the Queens Majesty's garryson. To this as near
as I can, I will repeat his words, who at the time I alleged it to him smiled
and said, I have not yet forgotte all mine Accidence by this text. Foelix quem
faciunt aliena pericula cautum, which was wont to make me take heed, to do
that in school, for which I saw another beaten, I stand as it were in a three
want way, whereof one part leads right, and I have seen two take several
ways, and both lose their labors because they were out of the right way.
What lets now, that I perfectly instructed and warned by other men's
errors, should not boldly proceed the third way and not go awry?

Most of those that have taken in hand before this, to win and inhabit in
Ireland, have after the place once possessed, divided themselves each to dwell
upon his own land, and to fortesie him self thereon, trusting with his own
strength, if any invasion were made to preserve him self therein. But this
made not the enemy afraid, who lay continually under his Nose, and all
along upon the border watching the time to serve his turn, sometime
stealing and praying the Cattle, other times laying wait to entrap and murder
the Master himself, sometime setting Fire on his Keekes or Towns, whereby
they that lay next the Frontier were forced either to for sake their own, or
else compound and foster with the Irish. So they degenerated as is aforesaid,
and in time all was frustrate. Yet the Country of Ophally using that order,
lies at this day so safe, that they put for the their Cattle in the night with
out fear of stealing, but I judge that brought to pass rather by Cowleys
singular good government, otherwise than by that only order, for the
inhabitaunce of the Country of Le^ss which was divided in the same order, are
not altogether so assured.

Others whom the Queens forces do defend, when the enemies grow strong upon
them and begin to spoil the^, have of the garriso^ sent vown to defend them,
so flies the enemy to trouble an other quarter, or else for bears for the
time, till the garrison be called away to a place of more need, or that the
husbandmen eaten out with cesse, when he is weary, by petition has obtained too
be cased of them, who be no sooner gone, but the enemy returns to wast him
ageine. Thus every way goes it backwards with them.

The third way is that we must take, first to choose a place so near as we
can that is naturallye strong, When after it is won not too suffer the
Soldier too be dispersed, well to let the owner repair to his portion, but so
as a soldier in his steed be always on the frontier, least of all to trust
to be daily defended by the Queens garrison for diverse inconveniences. And
herein since we have leisure enough, I will open to you some what of my
design, and the reasons have persuaded me thereto.

The Arde which is my demand, and the nearest part of all Ireland to
Lancashere, and the Cast part of England, I take to be a piece of ground as
easy to be won, inhabited, safely kept and defended, as any platte within
the Kealme of Ireland, being a reach of land (as it were of purpose bayed out
from the main into the Sea, to wall in so much of it as would make so fair
and commodious a lake and herber as the haven of Strangford is) fasshioned like
an Arm bente in the Elbowe, annexed no where to the main but at the one end
as the Arm to the shoulder. The breadth of which entry is about five Miles,
as by the platte here unto annexed may be more plainlye seen. That straight
once kept and defended, all the rest of the Country must of necessity
become quiet and safe, and thus shall it be defended.

Upon the said entry shall be raised strengths where all the soldiers which
are mainteyned by the Cuntrie, shall lie in garrison for diverse good
consideratio^s, keeping there continual scoute watch, and ward so narowly,
that one single person vndiscried shall not be able to enter or flee out of the
Country. By this means the Cuntrie is not only safely preserved, the border
as well as the midst, but the Irish will always keep them selves aloose, for
fear of Scarbrough warning, if they should harbor themselves any thing near
a garrison that lies ready to take every advantage upon them. And to the end
the Soldiers should be the more bigilant, I am minded to lay all the very
fro^tier Land denided by proportion, to the strengths where the garrisons lie,
so that every Soldier shall put in his share toward the sowing and manuring
thereof, and receive his part of the Corn and other profit that is too be
gathered thereon, which shall come to him besides his maintenance from the
Cuntrie. This for his own gain sake which lies in most danger of all, will
make him have better eye to his charge, and be the more jealous of the enemy,

As for having the Queens aid and garrison, I have good hope it shall not need
for since y^ every Soldier is made Master and owner of his land, to him and
to his heirs for ever, will he not think you look as well and as carefully to
that, as he would if he had six pence sterling a day of the Queens
Majesty, whereof he should be sure not past for a year or there about, and
then to go whither he would. Now if he keep and desende this, he is a
Gentleman, a man of liuelyhode and of enheritaunce, and who has and shall
have, his ground ploughed and eared for him without his pains, for that we
have provided for, if he lose it, he loses his own inheritance, and
hinders his posterity. And if by his own charges and costs he do obtain
it, and bring it to civility and good obedience to his Prince, how much more
^auour, grace, and renown does he delerue at her Majesty's hand, and as
without her highness charge, this he shall do, so as reason is, he has it the
better cheap, the larger estate in it, and the less incu^bered.

What difference I pray you is there in the end between the charges without
the Queens aid, to go to win the said Country, and inhabit it, or else to
go dwell, being set in by the Prince, in a country which her majesty huth
won and left unto the inhabiters to defend, nothing but the charges of the
first winning which is one years charge or two, for which charges to have in
recompense a larger estate, and to pay an easier rent, In faith I judge you
now sufficiently informed, and that you do take this a better, more
reasonable, and surer way, tha^ to covet herein at the first getting the
Princes aid, which if you shall have done it were reason we should both pay
bigger rent, and have worse estates, as they have already in other places of
Irelande, on that sort lately won.

Now you see I have not only answered you to your question, and resolved you
of your dout, but have opened to you a secret of mine enterprise, which makes
many that know not so much, condemn me for taking it in hand.

There rests yet master Smith said I one point to be alleged herein which
is this, that there are not many can bear this first charge, and be willing to
do it also. With that he paused a while, and there replied again as follows.
If there be any thing that may hinder in deed this enterprise, or make it
vain, it is that, that you have now spoken of, namely good council slowly
followed: but you shall hear what likelihoodes and hope I have to the contrary.

I am sure you are persuaded, that all enterprises are very much either
furthered or hindered by ye times in which they are taken in hand. For if
Amyntas, grandfather to the great Alexander, (the estate of the Macedonians
being then small and weak) had taken in hand the overthrowing of the Persian
Empire, he had never done it: nor Philip which prepared the Macedonians to such
an enterprise, whom by sundry conquestes upon his neighbors, he had fleshed
to the war, and by continual exercise had made them almost perfect
soldiers, for now desired they nothing but work, and the spoil of some
rich kingdom. Which when Alexander perceived, he took the advantage of the
time, and had good success: so you may see the time and inclination of the
Macedonians, was in deed of more effect to bring the enterprise to pass, than
Alexanders only disposition could have been, who was but a young man, and not
much experienced at that time.

More examples I will not use, but declare unto you that my greatest hope is in
the time wherein I am, which I consider on this sort.

England was never that can be heard of, fuller of people than it is at this
day, and the dissolution of Abbayes has done two things of importance heerin:
It has doubled the number of gentlemen and marriages, whereby comes daily
more increase of people: and such younger brothers as were wont to be thruste
into Abbayes, there to live (an idle life) since that is taken from them, must
now seek some other place to live in. By this means there are many lack
abode, and few dwellings empty.

With that our law which gives all to the elder brother, furthereth much my
purpose. And the excessive expense both in diet and apparel, makes that men
which have but small portions, can not maintain them selves in the emulation
of this world, with like countenance as the grounded rich can do: thus stand
we at home.

Then went I to examine the estate of Countries abroad, and found, that all the
Countries adjacent round about, were as well peopled or better than we be, or
else more barren, so that except we might master and expel the inhabitants, it
would not avail. But therefore, or for any other cause, to fall in variance with
France or Spain, were but as the rubbing of one boughe against an other with
the wind, where both fret, neither increases. Scotland besides that is
barren, is ruled by a friend king, and peopled sufficiently. freland is the
Queens inheritance, many countries there, as that which I demand, given to
her by act of Parliament of the same realm, others hirs by dissents, the
which lie almost desolate: To inhabit and reform so barbarous a nation as
that is, and to bring them to the knoweledge and law, were both a godly and
commendable deed, and a sufficient work for our age.

All these things happening together in my time, when I had considered, I
judged surely, that God did make apt and prepare this nation for such a
purpose. There rests only to persuade the multitude already destined thereto,
with will and desire to take the matter in hand.

Let us therefore use the persuasions which Moses used to Israel, they will
serve fitly in this place, and tell them that they shall go to possess a
land that flows with milk and honey, a fertile soil truly if there be any
in Europe, whether it be manured to corn, or left to grass, There is Timber,
stone, plaster, and state commodious for building every where abundant, a
country full of springs, rivers and lakes both small and great, full of
excellent fish and foul, no part of the country distant above, viij. miles
from a most plentiful sea, or land water able to bear lode.

You say well, (said I then.) But men are more moved by peculiar gain: than of
respect they have to common profit. Mary answers he: they shall have their
peculiar portions in that fruitful soil, being but as a vootie to be divided
amongs them.

And this shall be the quantity which a foot man shall have, videlicet, a
plowe land, which contains a C. and. xx. Acres Jrishe, but you will
understand it better by English measure. A plowland shall contain. CC. and.
lv. acres of earable ground. Then can there not lie in any country almost,
(especially so full of bottomes as that soil is) so much earable land
together, but there will lie also entermingled therewith sloppes, slips, and
bottomes fit for pasture and meading, and commodious to be annexed to the
same plowlande, so that the whole may amount to. CCC. acres at the least. I
pray you tell me, if you had so much good ground in Essex, would you not take
it for a pretty farm, and yet a horse man shall have double, videlicet, six.
C. Acres of ground one with an other at the least, whereof there is. v. CCCCCx.
acres earable, the rest meadow and pasture, I believe you would call that in
Essex a good manor, and yet these are the least deuisions, I purpose to make,
saving a ploweland or two in every parish that I think good to divide to
laborers and artificers, but I am not of the manner thereof yet fully resolved.

This is good said I, if a man might have it as easily rented. Judge you I
pray you says he. They shall pay for every Acre of eareable land one penie
starling, as for the pasture and medowe, they shall have it as reasonable as the
eareable in some places better cheap, according to the goodness of the
ground. But this is the greatest rent: I must have upon every such plowland one
able English footeman, or upon his two plowlandes, one horse man, maintained
to be ready at all times for the defense of the whole country, abiding either
upon the same plowland, or else upon the frontier, which may be peradventure.
x. or. xy. miles distant at the vttermosts, most commonly nearer.

I intend not that this lying in the frontier shall be continual, but one
shall relieve an other by quarters, some in garrison, and some resting them
selves at home in the Country, and it may be, (which I hope in my time to see)
all Irelande reformed, and no need of garrison in all the country, when y^
service shall cease also.

This portion said I, that you speak of, me think if it be in fee, so easily
rented should make your enterprise a fit match for younger brothers, such as
have but annuities, stipendes, and dead stocks to live on. For by this means
should they be proutded of an house, and pretty land belonging unto it,
sufficient to yield wherewith to make a friend drink, and many such farms
make a man rich. But I fear me it can be only profitable to such as dwell
upon the same, as it is in some places of England, where the Gentlemen have
upon their wide Lordships, great provision of corn and cattle, wherein most of
their rent is paid, but that is so cheap there, that a great deal to be
sold, yeldeth but a little money, whereby they may give meat and drink to a
number, but pay wages to a few, so that he that should not dwell there him
self, after the souldioure were found, and the rent paid, should either
have little or nothing for his own share: bisides if the owner him self be
not there, to manure or to see the same manured, how should he gather profit
thereof? or who would farm it for him, or yield him rent for his land?
This is a doubt in deed that will make many stay I tell you, who would otherwise
adventure. Nay in good soothe is it not (said he) as you shall hereafter
perceive.

So soon us we shall ariue in Ireland and have proclaimed, that all such at
the Irishe as will (...) (...), and manure the ground under us shall be welcome,
defended from the enemy, and have no coin, liuerie nor cease laid upon
them, but whatsoever bargain they make, that justly performed. There is no
doubt but there will great numbers of the Husbandmen which they call Churles,
came and offer to live under us, and to ferme our grounds: both such as are of
the Cuntry birth, and others, both out of the wild Irishe and the English
pale. For the Churl of Ireland is a very simple and royleseme man, desiring
nothing but that he may not be eaten out with cease, Coin, nor liuerie.

Coin and liuerie is this. There will come a Kerne or Galliglas which be the
Irishe Soldiers, to lie in the Churles house, whiles he is there be will be
master of the house, he will not only have meat, but money also allowed
him, and at his departure the best things he shall see in the Churles house,
be it (...) cloth, a shirte, Mantel, or such like. These is the Churl eaten up,
so that it Dearth fall in the Cuntry where he dwells, he should be the first
starued, not being Master of his own. From which exactions that he might be
free, there is no part of the Cuntrie but he would seek to, and give for Land
wonderful rents, paying them in such commodity as the ground will yield, be
it Corn, Butter, or Cattle. You may have Farmers out of the I Will of Man, and
other poor men out of England, so they may be aided at the first with some
stock of Corn and Cattle. It is but a little care at the beginning after the
land is divided, I for my part will indeuer my self to persuade the one
freendly to depart his commodity with an other: but I fear the sweetness
which the owners shall find in the Irish Churl, giving excessiuely, will
hinder the Country much in the peopling of it with the English Nation,
making men neglygent to provide English Farmours, but thereof there is one
prouiso in our instructions from her Majesty's Counsel.

Now will I tell you what rent the owner may reap of his Land, videlicet, Money,
Corn, Butter, Parne, Cattle, and such like, my counsel shall be that every man,
since their land is delivered, such as is errable, should continue the same
under tillage, and receive his rent in Corn, which tilling of their Land that
it be so done, is also provided for in the said instructions, because it
settleth the occupier, and what with tending his fallowe, reaptyde, seed time,
and thrashing, it binds always the occupier to the Land, and is a
continual occupation of a great number of persons, a helper and a mainteyner
of Civility in my opinion. As for the rent, I wuld have one rate thereof through
all the Cuntry, of every plowland a like. I think two pecks Irishe do contain
four English Busshels, of an Irish Acre, which is two English Acres and a
half quarter, were reasonable between the Lord and Tenant, so that the Tenant
should pay only that rent for the errable ground, having the Medowe and
Pasture into the bargain for maintenance of his Teame. Of this rent by my
counsel the one part should bear Wheat, and the other part Otes and Barley.
By which means one plowlande may yield yearly to the owners thirty quarters
of Wheare, and as much Otes and Barlie, toward the finding of his Soldier,
and payment of his rent. As for the victualing of his sootman soldier, I
parpose to undertake for v. quarters of Wheat and five quarters of Barley,
sufficiently to find every such footeman, and for ten quarters of Wheat and
ten of Barley and Otes, to find every horse man and his horse in continual
garrison, for one whole year. The footemans wages and the rent will be
disdischarged for ten quarters more, the horsemans wages and rent for twenty.
Peradventure you will say I allow with the most, and that less will serve, yet
has the owner of one plowland forty quarters of Corn de claro at the years
end, and the owner of two plowland four score.

But what shall he do with that Corn, will you say, Mary sell it, for
ordinaryly Corn bears the same price there that it bears in England, and
save of very late years, it has been accustomed too be always deerer. And
yet there is another way more aduantageous, than the sale of Corn in Ireland,
that will be acloyd therewith, if at the beginning before our part be thoroughly
peopled, we fall to turning all the Land as before is said to Tilling, not
being able to spend it, therefore is it necessary, and I am fully persuaded,
that the Queens Majesty furthering the inhabiting and civility of the North
(which increases more by keeping men occupied in Tyllage, than by idle
followyng of herds, as the Tartarians, Arabians, and Irishe men do) will give
full liberty for the transportation of Corn out of y^ said Cuntries into
England, France, Spain or other place, whereas the Market shall serve best,
and thereupon will lay a reasonable Custom. For this cause shall there be one
Haven with common Oranyers made upon the Key, sufficient for the receipt of the
Corn of the Cuntry, and one Port Town builded, so soon as we may begin to be
any thing settled. More of the order heerin I will tell you another time, but
comfort your self with this in the mean time, that Corn in Spain is
always good merchandise, and brings away ready money. The cut between the
Cuntries, short, straight, and not five days journey. How say you now, have I
not set forth to you another Eutopia? but I looked when you would bid me stay
and declare first how to get it before al these be donesith you will not ask
me, of mine own proper motion I will tell you.

If these declarations of mine in so fit a time and Country, where God has
prepared the Nation to such enterprise, may allure any number to take it in
hand, were they but six or seven hundred, which I take to be but a small
number to be got in all this Realm. What should let that in a cuntrie almost
desolate (except but of such of y^ Englysh race as will be glad of this
enterprise) we might not inhabit and dwell in safety? It may be said that at
the first, the Irishe will assemble and put us back. Alas six thousand of
the^ dare not set upon seven hundred English men, having the advantage of a
trench, scarce in the plains. But if we will keep our selves close for a
while, they must of necessity for lack of victual disperse them selves, and
give us liberty with the advantage over them to break forth and proceed with
our enterprise, and who is there now of the Lords in the North can make two
thousand men. Onell though he joined with him all the Lords of the East side
of Ulster, and the Scotts is not able to make three thousand fighting men. As
for Odennel, Mon Guyer, O Rayly, and the Barons sons, which be the greatest
of the North, I take it certain, that they will not hazard their Cuntries with
any new Rebellion, but had rather live contented with peace, sauouring and
finding aid at the English men's hands, as they have been accustomed to do.
And yet I hope well of the rest, because I will not (so near as I can) do them
any injury.

If you will have examples of defe^ding Countries with fewer men, take Lease
and Ophally, the Cuntrie of (...) our next neighbor, sometime kept by Bruton
with a hundred horse, the Kerry by Sir Warham Sentleger, till his coming a
way, with less than a hundred Horse, and the Arde it self where Goodrich
Captain Barrowes Liuetenant, with fourteen men kept and defended the Castle
called Castle Reau, in the entry thereof, and went daily one quarter of a Mile
for in fetch his water, against five hundred that lay daily upon him, with
many others. But if you will have example of winning if, and the valor of our
Nation in comparison of them, see the overthrow given to the Butlers, with less
than three hundred horse, in the last general rebellion, the appeasing and
winning ageine as it were of all Munster, at that time rebelled, by Sir Humfry
Gilbart, with less than v. hundred English men. The overthrow of a thousand
Skottes in Connaught the lafte year by Captain Colyer and his foot band. The
overthrow given unto Shan Oneil with three thousand Irishe by Captain
Randall and three hundred English men only. The driving of Shan Oneil out of
Dundak after he had taken it, when he was in his greatest forces, by two
bands of English men: with infinite other examples, as the taking of thirty
of their Castles in one day by two English footbands. Wherefore since their
Castles can not preserve them, nor themselves in the fight prevail, upon the
plain nor other where, all men may easily judge that the winning or defending
of any Cuntrie is easy enough in Ireland, if therefore there be any competent
number of English Souldyers together. And I will in these comfort you
somewhat, that the Arde and the Cuntrie adjacent is a plain Cuntrie, wherein
are very few Castles to be won, if it should chance the Irishe would defend
them, I think not above four if there be so many. What rests now since I
have proouee by examples that it is faisable, and that without danger almost,
except we should more despair of our selves, tha^ smaller companies have
heretofore done, sith I have showed you by reason that it is profitable, but
that I knit up our talk, because it is late, with veclaring unto you with how
small charge it may be taken in hand, and how that it may be rather a saving
to some, than exspence.

There be many that not considering what facillitie it is by good order and
willing menes to bring great things to pass, but wondering rather at the
greatness of the sum, which must furnish so many soldioures, carry them over,
and maintain them there for a year or there aboutes (that must of necessity
be supplied from England) are of the opinion, that it can not be done without
the Princes pay. But I will inform you an easy way, to bring this without her
majesty's expenses to pass.

All that land of the Arde, and other places which her majesty has given
unto my father and me, we are purposed to divide unto such as shall be
contented either to accompany me, or be at the charges of a souldioure, be he
foot man or horse man, in this journey, reserving some small thing of a plowe
land to our selves, as a chief rent, contenting our selves rather to be
accounted the motioners and ring leaders of so many English families, to be
planted for ever in the Ardes. etc. than forcing of any gain. Which while some
in the like matches have groped to narowly after, they have marde ye whole
enterprise. Mary he that will look to have tho said lands at the rentes and
rates, which I have already told you, must be at the charges of finding him
self, or some other in his room, for the winning and defense of the country,
first to come furnished of all things necessary be he footeman or horse man.
Thus when all my company shall come furnished, with armor and weapon as
souldioures ought to be, what is there then lacking to this voyage? Mary
shipping for tra^sportation: when we are there, corn and other victual for
the first year, ships and boats to fish for our better victualing, corn to
put in the ground against the next year, plowes and all things necessary
thereto. For I mind to have that done also of common charges, that if it be
possible we may have no more, or else very little leuying of many for the next
years victailes but that the common stock may serve, this I assure you am I
purposed to do, and to play the good husband with the companies stock, that
it may reach far, and yet are there many more things to be provided, as powder,
some furniture of Armor in store, Iron pieces, and of all munition be longing
to the wars, you and yet more, as all manner of things belonging to building
and fortification, with the Carpenters, Masons, Smithes. etc. who will look for
wages. Item that belong to the bands, as Crokes, Bakers, Surgeons. etc, that
will also look for wages. And because all these prouisio^s might be orderly
done, and nothing in time of need be to seek, I have taken it in hand
therefore to (...) of every man, according to the rate of land he looks for,
videlicet ten pound of one foot man, and twenty pound of a horse man, so
to see all necessaries abundantly provided. If less would suffice, I would take
less, for I mean at the years end, that the Treasorer shall yield account,
and what is not spente, shall serve the second year, and the less levied of
the company toward the provision of the said necessaries. After which time
there is no manner don't but the Country will yield to serve our turn
sufficiently, without any more leuying, and as for them that will deliver
corn, or any other thing necessary to the rate of the said sums, it shall
be accepted in lieu of money. And this is the charge and adventure of a foot
man, videlicet, ten pound for his victaile, six pound thirtene shillings
and four pence, the rest of his furniture for one whole year, and for that
money will I undertake to find a footeman, arm him, give him his liuerie,
pay him three pound six shillings and eight pence wages, and victaile him
one year, to serve in room of him that neither goes him self, nor sends
an other furnished.

Now let us gather and make one sum of all the collection of one year, and
see whether it may be judged sufficient or not, of seven hundred, grant three
hundred horse men, which pay twenty pound a piece, that is six thousand
pound. And four hundredth (...) after ten pound a piece, which amounts to
four thousand pound, the whole x. thousand pound. Look you now, every man
putting in a share, that is not much, what a sum ryseth it to? which I hope
with good using will not only be sufficient to victual the seven hundred
souldieurs, but all other Artificers and Laborers, and to pay the^ their
wages, with all other store of Munition, shipping, and necessaryes for one
whole year at the least. Two years charges is the vttermoste can pass without
game, wherefore let us compare the charges and yearly profit (to be looked
for) together, and see what evil bargain this can be.

Two years charges of a footeman is, three and thirty pound six shillings
and eight pence, for as for rent there is none to be paid till the fourth
year, the commodity to be looked for, is forty quarters of grain at the
least de claro per annum. But the horsemane gain and charge is double, and
this is the worst bargain. For he that goes in his own person as younger
brothers and such like, do rather save than lose, for with less expe^ces if he
have no Horse in England, can he not live for his diet, than ten pound: if he
be a horseman, his Horse and he under twenty pound, yet live he must whither
he spend the time in England or Ireland, and this I am sure of, that whatsoever
he may save of his diet in a year here in England by lying in his friends
house, he shall spend in apparaile: for that Cuntrie of Ireland requires rather
lasting and warm clothes than gorgeous and dear garments. Besides this, in
consideration of leading his life in Ireland, he is too enjoy a good and
commodious piece of Land, yielding three score quarters of grain yearly
toward his maintenance, being a footeman, or a hundred and twenty if he be
a horsman, and so by proportion. Shall I tell you my conscience heerin? I can
not see how Fathers that have many Sons, or landed men that have many younger
brothers ca^ do better for their punees, than to prefer them, and set them
forth in this Jorney with me, who seek to persuade nothing but that I will go
in person to execute, not a whit the more fearful, because I am the only son
of Sir Thomas Smith. And now that I have resolved you of your doubt as I
hope, and performed my promise in the end, I will leave you for this time.

Thus much Master R. C. was our conference at that time, which so near as I
could remember I have repeated word by word, but to diverse other objections,
his answers which I have learned at sundry meetings, will I now declare.

Many say, that they shall go into a place where they shall want meat, housing,
and all things necessary, for that no Prince yet has been able to victual
his Army there, sufficiently in their journeys, besides that the Soldier is
always constrained, to march through the Bogges and rivers, and in the night
to lodge upon the Grass without meat and Fire. This in deed is great
misery, but they that threaten this in his journey, are altogether ignorant of
his procedings, nor consider not the difference, that is between the Deputies
iorneyes, (who seeks still to apprehend the Rebels bodies, following them
through Bogge, through plain and wood, hoping with perseverance and long
iorneyes to weary them, and bring them in) and his enterprise, who desires the
Land only, not any revenge upon the Jrish, and who purposes not to spend him
self with long iorneyes, but to proceed slowely, inhabit, build, and
fortify him self as he goes, contenting himself too obtein his portion of
Land well defended in safety, and not coneting otherwise with loss and
discourmoditie of his men, too seek to anoy the Jrishe as before is said,
proceeding on this sort.

He does mind at his first landing, to fortify him self upon the sea
shore, and the frontier of his country, and build there his store house and
houses of provision, which he will carefully and speedely see brought thither,
to be ready before it be wanting, a place for Artificers to lie safely in, and
in the mean time that it is building and raising, to lodge all his men in
camp, under canuas tents and hales, wherein he has promised to take order
with his associates, that will peradventure be one three months work. Then
after the store house and key of his country built, and left sufficiently
guarded, he will remove. v. vi. more or less miles, as the country shall some,
and there erecte upon the list an other fortress, able in receive and now a
sufficience crewe of soldiers, to be ready always in defense of the frontier,
incamping and lodging his men there as before, tell that forte also be done and
furnished Thus will he proceed in his journey all the Summer, till the entry
of his country be sufficiently fortified. Toward the winter (...), dividing
his soldioures into the said strengthes, there to lie in garrison upon the
ennimie, for the more safety of the country, as at the beginning I have
already sold you.

What misery (I pray you now) can this bring the soldiour in? what scant and
scarcity of victaile shall they be at any time constrained to, by reason it
can not be brought to them? if otherwise it be wanting which I am sure shall not
be, it is by his fault and slacknesse, not by the disco^moditie of the
carriage* or how evil need the soldier be lodged. This his proceedings are
others than has been heretofore used, and other men's errors have taught
him to take this order, to mark and consider them well is the only way to
perfectness (says he) and nothing has been so well done, but if it were to
do again might be better done: for time is it that in the most advised
gouernementes discovers faults, which while we patch and mende by little and
little, the first order is altered, and become an other thing, the very vanity
of the world.

And as for the present necessity and lack of many commodities of the Country
which are in England every where, if you mark that has been heretofore said
in describing it, you can not say but the only default thereof is the
vnciuilitie of the inhabitants, and lack of good orders. Which as soon as he
shall have amended, by bringing this his attempt to good end, and that it may
be replenished with buildings, civil inhabitants, and traffic with law,
justice, and good order, what shall let, that it be not also as pleasant and
profitable, as any part of England, especially when it shall be furnished with
a company of Gentlemen, and others that will line friendly in fellowship
together, rejoicing in the fruit and commodity of their former travail, which
(through noble courage,) for estimation sake, and the love of their own
country the first enterprised, deserving if I may speak it, that am resolved
one of the same company, to be crowned with garlandes of honor and
everlasting fame. But what do I digress? Is there any more doubts yet trow
ye? yes, this.

There be some that like well enough of this taking the Arde in hand, because
it is both defensible with a few men, and those free holders that yet remain
therein, being of English race, have always defended them selves from
praying by the ^rishe, but more they say, he shall never be able too compass
nor defend, to whom I will repeat this short answer.

He that has but a little Cuntrie can maintain therewith but a few men, and
is constreyned gladly to accept such conditions of peace as he can get at the
enemies hands, but he that has a large country, may maintain a great number
of men, and at pleasure commau^d whether to make peace or war with his
enemy. As for master S^^th he will proceed and hold so much only as his
forces will stretche unto, for the old Proverb sake that says: He that too
much gripeth, fastneth on little.

Be of good courage therefore, and resolve your self to be a partaker with him
in person. The enterprise is commendable, and not only to the increase of his
nation and honor of his country, but very profitable to them that are doers
therein, if it be brought to good pass, which is assured, if reason may serve,
or the like at any time (as before has often been seen) has taken effect,
and the adventure is small, not to the tenthe part of the gain. He is
provided already I know, of singular good Captains, and the promise of an
hundred Gentlemen already at the least, having not yet opened the matter but to
his friends. As for him self you shall find him vigilant and careful, coveting
more the well doing hereof, and the safety of his company, than the glory
of victory in any rash attempt, more desiring to please and profit every man,
than loking for ceremonious courtesy and reverence. Lo conclude, I know him to
be such as disdaineth no man, or that seeks to feed the world with fine
language, fair speeches and promise, but a man that is open plain, more
affable than he seems, such a one infaith, toward whom your love and liking
will increase still, with acquaintance and familiarity, to be then most, when
you shall know him best. I speak this by experience and long proof that I
have had of him.

Grant it (will you say) that he for his part be such an one, but all those
whom he shall have assembled out of every part of this Realm, shall not be of
so good a Nature, as peradventure he is of, some be disdainful, proud, and
insolent, some covetous, and other of quarellous disposition, a few of these
are enough to disturb the whole company. Quarrels begin of small trifles,
and by parts taking, come in the end to great matters. Besides in the
particion, one will be angry because he was not preferred to that commodyous
seat or this good dwelling, and because he has not so much Land as an other,
but of this hope I also to satisfy you. For master Smith minds first to give
unto every man so much at the least as he promises by y^ order he purposes to
give out, and for which the Soldier was willing to adventure his part, then
can he not (...) fault with the quantity. Notwithstanding to him that
deser^eth well in this journey, he will (...) am sure be more liberal, for I
know he gives willingly. The place where their (...) shall lie must fall to
the^ by lot, as it shall be their chance first or last to be served, from a
place appointed to begin at before the lo^tes so drawn, so can he not
mistake of his chance, nor be angry for the place which fell not to him by
any man's appointing. And to take a^ray al occasion of Quarrels, Mutineries, or
other disorder, that might otherwise ensue, he has promised to cause one book
of orders or Discipline to be drawn, by the advice of the best Capitaines, and
shall be read unto the whole company. Which after it is allowed and agreed
to by them, shall be kept safely as the Statutes of this journey, and according to
the letter of that Book, shall all misdemeanors of the Camp be punished. For
every person abiding in the same shall be solemnly sworn, to observe every
Article and ordinance contained therein, and to his power assist and aid to see
them duly punished, that shall offend contrary too the Tenor of the foresayne
Book.

Adventure therefore boldly with him, as for your portion of Land, I knows
that his Father and he are bound to her Majesty by a Covenant, in her highness
grant expressed, in no less bond than in the forfeyture of the whole, that
they shall distrybute to all ayders herein according to the rate before
mentioned.

Besides I know he is liberal and will deal franckly with his friend, or any
other whom he shall have a good lyking to.

And the ^iquer or (...), either with his Fathers hand or his, or with the
hands of any Treasurer appointed his Deputy therein, testifying the quantity
of the adventure, shall be sufficient to charge them in this behalf Your
assura^re shall be made by deed, signed, ^^aled, an^ delivered so soon as
possibly it can be dispatched, after the said Land shall be assigned by lot and
laid out. And if it so chance that any die in this voyage, before the
partition de made, his part shall notwithstanding be reserved and performed too
his next heir or any of his kindred (that shall have presently word sent to
him thereof) if within three months after the said word given, they either
personally repair or send their deputies thither to receive the same. To the
end no man's adventure and hope so willingly taken in hand through his own
mischaunce should be lost from his posterity, nor untimely death be
prejudicial to his deserved inheritance.

Here will I end, hoping that I have fully satisfied you of all doubts, that
might have dissuaded you heerin. And this is the effect of all, that I have
with thus many Arguments gone about to persuade you, that you should employ two
or three years of your youth, in that most honorable seriuce that can be in
our times done for England, therefore to receive thanks, estimation, and a
profitable inheritance, besides the contentation of mind in your possibility,
to be the patron and first founder of a family in that cuntrie, which in time
to come with Gods favor, may spring up to great authority. Fare you well.

Since the writing hereof he has sent me word as to a freende, partaker of
his joy, that his book is by the Queens Majesty favorably signed, and
already under the great Seal. And that he myndeth to proceed to the
gathering of men, leuying of money, and making his provision necessary for
this journey with all speed. And therewithal has sent me a Coppie of the
order, or rather offer, to be given forth for the dispatching hereof, which
is this that I send you, heerewith nothing differing I warrante you, from that
I had wrote to you before in this discourse.

The offer and order given forth by Sir Thomas Smyth Knighte, and Thomas Smyth
his son, unto such as he willing to accompany the said Thomas Smyth the
son, in his voyage for the inhabiting some parts of the North of Irelande.
THe Queens Majesty's grant made to sir Thomas Smith Knighte, and Thomas
Smyth his son in Ireland, is all that is her Majesty's by enherita^ce, or
other right in the country called the ARDES, and part of other countries
adjacent in the Erledom of VLSTER* is that they ea^ possess and trpienishe
them with English men. The which thing that it might the more surely be done,
the said sir Thomas and Thomas his son have bounden themselves to her
highness to distribute all the said land within the said Countries, which
they shall be able to obtain and possess, to such as shall take pains to
help the^ to possess the same, to have and hold to them and to their heirs
for ever.

That is to say, to each man who will serve as a soldier on foot, one Plowland
containing a hundredth and twenty acres Irishe of eatable land, for which the
said sir Thomas and Thomas, must pay to the Queen's majesty two pence Irish for
an Irish acre, after four and twenty foot to the pole. In consideration of
which rent by the^ to be paid unto her Majesty, the Soldier shall pay for
the said plowlande unto Sir Thomas Smyth and Thomas, and their heirs, one
penie sterling for every English acre of the said plowland, after the measure
of sixtene foot and an half to the pole, and no more. The first payment to
begin four years hence, videlicet. 1576.

To each man who will serve on horseback two plowla^ds, videlicet two hundredth
and forty acres Irishe, which is at the least five hundredth acres and more
English, paying for every acre English as the footeman does.

And the earable land being divided, each foot man and horseman shall have
also allotted unto him pasture, medowe, and such like necessary, as the Cuntry
will serve, as reasonably as they have arable ground, so that they may therewith
be contented.

The charges that is required of a footeman at his first setting forth, if he
be furnished of sufficient Armor, for a Pike, Halberd or Caliuer, with a
convenient Livery Cloak of red color, or Carnation with black facing, is ten
pounds for his vitayling for one whole year after his arriual and his
transportation: after which year, there is hope to find prouisyo^ enough in
the Cuntrie, which they shall obtain with good guidance.

The charges of a Horsema^ well horsed and armed for a light horseman with a
Staff and a case of Dagges, is twenty pounds for vittayle of him and his
Horse for one whole year, and for his tra^sportation. His livery had need be
of the color aforesaid, and of the fashyon of the ryding Dutche Clokes now
used.

And to avoid the Flixe and such dangerous diseases as does many times
chance to Soldiers by reason of lying upon the ground and uncovered, and
likewise to Horses for lack of Hales. If any Soldier footman will give before
hand ten Shillings, and the Horseman twentye Shyllyngs, they shall be lodged
under Ca^uas, and upon Beds, until houses may be provided.

And if any will bear the charges of a Souldyour, that cannot go himself, nor
send another in his room, he shall have his part of Land allotted to him as
well as though he went himself: but then for a footman he must pay in ready
money.xvj. pound.xiij. s.iiij. d. This is one part. And if any will have two
parts or more, then according to this rate to pay the money. The Coronell to
find the said footman or men in all points for the first year according as the
money is received.

And to the intent that no man willing to adventure in this most honorable and
profitable voyage may doubt hereof, if it please him to resort into Paul's
churchyard to the sign of the Sun, there he shall see both the Letters
Patents and the Indentures of Couenauntes betwixt the Queens Majesty and the
said Sir Thomas Smith and Thomas Smith, and pay such money as he is disposed
to adventure, and receive his assurance from Thomas Smith the Son, who
takes the adventure and voyage upon him to go in person, or if the said
Thomas be not there, one of the receyuers of this voyage remaining there,
shall do herein as apperteyneth, whom he has made his Deputy in this behalf.

Note that all such kinds of provision as be necessary in this journey, the
Treasourer may receive in live of money, according as he shall have need of
such provision, be already furnished there with, and according to the place
where the said provision shall lie, for the commodious transportation thereof.

God save the Queen.

We request all our partakers to make so speedy payment of their adventures,
as possible they may, that nothing be wanting at the time of our forth
setting, which they shall learn of the Tresurer, or Receyuer, where they pay
the money, with the place and day of our general meeting and imbarking.

Imprinted at London by Henry Binneman for Anthon^ ^^^son, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Sun.


