The Manuell of Epictetus, Translated out of Greek into French, and now into
English, conferred with two Latin Translations.

Hereunto are annexed Annotations, and also the Apothegs of the same Author. By
Ia. Sanford.

OMNIA TEMPVS HABENT

printer's device of Henry Bynneman

Imprinted at London by H. Bynneman for Leonard Maylard. ANNO. 1567.

Tetrasticon ad Reginam.
Scilicet exiguu^ (Princeps mitissima) quicquid
Expromit liber hic, non tamen exiguum
Si te respicias, magni non muneris instar
Si libri sensum non erit exiguum.
To the most high and virtuous Princess, ELIZABETH by the grace of God, of
England, France and Ireland Queen, defender of the faith, long health and
perpetual felicity.
Although I have not attained (most soueraign Lady) to that ripeness in
knoweledge and profoundnesse in lerning, as they have, who both in reding and
writing have spente almost the whole course of their age. Yet forasmuch as
paynefull practice joined with diligent study, brings to effect some thing
worth the labor, I took in hand this little Book, as a trial in the true
trade of interpreting. Which done, I thought not my travail mysspent, but
worthy to be published abroad for a common use and commodity, and meet that
of all estates he be usually read, daily to be had in hand, and continually to
be had in remembrance: for if a man read this, and in reading consider it
with a quiet mind void of all care and solicitude, and being attentive upon
one thing wherein he is conversant, he shall find (as I suppose) nothing more
excellent, nothing more commodious, nothing more godly to be taught and showed
us, than the sum of this Book, and the principal points herein comprehended
and contained, which are these:

Hurt no man. Obey God and nature. Suffer injuries. Deserve well of al men as
nigh as thou may. Take in good part whatsoever chance without thy default.
Use such things as are given for the necessity of life, as if thou did not
use them, and gladly to restore the same when God or Fortune (as we commonly
say) requires the same. Repose and account felicity in an upright and quiet
mind. Finally recreate and content thy self in the divine administration of
worldly things, as very just and wise, and to us available, although
sometimes it seem very grievous.

These things so great, so profitable, so needful to be known, so available
for well framing of life, if we shut it within the chest of our mind, it is far
from that we should be void of all perturbatio^s and troblesome motions of the
mind, that we should be in felicity, and lead our life both well and
wealthilie. You may coiecture (most gracious and sovereign Lady) that in
dedicating this Book unto your highness, I mean to instruct one better learned
than my self, and as the Proverb is SVS MINERVAM, the which doubtless is
farthest off from my cogitations: for it is the sign of a man bereft of his
wit, and not of a sound and perfect mind, to carry wood into the Wood,
and to cast water into the Sea. What should I speak of the goodly virtues
wherewith you are adorned?

What should I set forth and with praises extol your excellent endowments both
of mind and body, which cause in all men an admiration?

For the Greek tongue you are to be compared to ZENOBIA Queen of the
Palmirians, who was very skillful in the Greek language, and in the Latin not
ignorant. For Eloquence you may be likened to CORNELIA mother of the Gracchi.
For the embracing of the holy and sacred scripture you are to be numbered with
FABIOLA and MARCELLA women well learned and studious of the heavenly verity. In
brief* you may be reconed as EVSTOCHIVM was, who in her time because of her
litterature and profoundnesse in knowledge, was called Nouu^ orbis prodigiu^.
Your knowledge in the French, Spanish and Italian tongue I need not declare, for
virtue needs no commendation, nor delights to be ennobled with gay glossing
communication: for where the sun casts his glistering beams, the light of
the candell is diminished and obscured. This Stoic Philosopher EPICTETVS wrote
this work in a large Volume, in his mother tongue, and was abbreuiated by one
ARRIANVS a Grecian into this form, and entitled it Enchyridion, than the
which there can be no Book to the well framing of our life more profitable and
necessary. The Authoure whereof although he were an Ethnicke, yet he wrote very
godly and christianly, and as he speaks in other tongs, so now he shall
speak in the English language, and under your Graces protection shall be
published to the commodity of many. Most humbly beseeching your highness, to
accept and take in good part this little Book, offering it as a pledge of my
bounden duty toward your highness, and affection toward my country.

Your highness most humble and loyal subject James Sanforde.

To the Reader.
THis book (gentle Reader) is entitled a Manuell, which is derived of the
Latin word Manuale, and in Greek is called Enchyridion, because he may be
contained (...) that is, in the hand. It is a diminutiue of Manus, as it were a
storehouse, and which ought always to be had in hand, as the handle in the
sword. This word Enchyridion does not only signify a Manuel, but also a
short dagger, which is used in the wars, or a Poineado. Wherefore some do
entitle this book Enchyridion, yt is, a short Dagger: for like as ye Dagger
defe^deth a man from his enemy, eue^ so this little book does defend one in
perfectness of mind, and saves him from the filthy fogge of wicked vices.
The title of either of these may be well applied to the book, ye one respecting
the quantity, the other the matter in the book comprehended.

The words contained in him, are of great force and full of efficacy, to
move men's minds, for every man may know his affections in him, and to the
amending of them, he is stirred as it were with a prick. His style or manner of
words is brief, and void of all elegancie in words, very much like the
Pithagorean Precepts, which they call Diathecae.

Fare well gentle Reder, and accept in good part these my labors.

In Sanfordi Epictetum Anglum. E. L.
IMpiger extremis rediens Mercator ab Indis
Has inquit merces India fusca tulit.
Et silet, and vendit, satis and laudasse putatur
Et precium nummi nobile pondus habet,
India fusca tulit: quid tum si Graecia ferret?
Quid si Roma tulit? Gallia sieve tulit?
Graecia, Roma, suis pretiu^ number mercibus addu^t?
Gallia si quid habet, nu^ quoque pondus habet?
Si modo pondus habet, po^dus feret iste libellus,
Qui nunc est Anglus, qui modo Gallus erat,
Graecia quem vidit Graecu^, que^ Roma Latinum,
Quemque nouos docuit lingua Britanna sonos:
Impiger ad nostras quem tu Mercator ad oras
Attuleras SANFORD, sic quoque sanctus eras.
Sic quoque sanctus erit labor hic tuus, and liber ide^
Et si sanctus erit nobile pondus habet.
Nobile pondus habet suauissimus ore Brita^nus,
At magis ore sacer nobile pondus habet.
Eiusdem Edmundi Lewkener Libri ad Lectorem Prosopopeia.
VErba librique docent sacrae munimina vitae,
Virtus est clarae nobilitatis iter,
Elisij Campi vitae sunt munera sacrae,
At comes est magnae nobilitatis honos.
In me diuinae lucet virtutis Imago,
Atque ego sum vitae dux sine labe tuae.
Ergo si coelos, si non contemnis honores,
Tu face quod iubeo munus vtrumque feres.
Against curious Carpers.
CArp not ye cankred zoiles al, the men
Whose labor spente in paynfull toil has been
To blase the badge and banner brave display
Of noble virtues force and craggie way.
The biting Theon and Daphitas bold
With all the railing rabble manifold
Of zoilus sect cease biting chaps to use
Against such, who on learnings lore do muse.
The learned Homer, and Praxitiles,
To tau^ting talk, and misreports were these
Subject. Therefore should I esteem my self
T'escape the iarring jaws of zoilus elfe?
The life of Epictetus.
EPictetus a noble Philosopher in the Stoic profession was born of servile
parents in Hieropolis a City of Phrigia, who albeit he was a bond man, lame,
and in extreme penury, yet he doubted not earnestely to affirm that he was a
friend to the Gods, in two verses very well known among the Greeks, which
are cited both of Macrobius and Aulus Gellius, and be these: (...)
(...).
Which are of a certain Writer translated into Latin after this manner:
Seruus Epictetus genitus sum corpore claudus,
Paupertate irus, Dijs and amicus ego.
And may thus be Englished: Of servile kind I borne was,
hight Epictete by name,
In substance pore, to God a friend
and eke in body lame.


He served in Rome one called Epaphroditus familiar with the Emperor Nero. And
lived in Rome all the time of Marcus Antonius reign. But when Domitian took
rule in hand, he went from Rome to Hieropolis where he was borne, supposing
that to be true, which is in the Tragical Poet. Patriam esse cuiusque, vbi
quis recte ageret, that is: A man his country is even there
Where of God and man he stands in fear.


He did read in Plato (of whom he was a diligent Reader and follower) in that
Dialogue which is entitled Primus Alcibiades, or De natura hominis, that he
properly and verily was a man, whose substance altogether did consiste in the
reasonable mind, accompting the mind only to be man, and ye body but an
instrument. Wherefore whatsoever was without this man, he thought the same
nothing to appertain unto him, neither did he declare that only in words or
books, but also in his life: for he did so withdraw himself from the care and
love of outward things, so little regarding his body, or any thing thereto
belonging, that at Rome his house had no door, for there was nothing at all in
it but a bad beggarly bed of little value. Lucian the Sirian writes that
Epictetus was after his death so esteemed, that an earthen candlestick that he
had, was sold for fifty pounds.

The Manuel of Epictetus
Cap. 1. What things are in man, and what are not.
OF al things which are, A division of things.
some are in us, some are not. In us are Opinion, Endeavor, Desire, Eschuing,
and briefly all that which is our work. In us are not our Body, Possessions,
Honors, Souerainties, The natural condition of things.
and summarily all that which is not our work. Then the things which are in us
are free and frank by nature, and can not be prohibited, empeached, nor taken
away. But such things as are not in us, be servile, feeble, and may be
prohibited, empeched and taken away, as things unto other men belonging, and
not ours.

Cap. 2. Of the damage which proceeds of taking the one for the other, and of
the profit in good Judgment. The effects of a good and evil judgment.

IF the things which are frank and free, thou shalt esteem and Judge
seruill, and the things which are not ours, thou think proper, thou shall be
sorrowful, thou shalt be troubled, thou shall find thy self encombred, and
shalt miscontente thy self with God and men. But if thou think only the
things thine, which truly are thine, and the things other men's, which truly
are other men's, no man will constrayne thee, no man will hinder thee, thou
shall blame no body, thou shall accuse no body, thou shall do nothing against
thy will, no man shall hurt thee, and moreover thou shalt have no enemy. For
in nothing which is hurtefull thou can not be persuaded.

Cap. 3. That other men's matters must be omitted, our own must be seen unto,
and that we can not do both.
THen if thou desire such things, remember that thou oughteste not being
greatly moved and troubled, to take them in hand: but either altogether thou
oughteste to reiecte them, Our consideration is to be stirred up and a dilligent
preparation to be used.
or for a time lay the^ a side, and before al things to be careful over thy
self. But if thou desire these things, that is to rule, to be rich, to have
thine to prosper, peradventure thou shalt not aspire to all these things, One
can not serve virtue and vanity.
because thou do desire also the chefest. So by no manner of means thou art
able to attain unto ye things which give felicity and liberty to man.

Annotations.
All these things) That is rule, riches. etc. because thou do desire the
chiefest) that is, these things which Philosophy gives, Liberty,
tranquillity of the mind, and security.

Cap. 4. How we ought to behave our selves in every sharp imagination.
IN any strong and sharp Imagination, We must refrain our consent before the
matter be plainly perceived.
thou must accustom thy self immediately to consider, that this is nothing
else but Imagination, and that in deed it is not as thou deemest. Afterward
search it out, and examine it, with these rules which thou haste. First and
principally by this, whether the thing concern the things which are in us, or
the things which are not. And if it be of the things which are not in us, have
incontinently this in remembrance: That belongs nothing to me.

Cap. 5. What thing it is that one ought to desire, and one ought to flee.
CAll to remembrance, A vain flight from discommodities makes a man
miserable, and a depriving of desires makes a man unfortunate.
that the promise and the end of desire is, enjoying of the thing desired: and
that the promise and end of eschewing is not to fall into that, which one
ought to flee: He then which comes not to enjoy, but is deprived of the
promise of his desire, is not happy, but unfortunate, and whosoever falls on ye,
which he declineth, is miserable. If the^ only thou decline that which is not
agreeable to the nature of the things which are in us, thou shall never chance
into that, which thou shall flee. But if thou think to erempt thy self
from sickness death or from poverty, or altogether shun them, thou shall
find thy self unhappy. One newely entered in the doctrine of virtue ought not
to take to much upon him.
Wherefore thou must set apart all the eschuing, and avoiding of such things as
are not in us, and transpose these into them which are against the nature of
things, which be in us. As touching desire, thou must altogether set it aside
at this present. For if thou covet the things which are not in our power, it
must needs be, that thou be frustrate. How and after what sort thou must
desire the things which are in us, thou art yet uncertain. As for endeavor
and refraining of ye mind use it slightly with reason, and a rested
deliberation.

Annotations.
Promise of desire, It is a certain faining of desire speaking with a man. To
the unlearned sort the words should be more plain* if he had thus spoken:
when thou do desire any thing, have a confidence to obtain it, and to have
thy desire. etc that which is not agreeable to ye nature of the things which are
in us, Against these things verily do repugne, false opinion, naughty and
corrupt appetite, all the perturbatio^s of the mind, which the Stoicke
Philosophers would have to be in man's power: not so peradventure that they
appear not (for that were more beseming God than man) but that they obey
reason. Tra^spose these into them which are against the nature of things which
be in us. These words seem unto the unlearned obscure, which had been more
lighter and easy, if he had written thus: To abhor false opinions, folish and
evil desires, dishonestie, and disworship. For as thou may flee these
things, so thou may eschew them.

Cap. 6. How we ought to esteem the things wherein we take pleasure, or
which bring us profit.
IN every thing, which does either delight thee, The nature of the thing derely
loved is to be considered.
or which are profitable unto thee, or which thou love, thou must diligently
consider the quality, beginning at the least things. If thou love a pot, say
in this manner: I love a pot, the same being broken, thou shalt not disquiete
thy self, for thou did well know, that he was fragile and brittle.
Likewise if thou love thy son, or thy wife, say that thou do love a man:
if one or other chance to dye thou shall not be troubled, because thou dyddest
consider well that he was mortal.

Annotations.
If thou love a pot, Albeit Epictet, as a dispiser of riches, brings forth
examples of vile things, as of baynes, lactuce, and other of that sort: yet
Simplicius has a more apt word: If thou ha^dell or toss a pot: that is, a
brittle thing that cannot abide or suffer tossyng, or hitting against the
walls, as glass, whereof Publia^ says, Fortune is as brittle as glass,
which when it shines, it is broken. Peradventure he alluded to Diogenes Tonne.

Cap. 7. How a man ought to take a matter in hand that we may be void of
perturbation, and first by meditation.
WHen you do take any thing in hand, The circumstances of every business
are to be considered.
thou must set before thy eyes ye quality thereof: as if thou wylt go to the
baines, consider with thy self diligently all that which may happen, and what
they do. Some cast water, some are driven out of their places, some do a thing
to the rebuke of an other, and in the mean season other pick and steal. In
doing this thou shall more certainly and constantly bring thy matter to pass,
if finally thou say I will bath my self, and observe thy purpose unto nature
agreeable, and semblably in all things thou shall not do amiss. For after this
sort if any harm befall while thou art in the baine, this saying shall be in a
readiness: I would not only observe this, but also would not swerve from my
purpose which is agreeable unto nature, which I shall not perform, if I take
displeasauntly the things which happen and befall.

Cap. 8. How to put away our perturbations, through the consideration of the
nature of such things, We are troubled with opinions, not with the things them
selves.
as trouble us.
THe things do not trouble men, but the opinions which they conceive of them,
as for example: death is not terrible (the^ it would have so seemed to
Socrates) but because the opinion of death is terrible, A wise man is without
complaint.
death seems terrible. Then when we are brought in the briers, or be troubled,
or that we do bewail our own state, let us not blame others but our selves,
that is to say our opinions.

Annotations.
Death is not terrible, If either the soul be extinguished with the body, or
be tra^sferred and carried into a better place. But if thou shalt be punished
for thy offenses, it is a dangerous matter, and a hard case, except thou be
fensed with the buckler of true piety.

Cap. 9. The reason and proof of the former precept with an assignation of
three sorts of men.
THe unlearned accuses other in his own propre fault. He that begins to
have knowledge accuses him self. The learned accuses neither an other,
neither him self.

Annotations.
The unlearned, That is he, which considers not what things are his own, and
what ar an other man's: who requires all things to be done according to his
will and pleasure, that which neither may be done, neither perhaps ought not.
Himself for he does acknowledge his fault, and also is intentive and diligente
about it, least that he stumble again at the same stone: that is, lest that
he claim or attribute other men's right to himself.

Cap. 10. That the glory in exterior and outward things is vain.
GLory not in thy self for the excellency of an other thing. We must auaunt
in the riches of the mind, and not in the gifts of fortune.
It should be tolerable, if a horse aduaunting himself should say: I am
fair. But thou when in bosting thy self, thou do say, I have a fair
horse: remember that thou do glorify thy self for the beauty which is in
the horse. The use of opinion is propre unto man.
What haste thou then? Nothing bisides the use of opinion.

Therefore when in the use of opinion thou shall govern thy self according to
nature, then thou shall have wherewith to auaunte thy self, for in any
commodity which is thine, thou will glorify thy self.

Annotations.
The use of opinion, This seems obscure to the unlearned. But it is even as he
should says In all things we ought not to follow appetite, or the common
opinion, but the judgment of reason. For to use well opinion, is nothing else
than to judge well of all things, and to obey reason, not affection.

Cap. 11. What outward things are granted us, and how we should use them, by
a similitude.
EVen as in Navigations, We ought in all things principally to be mindful of God.
when men make their abode at any haven, if ye Mariner goes to land for
fresh water, and it happens that incidently by the way, he thinks to gather
cockles or oysters, yet nevertheless he ought to have regard of the ship,
and oftentimes to look back, whether ye Master calls: and if he call thee,
leave all behind, and return to the ship, least that thou being bond like a
beast, be not drawn by force to the ship. Even so it is, in the course of
our life, as if for a cockle or an oister, there be given us a wife and a
child, or other things, which we hold dear, and wherein we take pleasure, they
ought not to put us from our purpose unto nature agreeable: But if the master
do call, run unto the ship, leaving these things behind, not looking back
toward them. But if thou be old, go never far from the ship, least that
thou being called, do fail, and that thou be not constrained. For he which
willingly follows not necessity, by force and maulgre his teeth she draws
him.

Annotations.
Least yt thou being called do fail. He speaks not of the outward power,
but of the imbecillitie and weakness of the might: which the greter it shall be
when age comes on us with more few things the mind is to be occupied: for
because it is very difficulte to be void of these, and to fulfill that which
Philosophy commands. A single person (if other things be correspondent) may
be in his life time, contented with a little, and die with a more pacient
mind. A wife, children, and family, do more trouble and disquiete the
husband and father, being as well in good health, as sick, than his life. I
understand the ship, either to be Philosophy, or the trade of our life: the
ruler and master of the Ship to be GOD: to whom when he calls, who so
obeys not either is entreted as a slave, or else is utterly forsaken.

Cap. 12. How we may enjoy outward things without fault or trouble.
WIsh not that the thing which is done, We must not covet in vain, that which
is impossible.
be done according to thy pleasure and will. But wish that it be done, even as
it is don, and thou shall be happy. Sickness is an impediment of the body,
not of thy purpose, except thou will thy self. A well framed mind is disturbed
with nothing.
Halting is an impediment of the leg or foot, and not of thy purpose, and so
consider in every inconvenience which may befall, and thou shalt find the
impediment to appertain to an other, and not to thee.

Annotations.
Halting is an impediment of ye foot, not of thy purpose. But thou will say
when thou art purposed to go a journey (namely if thou want a horse, or a
wagon) halting hinders thee. Epictet will answer and say: If thou shall
follow my precepts, thou shall begin no journey, which thou art not hable to
atchieue. So the more and greater the impedimentes of the body shall be, so
much the more thou shall suppress appetite, and shalt take fewer things in
hand. But thou do say, that this is the impediment of purpose, and therefore
very troublesome. Epictet denies it to be an impediment, to desire nothing
rashly and in vain: but affirms it to be the propre part and office of a
Philosopher. Verily, even a fool does understand this, that it is better to
make appetite obey reason, than to burn in vain desires. The impediment to
appertain to another and not to thee) If he would grant the foot to be a
part of the body, (neither does he deny it) and the body to be part of man
(which he seems to deny) when his foot is poistered and shakled, the body
is also cu^bred, the body being cumbred, man him self at least wise partly is
cumbred, but if the body be the instrument of man, doutlesse it ca^ not be
denied, but that the instrument being mutilate and imperfect, the work shall be
more imperfect and unmeet. For thou shall have the overthrow, if thy Sword
or Dagger lack hiltes and handle.

Cap. 13. Of the remedies which we have against all accidents.
IN every accident thou must incontinently consider what puissaunce and
strength thou have to withstand that which is happened. The power of the mind
ought to resist adversity and naughty desires.
If any mischief befall unto thee, thou shall find virtue which is good and
wholesome, as against voluptuousness, continency. If labor be offered thee,
thou shalt find strength: if wrong, patience: and if thou shall thus
accustom thy self, thou shall never be troubled with ymaginations.

Annotations.
Thou shall not be troubled with imaginations) That is, thou shall never be
overcome and subdued with pleasure and sorrow, but shall conquer naughty
desires, and affections, by the help of wisdom and virtue.

Cap. 14. What manner of men we ought to show our selves, when we lose
outward worldly goods.
Never say that thou haste lost any thing, We do never lose our goods, but
restore the^, to him of whom we received them, that is to God.
but that thou haste restored it. If thy son die, he is restored. Thy
liuelode is taken away, have thou not restored it? But he which deprived thee
of it, is an ill man. What matter makes it to thee, by whom he which gave it,
has eftsoons taken it? Have a care and regard to all things, keeping and
using them (during the time only that thou haste them in thy custody) as
things unto other men belongyng, even as the wayfaring man does to his lodging.

Cap. 15. That a man ought not to lose the quietness of mind, for exterior
and worldly things.
IF thou will profit thy self, The garnishing of the mind is to be regarded
above all things.
let pass these cogitations. If I shall not be careful of my affairs, I
shall not have wherewith to live. If I correct not my servant, he will be
naught. For it is far better to famish without sorrow and fear, than to live
in abundance with a troubled mind. And it is much better, that the servant
should be faulty, than thou which art his master unhappy. Then thou must
begin with the least things, the Oil is spilte, the Wine is stolen. Consider
with thy self, that quietness and security of the mind cost thee so much:
for nothing is freely gotten. If thou call thy servant, imagine it may so fall
out, that he hears thee not, or hearing thee, to do nothing which thou
would have him do. But that he is not worth so much, that for him thou
should be troubled.

Annotations.
It is far better to famish. etc. It may be asked not without a cause whether
so great constancy may agree with man's nature, that it may suffer and endure
extreme hunger?

Cap. 16. We must take patiently the evil opinion of the multitude conceived
of us.
That for the estimation of the people we ought not abandon virtue.
IF thou will profit thy self, be not displeased, if for outward things,
thou seem to other mad or folish.

Annotations.
If thou will profit That is to say in Philosophy and garnishing of the mind.
For he understands and means that progressio^, whereby the tranquillity and
liberty of the mind is increased. Be not displeased, if for. etc. For who so
regards not pleasures, riches, and honor, namely if he may obtain them: of
all men he is accounted a fool, namely in these days. But in times past
diverse Philosophers and good me^ for the love they had to virtue abandoned al
worldly wealth and promotions, as Crates, Diogenes, and this our Epictete.

Cap. 17. Against vain glory.
Seek not to seem learned and expert in any thing, It is hard to do many
things at once.
and if to any thou do seem, trust not thy self: for thou know it is not
easy for a man to keep his purpose agreeable unto nature, and to embrace
exterior things, but it must needs be, that he which is careful of one,
should be negligent in the other.

Cap. 18. What things we ought to desire, and what we ought not.
IF thou will have thy wife, We do in vain seek to keep those things
inviolable, which are not in our power.
thy children, and thy friends to live for ever, thou art a fool. For thou will
have in thy power the things which are not, and wilt have ye things to be
thine, which are belonging to other me^. And so if thou will not have thy
servant to offend, thou art a fool, for you will have vice to be no vice.
But if thou will not be frustrate of that which thou do desire, this thou
may do: herein then exercise thy self.

Annotations.
For thou will have vice to be no vice, He means (as I suppose) that boys
and al manner of men, by nature are inclined to vice: and that vices cannot be
repelled, but by philosophy which young and tender age is not able to receive.

Cap. 19. What things make us bond, and what free.
HE is Master and Lord of any man, Who is a master.
to whom (nil he will he) he may either give or take away. He then which
will be free, let him neither desire, nor flee any thing, which is in an other
man his hand, and power, otherwise of necessity he shall be constrained to
serve.

Annotations.
He is Master of any man. etc. How many Masters then has Fortune laid upon
us? How many more do we lay upon us, through the insaciable desire of
transitory things?

Cap. 20. A rule to elect and choose things present* past, and to come, by a
similitude.
Remember that thou must make comparison of thy life to a banquet: Such things
as are offered are to be taken: such things as are denied us, are not to be
desired.
where if the meat stand before thee, thou must take it modestly: if he,
which does bring it, do pass by thee, stay him not, or if he be not yet
come to thee, be not over gredy thereof: but stay until he come to thee. In
like manner thou must dispose thy self, toward thy children, toward thy wife,
toward great men, and toward riches, so at length thou shall be worthy the
table of ye Godds. But if thou take not that which is set before thee, but
do refuse it: then thou shall not only be worthy of their table, but to be
their companion: for when Diogenes, and Heraclitus and other like to them did
thus, worthily, and of very good right they were divine, and so were accounted.

Annotations.
Worthy the table of the Gods) He signifies, that the despising of outward
and worldly things is a certain heavenly thing, and that it makes a man like
to God. They were divine, and so were accounted. Arrogantly doubtless, and
ignorantelye. For how far does even the excellentest man that ever was
differ from the least part of the Godhead?

Cap. 21. By what means we must govern our Imagination about such things,
as seem to be eschewed.
WHen thou do see any man sorrowful, We must have regard to humanity in
such sort, that the quietness of mind be retained.
and torment him self either because he has no tidings of his son, either
because he is dead, either because he has spent all, beware enter not into
imagination, that this makes him unhappy: but have redilie in remembrance
that it is not the accident, which troubles him (seeing it tormenteth not an
other) but his opinion conceived thereof. But if thou fall in talk with him,
accommodate thy self to his perturbation, and moreover if the matter so
require, weep also with him for company: but take heed that thou sorrow not
inwardly.

Cap. 22. That it lies not in us to choose the state of our life, but to use
it even as it chances, by a very apt similitude.
THou must remember that thou art one of the players in an interlude, We must
pass the whole course and time of our life, according to Gods will.
and must play ye part, which the author thereof shall appoint, thou must
play be it long, be it short. If he appointe thee to play the beggar, ye
Creple, ye Prince, or the private person, do it well and wittily, for it lies
in thee to play that part, whereunto thou art appointed, and in an other to
choose and appoint thee.

Annotations.
Which the authors thereof shall appoint, That is, whether he be a comicall, or
a tragical Poet? As concerning the very matter the Greek Epigram does declare.

(...),
(...).
Which may thus be englished: What is our life? a gawish game
a sweet delighting play.
Then cares in gaming lay a side,
or live a miser aye.


Nazianzenus does almost signify the same, but with a more gravity and
piety, in these verses worthy to be had in remembrance.

Men's age suspice, terrenas age despice sordes,
Corporis a vitijs ne subigare cave,
Quam breuis est haec vita? beatos somnia ludunt:
Sors vaga sic alios, sic aliosque rotat.
Vita diu durat, nulla peritura sub aeuo
Sancta: labor fructu non caret ille suo.
Which may after this sort be Englished.

O mind search high and heavenly things,
despise this earthelie pelf:
Beware, to lawelesse lusting flesh
thou ne subdue thy self.
How sone ar spent our brittle dais?
they dream, that swim in bliss:
So those and those not all alike
does fickle fortune kiss.
A life ensuing godly laws
shall never clean decay:
So travail spent in holy deeds
his hired meede does pay.
Cap. 23. By what means we ought to govern our Imagination, in looking for
diverse things.
IF thou take the croking of a crow to be unlucky, A wise man takes profit
by every chance.
let not that imagination move thee, but judge immediately in thy self, and
say: That portendeth nothing to me, but either to my body, or to my possession,
or to my estimation, or to my wife, or to my children: but as touching my
self, they signify nothing but good, at least wise if I will: for what so
ever shall chance, it lies in me to have the profit and commodity of it,
if I will.

Annotations.
If thou take the croking. etc. We have instead of divination by flying and
crying of birds Astrology: Which if by yearly reuolutions and progressions of
the stars, it threatten damages and dangers, let us not use Epictet his
counsel, but godly prayers.

Cap. 24. How to be unconquerable, being the cause of the former precepte, and
as it were the conclusion.
THou may be invincible, We must take in hand things agreeable to our
strength.
if thou never enter into battle, for thou art uncertain, whether it lie in
thee or no, to have the the victory.

Annotations.
Thou may be unconquerable. This saying depends upon the division of
things made in the beginning. They are conquered, which covet other men's
goods, that is, such as belong to the body, and are placed in fortunes hand.
They conquer, which resist naughty opinious and desires, so that they
contend according to the law.

Cap. 25. Which is the readiest way to virtue.
TAke heed that in following thy imagination thou say at no time, He that
seeks for all good things of him self, he does neither marvel at any man,
nor enuyeth any.
the man is happy, whom thou do see auaunced either to honor, or
authority, or renoumed: for if the substance of goodness be in the things,
which are subject to us, there nether envy, nor emulatio^ takes any place.
Then thy purpose is not to be Emperor, There is one way to liberty: the
despising of outward things.
or King, but free, and fra^ke. But unto that thing there is but one certain
way, that is, the contempt of such things as are not in us.

Annotations.
For if the substance of goodness. etc. The understanding of this sentence is
uttered stoicallie in dark words. He which seeks all good things of
himself, is of a quiet mind: who so is of a quiet mind, he does neither
envy, nor emulate. For seeing that lack of pain called in Latin Indolentia
excludes all perturbations: (...)
verily it excludes envy and emulation. But if these affections do rule in
any: it is manifestly gathered thereof, that he is far from the tranquillity
of the mind, and does not obey the precepts of Philosophy.

Cap. 26. A solution of them which seem to let the things before mentioned, and
how a man should not be angry.
REmember, No man is hurt, but of himself.
that he, which taunteth or beats, is not ye author of reproach, but the
opinion conceived of ye same as reprocheful. Then when any does kindle thee to
wrath, understand that thou art moved to anger through thine opinion. Wherefore
especially endeavor thy self, Delay establysheth judgment.
that imaginations pluck not co^sente from thee, for if thou shalt once
suppress it for a certain time, thou shall more easily be thy own Miaster.

Cap. 27. How to learn, and set our mind in high things.
SEt before thy eyes, death, banishment, and all things which seem terrible,
but especially death: in so doing, thou shall not think upon base and vile
things, and shalt never be exceeding covetous.

Annotations.
And shall never be exceeding covetous. Syracides affirms, Syracides.
that the imagination of death, and God his judgment does fear us from
sin. Which if it do: we are taught to suffer adversity much more patiently,
and to despise prosperity, because of their sorrow and profit, which endures
for a little space. Cicero.
So Cicero. All pleasure says he is to be esteemed as nothing, which when it is
paste, it is as if there had been none at all. But in great grief of the body
and anguish of the mind, one hour seems longer than a whole year.

Cap. 28. The second part, wherein he does point him out which has already
profited. And does first dissolve such things, as come in ure to the students
of Philosophy.
AS soon as thou haste determined to lead a perfect life, A Philosopher ought
not to regard the mockery of the people.
prepare and address thy self to be scorned and mocked of many, and to hear
what they speak of thee, whereof comes this sudden sagenesse and gravity?
whereof comes this sadness? lay aparte thy sad sour countenance. But yet
retain and keep these things which seem best to thee, in such sort, as if
this were the front where God has ordained and placed thee to fight.
Constancy gets victory.
And if thou persist in the same things, they which before have mocked thee,
will have thee in admiration: but if like one fleeing away, thou give over thy
enterprise, thou shalt be double as much mocked and scorned.

Annotations.
Lay apart thy sad sour cou^tena^ce. That is, a musing countenance, sad
gravity and hautinesse of mind. And it appears by this short and quick
sentence of Menander, Mena^der
that this was the countenance of Philosophers. They which look stately, say,
that Solitariness is mete for meditation.

Cap. 29. That bosting destroys the state of a Philosopher, in showing
whereunto he ought to lean.
IF it chance at any time, that thou give thy self to the things which are not
in us, and that thou do desire to please any man, understand that at the same
present thou art fallen from thy state. By this word Philosopher is meant a
wise man.
Wherefore in all things let this suffice thee, to be a Philosopher: But if
thou do covet to seem to any a Philosopher, let it be to thy self, and that
shall be sufficient.

Annotations.
If it chance at any time that thou give thy self. etc. He forbids the
desire of glory, and seeking for ostentation, which affection it will be long
before it take place in good and learned men. He would have a Philosopher to
keep him self within the limittes of his conscience, as an oyster within his
shell, and to judge that, the most noble show of his virtue. Thou art fallen
from thy state, That is to say, thou art vanquished.

Cap. 30. How to answer to such stays as would hinder a man from wisdom.
Let not these cogitations torment thee, That a Philosopher even of small
substance, may much profit the common wealth* by teaching of virtue and his
good example.
I shall not be in honor nor in place, where I shall be regarded: for if to be
without honor is an ill thing, thou can not be in evil for an other thing,
no more than in a dishonest thing. Is it in thee to bear rule, or to be bidden
to a banquet? No. What is this then, but to be without honor? and how say
thou, that thou shalt not be esteemed, whom it behooves to to meddle in those
things only which are in our power, in which thou may bear a great sway and
stroke. But thou will say I can not profit my friends. What do thou call to
profit? How a wise man aideth his friends.
shall they have no money of thee? neither will thou make them citizens of Rome?
But who told thee that these things be in us, and other men's works? Who can
give to an other that he himself has not? Get it, (say they) that we may have
it, also. If I may get it, We ought to require of every man but such things as
he may and ought to perform.
keeping my self modest, faithful, and valiant, show me the way, and I will
get it. If ye think it meet, that I should lose my goods, that you should get
such things as are not good, see your selves have unreasonable and ungrateful
you are? But if thou prefer a faithful and sincere friend before money,
herein help me, and think it not meet that I should do the things whereby I
should loose modesty and fidelity: But I can not succoure nor aid my
country. How a wise man helps his country.
What do thou call succoure and aid? That it shall not have of thee, nor by
thy means, fair and sumptuous buildings, nor baines? What then? has it not
shoes by the Shoemaker and Armor by the Armorer? It is sufficient when every
vocation does his work. If thou get it a faithful and modest member, do
thou think, that thou bring it but a little profit? very great doubtless.
In so doing thou art not unprofitable to it. In what state shall I be in my
country? in that thou may, keeping always fidelity and modesty. But if
supposing to aid it thou loose modesty and fidelity, what profit shall thou
do to it, which art become impudent and disloyal.

Annotations.
Thou can not be in evil for an other thing, This sentence depends upon the
opinion of the stoics, that only honesty is good, and only vice is naught.
The contempt and despising of me, if I do my duty, is not my vice, therefore
neither my evil, but their vice and evil who of a perverse judgment and
naughty mind do contemn, despise, and misuse me without cause. Show me the
way, He signifies that riches and dignity is gotten by nothing else but by
deceit, and for that cause a good man ought to despise them. Neither does he
speak of them, which show themselves unworthy of honor, and they are the
cause, that they are not regarded. A faithful and sincere friend, Now a days
most men had leiffer to have money. Neither do they think that a poor friend
may help us in any thing. So are endowed maidens preferred before them, who are
chaste, and well brought up, if perhaps there be any such, and do so
continue. Wherefore the wowers peradventure are to be pardoned, who in so
uncertain a hazard of chastity, and honesty, had rather to abide the
unquietness of rich than of poor wives. Neither has it Shoes by the
Shooemaker, nor Armor by the Armourer. The sense is: sumptuous buildings
bains, and the city of Rome is no more to be required of a Philosopher, than
weapons of the Shooemaker, or Shoes of the Smyth: seeing that it is the duty
of a Philosopher, to train up his country men in virtue, as it is the
Shoemakers duty to make Shoes, and the Smithes, Weapons.

Cap. 31. A continuation of the solution of such things as do hinder him which
does begin to study philosophy and wisdom, in showing that a man should
not move himself, for that which chau^ceth to an other and that he has
nothing of an other without giving of his own.
IS there any placed before thee at a feast? We must envy no man, and rejoice
of an others good fortune.
or was reverence done to him before it was done to thee? or is he preferred
before thee in counsel? If these things be good, thou must rejoice, that thy
neighbor has them: if they be ill: then be not sorrowful, because they
cha^ced not to thee. Then remember in giving thy mind to nothing else, A
benefit commonly is given for pleasure and service.
but to the things which are in us, thou can not attain to the like things,
which other do in them which are not in us. How may it be done, that a man
frequentyng not thy house shall have like things as he which haunteth thy
house, or he that seeks not friendship and favor, as he which does? or he
which does not please and praise the, as he which does please and praise thee?
Thou shalt be unjust and insatiable if thou have not paid for such things
as thou haste bought, but do require to have them for nothing. Admit the
case I could not buy lectuce for a half penny, Who so lacks commodity
lacks also cost and disquietnesse
if any then buy a half penny worth of lectuce, and thou do buy none: think
not thy self in worsser case and to have less then he, which has bought
lectuce: for as he has bought so thou have not given thy halfpenny. Even so it
fares, thou art not bidden to a man's feast, because thou haste not given him
as much as his feast cost him. He sells it for praise, he sells it for
service. Give him then (if thou think it good) the price, for the which he
sold it thee. But if thou will not perform that and take these things, thou
art insatiable and foolish. Have thou given nothing in stead of the feast?
Yes mary, for thou have not praised him, whom thou would, and haste not
suffered him in his portly going.

Annotations.
If these things be good, Because they are good, they are sorrowful that they
could not attain to them: because they be evil, they are glad, that they are
chanced to other, And have not suffered. etc. Pride and ambitious salutations
of rich men do seem to be understood in this place very troublous to a
simple and learned man, in like manner salutations, retinues, praises. But
perhaps rich men given to pleasures, going in their pomp, were wont on every
side to lean and cleave to Parasites.

Cap. 32. What things are common even according to the will of nature.
THe purpose and will of nature, We must not judge otherwise of our own
misfortune than of other men's.
may be judged by these things, in which we differ not one from an other: as
for exaumple, if a man's servant break his Masters cup or any other thing,
incontinently it is said this is a thing which oftentimes chau^ceth: remember
then when thine is broken, that thou be the same manner of man, as thou were
when the other man's cup was broken. And so do in greater things. If a man's
child or wife chance to dye, there is no man but will say incontinently this
is natural. Notwithstanding every man when any of his is dead, he does lament
and bewail pitifully: But we must remember how we are disposed, when we have
heard any such thing of others.

Cap. 33. How one ought to understand the nature of ill.
EVen as the white whereat Archers shoot, It is in our choice whether we will
be troubled with the opinion of ill things.
is not set there, where it may not be stricken, so it is of the nature of ill in
this world, for it is not set out to be embraced, but to be eschued: as if
goodness were set for the white, and evil were all that, where the white
were not, besides the white, the Archer has an ample and large space to shoot
from the white: so without the only mark of goodness on every side is placed
evil, which is as easy to be done and committed, as it is difficill to hitte
the white, or to do good.

Cap. 34. We ought not abandon our mind to wrath for injuries done: and how to
take in hand our enterprises.
IF any deliver thy body to the first he meteth, it will grieve thee excedingly:
but when thou do yield thy mind to the first that comes, as when thou
art wronged, thy mind is troubled and heavy, art not thou ashamed? A
premeditation and a diligent preparation puts away ignomie and repentance.
Before thou take any thing in hand, consider first the beginning, and the
sequel, and then take it in hand. If thou do not so thou shalt never be
certain and sure in thy enterprises, not regarding that which may befall, but
after when any dishonest things chance, thou shalt be ashamed.

Annotations.
If any deliver thy body to the first he meteth, He argues from a less thing
to a more, after this sort: thou will be angry with them, which gave power to
any to violate thy body (such is the condition of them which are banished)
how much more ought thou to be angry with thy self, which art wont to
give power to every man to hurt thy mind, whereas it lies in thee not to be
hurt of any man at all?

Cap. 35. An effectual example to consider what may befall in every thing
which we shall take in hand.
Will thou co^quere at ye plays Olimpia? Temeritie is the mother of lightness
and inconstancy.
And I by ye faith of my body: for it is a very honorable thing, but
consider well the beginning, and the sequel and then take the matter in hand.
Thou must order well thy self, and use necessary meats, abstain from
delicate and dainty things, and exercising thy self, according as it is
expediente for the time and hour appointed, be it hot or cold, not drinking
water or wine, if occasion so require. And briefly thou must commit thy self
wholly to the chief of the games as to the Physician in doing that which he
shall appoint thee. Afterward enter into fight, and sometime to have thy hand
hurt, thy foot out of ioynte, to swallowe down much dust, to receive grievous
strokes, and otherwhile after all this to be vanquished. When thou haste
considered all these things, if thou be willing, go and fight, otherwise thou
shall be like the little boys which are now wrastlers, now swordplayers, now
trumpetters, forthwith players in tragedies. So thou also now a fighter, now a
swordplayer, afterward an Orator, at length a Philosopher: but thoroughly
nothing at al, but as an Ape thou do counterfeit and resemble al things, and
now one thing shall like thee, now an other: for thou have not done thy
enterprise advisedly, in foreseeyng the circumstances, but aduenturouslie
following a light and cold desire. So the greater number, when they see a
Philosopher, or when they hear say that Socrates speaks well, (but who can
speak so well as he?) they will incontinently dispute and reason of
Philosophy, and search the causes and nature of things. Man first consider
the thing, and the quality thereof, and then enterprise it. Both the thing and
our nature is to be considered and compared together.
Afterward try whether thy nature be able to endure that which may happen.
Will thou be a wrastler? behold thy arms, thy thighs, and thy loins: For
nature mother of all things, has framed every man to some particular thing.
Do thou think that endeavoring thy self about these things you may live
as thou have been accustomed? As to drink so much as thou were wont, to be
angry so much as thou were wont? Thou must be vigilante, thou must travel,
thou must set aside thy proper affairs, thou must be mocked of boys,
despised of all the world, and in all things to have lest authority, be it in
honor, in office, or in judgment, and in all other affairs. Constancy is
to be observed.
Then consider al these things, and look whether in their steed, thou had
leiuer to have rest and liberty, without any perturbation. But if thou had
not leiuer to have it, see that thou take not in hand many things, to the end
that (as I have told thee) like little boys, thou be not now a philosopher,
now a lawyer, afterward an advocate lastly the Proctor of Caesar. All which
things knitte in one, can in no wise agree: for it must needs be that thou be
either a good or an ill man, that thou addict thy self to interior or
exterior things: that thou possess the place of a Philosopher and well
advised man, or of a Fool and Ideote.

Annotations.
At the plays Olympia. Olympia were plays as running, wrestling, and such
other faictes of actiuitie accustomablie kept in the honor of Jupiter
Olympicus, at Pisa and Helides Cities in Greece. Man first consider, He
signifies as to wrestling, to leaping and running, al are not meet, so
neither to Philosophy, both have need of patience of body and mind. Of
which things, whosoever is destitute, he shall be rather a counterfayt then a very
wrastler and Philosopher. Thou must be mocked of little boys,) Verily
Philosophers were wont of al men to be despised, but great stout champions
were in admiration.

Cap. 36. That duties do arise of nature, and that they are considered how a
man should behave him self toward any man, next of the duties toward men.
DVtie is measured by mutual affections. We must do our duty toward all
men, although other me^ do not their duty toward us.
If thou have a father, thou must regard and honor him: give place to him in
all things, and if he chide or beat thee, endure it. He is a naughty father
thou will say. Nature has enjoined us the obedience of the father without
mention of good. Art thou not joined by nature with a good father? No, but
with a father. Wherefore do thy duty toward him, and consider not what he
does: but do such things, whereby thou may keep thy purpose agreeable to
nature. No man will hurt thee except thou will. Thou shalt be then hurted,
when thou shalt think thy self hurt. So thou shall do the duty of neighbor
to neighbor, of Citizen to Citizen, of lord to lord, if thou accustom thy
self to consider the mutual affections.

Annotations.
By mutual affections. Affections are used as a certain rule to measure
duties by.

Cap. 37. What our duties are toward GOD, and how to behave us in his doings.
THe principal point of honoring God, is to think well of him, to believe that
he is, that he has created all things, and that well and justly he governs
them: Their religion is nothing worth which do not place felicity in the
riches of the mind.
afterward to obey him, accepting al things that he does, as proceeding of a
very good intent. In so doing, thou shalt not blaspheme God, neither shall
thou accuse him of negligence. Thou art not able to do this, otherwise,
except thou withdraw thy self from the things which are not in us, and placing
good and ill in them which are in us. But if thou esteem any of the things,
which are not in us, to be good or ill, thou must of necessity, when thou do
not attain to that which thou would, or when thou do fall into that
which thou do shun, blame and hate the cause of such an accide^t which is
good. All living creatures have this by nature, Tull. 1. Offic.
that they flee and eschew such things, and seem unto them noisome, and
their causes: but contrariwise they search, and marvel at these things which
seem to bring profit, and the causes of them. He then which thinks himself
hurt, can take no delight in that which unto him seems hurtefull. So it is
impossible that a man hurt may rejoice. And hereof it comes to pass that
the son does check the father, when the father makes him not partaker of the
things, which seem good unto him. This is that, which made discord between
Polinix and Eteocles, because they esteemed rule good. For this cause the
husbandman, for this cause the Mariner, for this cause the Merchant, for this
cause they which loose their wife and children do oftentimes defile and detest
God, for whereas utility is, Where as utility is, there is piety.
there is also piety. Wherefore he that does endeavor to desire and flee that,
even as he ought, by the same means he observes and keeps piety. He
prefers the rites of a country before the truth.
As touching offerings and oblations let every man do them according to the
guise of his country: purely, without superfluity, according to his ability,
without negligence or nigardshippe.

Annotations.
Whereas utility is, there is piety, O wonderful sentence, and also wicked
to see to: but so applied that it uncovers the dissimulation of man's mind,
and can scarce be nothing more agreeable to religion. Guise of his country.
Forasmuch as piety consists in the mind, he thinks that we should not
much regard ceremonies. Which if it might be persuaded to some men which are
in these days, we should live more quietly. It might be persuaded, if we
would rather endeavor to live according to religion, than to dispute of
religion: if we were rather desirers of the verity than of vanity, that is,
of ambition, of emulation, of covetousness, of reuengemente, and of such like
confusions and destructions of the mind, if there be any other.

Cap. 38. What manner of man he ought to be that comes to a Diuinour, and how
to use diuinations, wherein rests our duty toward God, and toward our
selves.
IF thou desire and seek to know that which is to come of any thing, The
diuinour is not to be counseled of our duty, but of the su^cesse of certain
actions
first thou must understand yt thou art ignorant of that shall come, and
therefore thou do go to the Diuinour to know it of him. Notwithstanding if
thou be wise thou art not ignorant what it is, nor the quality thereof. For
if it be among the number of the things which are not in us, truly it is
necessary, that it be neither good nor ill. Remove then from thee (if thou go
to the Diuinour) al desire and eschuing other thou shalt come to him trembling
and quakyng. But when thou shall understand, whatsoever shall befall to
appertain nothing to thee, and of thee not to be passed upon thou may use it
well, and no man shall forbid thee. Therefore go and ask counsel of God, as
of him who can give thee very good, and after he has given thee counsel,
remember who^ thou have called to counsel, and whose counsel thou have
despised. Counsel may be demanded of the Diuinour (as Socrates says) for
such things, whose consideration is referred to the end, the knowledge of which
end, occasion cannot be given by any manner of means, nor any art. And
therefore thou must not ask counsel of the Diuinour, whether thou shall put
thy life in danger for thy country, or for thy friend, if need require, for if
he perceive any unlucky sign, it is altogether manifest, that it signifies
death, or some impedimente of thy body, or banishment: but reason tells and
persuades thee, that thou must put thy self in danger for Country, or for
thy friend when need requires. Give ear then to that which the great Divine
Apollo says, who did chase out of his temple, the man, which helped not his
friend being in danger of death.

Annotations.
Remember whom thou have called to counsel, It must needs be, that the
cunning of the diuinours, southsayers, was in divination very great. Otherwise
a man of so great gravity would not have accounted their prophecies, for
divine aunswers.

Cap. 39. Duties toward our selves, and first of such as tend to the
constancy of manners, and what things let it, and chiefly of talk and silence.
THou must prescribe a rule and fashion, We must determine who and what manner of
men we will be.
which from hence forth thou shalt observe when thou art alone and when thou
art in company. Let silence be kept for the most part: or let necessary
things be talked of, and the same in few words. But if the time require thee to
speak, We must rule our tongue.
speak: but not of all things, not of the combat between fensers, not of
running with horses, not of wrastlers, not of meats and drinks triflingly,
nor principally of men, in praising or blaming them, or comparing them with
others. And if thou be able, change thy familiars Communication into that
which is honest and comely. But if thou be environed with strangers, hold
thy peace.

Annotations.
Environed with strangers, He understands those men, whom because of their
estimation and authority he dares not admonish.

Cap. 40. Of laughing.
LAughe not much, Laughter.
nor at all communication, neither a loud.

Cap. 41. Of Oaths.
Swear not, Oaths.
neither make an oath if it be possible for thee. But if thou can not
otherwise do, do it when it shall be needful.

Cap. 42. What conversation may do.
FRequent not the bankets and familiarity of the common sort, Bankets.
and strangers. But if occasion so require, be mindeful and take heed that
thou become not one of the common sort. And understand thou that he which
wrestleth with the defiled, must needs be defiled also.

Cap. 43. Of the use of such things as belong to the body.
AS touching the body, take such things as shall be to his use and also be
profitable for the mind, as meat, drink, apparel, harbor. But as touching
dainty and delicate dishes, thou must altogether reject them, and banishe them
from thee.

Cap. 44. Of the act of Nature.
TOuching Venerie we ought as much as is possible, to lead a chaste life
before marriage. But if we be constrained, we must take nothing but that which
is lawful: not withstanding reprove them not which use it, in blaming them, and
auau^ting thy self abroad, that thou do not use it.

Annotations.
In blaming them. Christian charity commands that sinners should be
reproved, and obstinate persons to be eschued.

Cap. 45. Against anger, and what manner of men we should show our selves
toward backebiters.
IF any bring thee word, An ill report is not to be passed upon.
such a man misreporteth and backebiteth thee. Excuse not that which he has
said, but make this answer: he is ignorant of many other great faults, and
imperfections which are in me, otherwise, he would not only have said this.

Cap. 46. How to behave our selves in shows and triumphs.
IT is not requisite to frequent often the shows and tournaments. Shows are to
be seen with a quiet mind.
But if at any time occasion requires, see that thou seem not to favor any
man more than thy self, that is, will thou only have that done which is
done: and him only to conquer, which conquereth? For so thou shalt not be
empeched. Abstain thy self altogether from shouting, from consenting
countenance, and let not thy gesture be sad and grave, but somewhat merry. At
thy return from the shows, talk not much of the things which have been
there done or said, seeing they auail nothing to thy amendment.

Cap. 47. Of the desire of such as go to hear others communication.
Approach not near them, whom thou see to commen apart, and be not thou
present if it be possible, or as seldom as thou may. But if thou be
present keep in such wise thy constancy, that thou show thy self void of
all perturbations.

Cap. 48. When one has to speak with a noble personage.
IF thou have any thing to do especially with such as are of noble blood, In
meetings, we must follow the examples of wise men.
and great authority. Consider what Socrates or Zeno have done herein, or the
wisest man yt ever thou did know, and so thou shalt not be in doubt,
how thou must behave thy self.

Annotations.
What Socrates or Zeno, That may be gathered out of both their sayings and
doings, forasmuch as we have not any thing written of neither of them. But
unless thou shall be endewed with the learning and constancy of them both
foolish imitatio^ will turn thee to shame. And perhaps they observed not
every where a seemelinesse and grace.

Cap. 49. How we ought to prepare our selves, when we go to speak with a man
of honor.
WHen thou will go to such a man as is of great honor, The difficult coming
to noble men is to be suffered.
presuppose in thy mind, what may chance, that (possibly) thou shall not be
received, that thou shalt be shut out of doors, that the gate shall not be
opened, or that he will not regard thee. Afterward ponder with thy self, if
with all these things, it be expedient for thee to go to him: and when thou
shalt come before him, suffer and endure that which shall be done, and say not
to thy self: I deserve not to be thus entreated: for it is to common a thing
to reprove and blame the things which are not in us.

Cap. 50. When we meet with many men, how to frame our communication.
IN company speak not ouermuche, nor beyond measure, of thy deeds, neither
of thy dangers: for it can not so much content other to hear them as thy
self to rehearse them. Laughter is not to be moved.
See also that thou move no laughter by thy communication, for that (I wot not
how) engenders disdain, and also causes that no reverence is given to thee
by them which are present. And very often leads thy communication to filthy
and dishonest talk: Ribauldrie is to be abhorred.
But if it befall, and that the matter and time require it, reprove him that
shall use such ribauldrie and filthynesse. If not, at the least show and
declare by silence and shamefastness, that such communication does displease
thee.

Cap. 51. How to resist pleasure.
IF thou co^ceyue any pleasure in thy mind, It is better to despise than to
embrace pleasure.
be circumspecte (even as in other things) that she beguile thee not, but
examine the matter, and take space to deliberate on it. Afterward consider
both the times, that is to say, the time wherein thou do enjoy pleasure, and
the time wherein after the enjoying of it thou may repent thee for having
enjoyed it. And afterward reprove thy self, and consider how well at ease and
contented thou shalt be, if thou abstain thy self, and in so doing thou
do commend thy self. But if the matter seem to require thee to do* it,
beware that her flatteries, her sweetness, and her inticements overcome thee
not, but consider how far better it shall be, if thou be able to win the
victory of that conflicte.

Cap. 52. That we ought not to leave off our good purpose, what soever men say.
WHen thou art resolved to do any thing, Our duty ought to move us, and
not the communication of the people
and have not yet done it, refuse not to be seen in doing thereof, although
other may judge amiss thereof, for if thou do evil, thou must give over thy
work: if thou do well, fear them not who wrongfully, and without cause shall
reprove thee.

Cap. 53. Of the honesty that we ought to keep at the table.
WHo has said: We must not have regard to our own lust but to the
Communaltie.
it is day, and it is night, taking the proposition severally we ought to
agree, but to understand it together, it is not to be received. So at the
table to choose for our selves the greatest, and the best part of the meat,
is a great commodity toward the body, but it is against the honest
participation that we ought to have at the table. Then if at any time thou be
bidden to a banquet, In feasts modesty is to be observed.
remember that thou must not only have regard to the meat, for the profit
of thy body: but also to honesty, and to behave thy self at the table, as thou
ought.

Annotations.
Whereas before he compared our life to a feast, let this precept be applied to
all the parts of our life: and every where let there not be a respect to our
private desire and utility, but of equity and society, and let the will of
the feaster, that is God, be considered.

Cap. 54. That we should not undertake more than we are able to do.
IF thou have taken more in hand, We ought to measure our strength in all things
than thou art able to atchieue or bring to pass: thou shall not bring it to
effect, and also have omitted that which thou were able to perform.

Cap. 55. That we ought to be circumspect as well to save the mind harmless,
as the body.
EVen as in going thou do take heed that thou step not upon a nail, We
must endeavor to have a perfect mind.
or that thou wreaste not thy foot: so in leading thy life take heed, that
thou hurt not thy mind, the gouernesse of all thy doings, which if we
observe in all things, we shall without danger take them in hand.

Cap. 56. Of the possession of such things as belong to the body.
THe body is to every man the form of riches, A few things are sufficient
for nature, but infinite substance suffiseth not covetousness
as the foot is of the shoe. If then in this thou persevere, thou shalt keep
the mean: if thou excede, thou must needs as it were, fall down headlong: as
if thou be more curious about the fashion of the shoe, then is nedeful for ye
foot, thou will make him of gold, after of purple, last of all set with
studdes of gold: for there is no end of that thing which has once passed
measure.

Cap. 56. For maidens unmarried.
WOmen after.xiiij. years of age are called of lovers Ladies: Modesty in
women is more to be regarded, than their beauty.
for after this age men (to the end to company with them) endeavor wholly to
please them. To obtain then men's good will afterward they become very
curious in trimming and decking themselves. Wherefore they must be admonished,
that for no other cause we esteem them, but because they are modest, wise and
honest, bearing reverence and obedience to their husbands.

Cap. 57. That more care is to be had of the mind than of the body.
TO persiste and continewe in things which belong to the body, We must be stow
much time in garnishing of the mind, but a little in the body
for pleasures sake, as in much exercise, in much trimming, and adorning of
the body, is sign of an abiecte mind, and very much swaruing from nature,
and also it is a sign of consenting to superfluity: for we embrace pleasure,
and rejoice in things which we allow. We must think then the exceeding care
of the body to be from the purpose: but principally we must be careful of
that whereof the body is but the instrument, that is, the mind.

Cap. 58. A precept to learn patience and meekness.
WHen any has misused thee either in word or deed, remember that he does
suppose it to be done and said according to his duty. Wherefore it is
impossible for him to follow thy advise and counsel, but his own. But if he
judge amiss, he is hurt which is deceived. For if any do judge hidden truth
to be a lie, the truth hydden is not hurt, but he which shall be deceived. If
so be then thou be persuaded, thou shall show thy self gentle and paciente
toward him that has iniuried thee. And at every thing thou shall say, it
has so pleased him.

Annotations.
He does suppose it to be done according to his duty. Pletho puts us in
mind of the same, Pletho.
that also we should be blamed, which are able to persuade one thing, and can
not induce others into our opinion. But thou will say, oftentimes unreasonable
and slanderous men know that such things as they do are dishonest and
shameful for them to do. Epictetus makes answer: they are so much the more
worse and miserable: but thou art never the more worse and miserable. But their
dishonestie is to me a damage, because they hurt my estimation, because they
diminish my substance, because they do afflict my body by violence or
witchcraft, because they hinder my commodities? Epictet will make answer, that
these are none of thine, but other men's, and to appertain nothing to thee.
Whereof much is spoken of before. The hidden truth, As it is in Sophocles in
Electra, Orestes was not therefore dead, because he had persuaded himself to
bring his bones shut in a coffin to Egisthus and others.

Cap. 59. That all things partly do agree the one with the other, and partly
do disagree.
EVery thing has.tj. handels, one whereby it may be carried, The handle of
humanity and not of immanitie is to be taken.
the other whereby it may not. If thy brother be ill condicioned, take him not
by that whereby he is ill condicioned, for it is the handle whereby he cannot
be carried, but take him by that, whereby he is thy brother, and whereby he is
nourished with thee, in so doing thou shall take him by ye handle, whereby he
ought to be carried.

Cap. 60. That because of knoweledge, or having more than other, we cannot
infer that we are better.
THese words agree not together I am richer than thou, We must not triu^ph of
the gifts of fortune, but of the riches of the mind.
therefore better. I am wiser and better learned than thou art, therefore I am
better: but these agree far better. I am richer than thou art, then my
possession is better than thine. I am wiser and better learned than thou art,
my words then are better than thine, but thou art neither thy possession nor
yet thy communication.

Annotations.
But thou art neither. etc. Thou will say, yea: but because of riches,
eloquence, and power, I am much regarded. The same does Epictet reprove, who
thinks good only wisdom and virtue to be much set by. What man except he
were a very naughty and wicked flatterer, Nero.
has had Nero the Emperor in great estimation, although besides his riches
and Empire, he were eloquent, a Poet, and a Musician? The mind of a perfect
man abhors to allow those, whose folishnesse and dishonestie is known, in
what fashion soever honor for a show be given to them, because of the gifts
of fortune, and corrupt conversation.

Cap. 61. Of an exact judgment in things.
IF any wash himself speedily, say not that he washes himself naughtily,
Not only the deed it self, but the cause of the deed is to be considered.
but spedily. If any drink much, say not that he drinks naughtily, but
much, for if thou know not why he does it, how do thou know that he does
naughtily? So it shall chance that we do receive and supporte the fantasies
and imaginations of some, and to other we agree.

Cap. 62. Against glory and ostentation. And first as touching knowledge.
REpute not thy self a Philosopher in any case: Philosophy is not to be
declared by words, but by deeds.
nether dispute not much of precepts, but rather put some thing in execution,
as at the table, teach not how one should eat his meat, but eat as it
behooves thee. Nothing must be spoken unadvisedly.
For remember that Socrates did so set aside all ostentation. But if at any
time these precepts come in question, speak as little as is possible, for it
is dangerous to vomit that which the stomach has not well digested. And if
it chance, that a man tell thee, that thou know nothing, and that it moves
thee not, The Sheep declare by their wool and milk how much they have eaten.
understand that this is a great entrance of thy work, for the sheep
vomiting up their grass, declare not to ye Shepherds how much they have
eaten, but digesting it within they show without their fine wool and milk.
Thou therefore show not, neither utter thy learning to ye rude and ignorant:
but declare some effects outwardly of that being well digested.

Cap. 63. Against the boasting of sobriety and sufferaunce.
GLory not thy self to have mortified, Ostentation is to be eschued.
empaired, and weakened thy body thorough abstinence: Neither if thou haste
dronken nothing but water, say not at every occasion, I drink nothing but
water. But consider how much more abstine^t the poor are, who crave alms,
suffering and enduring much more than thou. Furthermore consider how many
perfections and virtues thou haste not, which other have. But if thou will
exercise thy self in pain and patience, do it by thy self, and seek not to
advertise other of it, as they do who suffering wrong of great men, set images
on fire, and say, we are undone, to the end to move and assemble the people.
For a bragger is altogether mindful of worldely things, and turns topsie
turuie the goodness of patience and abstinence, because he determines the
end of them is to have, the good opinion and praise of many.

Cap. 64. The description of a triple quality or property, that is, of the
unlearned, of the Philosopher, and of him that begins to learn.
THe condition and state of the unlearned is, to look for of him self neither
profit nor damage, but of outward things. The state and condition of the
philosopher is, to look for of himself all utility and discommoditie. The
sign of him which begins to profit is, The signs of him which profits
that he dispraise no man, that he praise no man, that he complain of no man,
yt he accuse no man, that he speak nothing of himself, as though he were any
body, or knew any thing. When he shall be at any time empeched or disturbed, he
blames none but himself. And if one commend him, he mocketh him covertly
which commends him, if he be dispraised, he purges nor justifies himself:
but lives like a sick person fearing to move and troble any thing within him
before he be recovered. He sets apart all appetite, and flees the things
which are against the nature of them which are in us. He uses a light
endeavor about all things, and passes not whether he be termed a Fool or an
Ideote. And (in brief) he watches himself, as his Enemy and Spy.

Annotations.
That he dyspraise no man, That is through curiosity and too much diligence in
other men's matters, or provoked thoroughe self love: Epitecte commends
Agrippinus, but why? that other should follow his example. He reproves other,
wherefore? that they should be amended.

Cap. 65. That learning is not only to be expounded but also to live according
as it does prescribe.
IF any do auaunte that he can well interpret and expound the sentences of
Chrisippus, They are Gra^marians not Philosophers, which do expound the
precepts of wise men, and follow them not.
say with thy self, if Chrisippus had not written darkly, and obscurely, I
should have nothing wherewith to auaunte my self. But Chrisippus has not
written, to the end he would be interpreted, but to the end that according to
his doctrine we should live. If then I use his precepts, then shall I attain
to ye goodness of them. But if I marvel at the interpretation, or if I can
well interpret it my self, I marvel at the Gra^marian, not at the
Philosopher, or else play the Gra^marian not the Philosopher. But what avails
it to have found written remedies, to understand them well, and being sick
thy self not to use them?

Cap. 66. That we ought to persevere in goodness.
THou must be stable and firm in thy good purpose and deliberation of life,
Precepts are to be obeyed, and words are not to be regarded.
eue^ as in a law. Persevere therefore, eue^ as if in tra^sgressing, thou
should incur the crime of impiety. And whatsoever me^ talk of thee,
regard it not, for that belongs not to thee.

Cap. 67. That we ought not to defer from day to day, for to lead a perfect
life.
HOw long yet will thou defer to esteem thy self at any time worthy of these
things which are so excellent, and not to tra^sgresse one? But if from day to
day thou do defer ye time, thou do not aua^ce but hinder thy self. Then
incontine^tly accustom thy self to live as perfect, and to use well all
accidents and chances. And in every thing suppose that the combat is ready
for thee, and neglecte no time, for that day in the which thou do not
profit, thou do receive damage. After this manner Socrates became the wisest
of al. But if thou be not yet Socrates, thou ought to live as, one that
would become Socrates.

Cap. 68. Three places in Philosophy, and the order of them together.
THe first and most necessary place is that which appertains to the
practice of knowledge: Precepts are better than the cause of precepts, and the
Method of demonstratio^s.
as, not to lie. The second which appertains to demonstrations: as, how
comes it to pass that this is demonstration? What demonstration is? what
consequence is? what fighting is? what is true? what is false? Therefore ye
third place is necessary for the second, the second for the first. The most
necessary of all, and wherein to rest our selves is the first. But we do
contrary, for we stay our selves in the third, and therein bestow all our
study, and make no account of the first, but are altogether negligente. And
how? For we make leasinges, and notwithstanding we have well near always no
other thing in our mouth, why and wherefore we ought not to lie.

Annotations.
Not to lie. And this is the active or moral part. We should not lie. This is
called the judicial or natural part. To demonstrations. This is logike and
Rhetoric, whereby we prove and try the truth, and disprove that which is
false.

Cap. 69. Three sentences of the auncientes to be had in mind. Of the which
the first is of Cleantes, the second of Euripides, the third of Plato.
LEt us always have these three things in memory and before Crito If it so
please god, so be it. Anitus truly and Melitus may well kill me, but to hurt
me, it lies not in their power.

Annotations.
It is marvel that this moral and auailable saying of Epictetus was omitted,
(...), that is, Bear and Forbear, which be used very often, and does in a
manner comprehend all that whereof mention is made at large in this book.

The Poesy of Epictetus which he used as his badge or Cognisaunce.
(...).

Sustine and abstine

Sustain and refrain.

The translater upon the same.
SVstaine al wrong and injury,
and never see thou pine
At any thing, which fortune blind
does claim not to be thine.
Endure the loss of worldly wealth
and covet chiefly this:
A quiet mind, a godly life
which makes thee live in bliss.
Refrain with pomp to vaunte thy self
in frail external things,
Seeing to this wearing wasting world
thou nothing with thee brings.
See thou expel not from thy mind
and quite from it displace
Al virtuous acts and holy deeds,
though some seek to deface
Thee, in whose mind is fully fixte
the trade to virtues way
By pleasant show of filthy vice
which leads men astray.
For some there are, who when they see
one following virtues lore,
From virtue hard, to easy vice
they seek him to restore.
Abstain from wrath in matters all
from Oaths and laughter great,
From naughty and ill company,
from all delicious meat:
From giving ear to secret talk
and from dame Venus field
Retire thy self, and take in hand
of chastity the sheilde.
Sustain, Refrain, these ar two words
which great importance have,
And if with reason thou them skan.
from damage much do save.
The Apophthegs or quick Sentences of Epictetus.
EPictetus ye Stoike Philosopher seeing a certain fellow void of al good
conditions, having a bold spirit to speak yet to an ill intent, giving his
mind to the study of Philosophy: he with a loud voice cried out on the
faith of God and man, reproving the man in these words: O man see whether the
vessel be clean, wherein thou do put these things. For if thou shalt of
arrogancy pour them in, they will perish: if they shall putrify, they will
become urine, or vinegar, or worse than these, if worse may be. He meant, that
learning infers great hurt and damage, if it happen upon a mind which is
corrupted with ill affections: and the more excellent every learning is, the
greater hurt it causes if it happen on a naughty man: like as there is no
thing more better then a good divine, so there is nothing more pestilent then
an ill divine. Gellius. lib. xvij. cap. xix. and Erasmus. li. vij. Apoph.

He on a time hearing of a certain man yt would easily be flattered, said,
the crows pluck dead men's eyes out of the carcasses and that not without a
cause, for none which is deprived of life, has the use of his sight. But
flatterers corrupting the minds of them which are alive, do take away al their
sight. Stob. Antonius in Melissa. part..j. ser. lii.

He counseled that we should consider three manner of ways: the man with
whom we are conuersaunte: whether he be better than we our selves are, or
inferior, or equal unto us. It is meet to hear diligently, and obey him
which is better then our selves, modestly to persuade the younger or
inferioure, and to agree with thy equal. And truly by this means thou shall
never fall in contention when thou art in company. Stob. sermon. iij. de
Te^perantia. Although this be before among the precepts, yet I thought good
again to repeat and reckon it also in this place. For as the proverb is, Bis
and ter quod pulchrun est repetendu^: yt is, that which is goodly ought twice
and thrice to be said or repeated.

He being demanded, what man was rich. To whom (said he) that is sufficient
which he has. Strob.

He said that the Gods did not hate such, as in this life do contend and
wrestle with diverse miseries. The Philosophers meaning was, that adversity was
unto men auailable: to whom if things do prosper according to their desire,
they are so vexed with the Furies, that is, with anger, covetousness and lust,
ye through their prosperity, they move ye Gods to wrath. This is found in
Brusonius Contursin us. li. ij. Exempl. He being demanded, by what mean a man
might purchase an honest report, he answered. If thou will have a good name,
learn to speak well, when thou have learned to speak well, endeavor to do
well, and by this means thou shall get a good report.

He being demanded how a man might procure sorrow to his ennimie, said: If a
man do so frame and dispose himself, that he do all good things.

The same was accustomed to say, that it was more necessary to cure the soul
than the body, seeing that it is bet to dye, than to lead an ill life. Antonius
in Melissa, part.i. Ser. lviij.

The same was wont to call such as showed the^ selves to be Philosophers by
their beard, garment, and bragging words, Factis procul, verbis tenus, having
their deeds far of, and their words at hand.

The same was wont to say, that a life joined with fortune, was like unto a
violent flood of water. For it is troubled, and full of dirte, and hard to
enter into it, it is violent, roaring, and continues a short space.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Pater Noster Row, by Henry Bynneman, for Leonarde
Maylard. And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Cock.
1567.


