APOPHTHEGMES, that is to say, prompte, quick, witty and sentencious
sayings, of certain Emperors, Kings, Capitaines, Philosophiers and Orators,
as well Greeks, as Romans, both veraye pleasant and profitable to read,
partly for all manner of persons, and especially Gentlemen. First gathered and
compiled in Latin by the right famous clerk Master Erasmus of Roterodame.
And now translated into English by Nicolas Udall.

Excusum typis Ricardi Grafton. 1542.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



NICOLAS VDALL UNTO the gentle and honest herted readers well to fare.
FOrasmucheas the autour self in his preface here ensuyng does at large
declare the nature, the purpose, and the use of Apophthegmes, to make of
the same matier double inculcacion should be (as me seems) both on my part
and behalf a thing superfluous, and also a tedious dullyng to the reader. It
shall therefore at this prese^te time be sufficie^te to admonyshe you gentle
readers, that of the whole work of Apophthegmes by the right excellent clerk
Erasmus: for the most plesaunte and the same most honest, profitable, and
wholesome readnyg of allmaner persons, and in especial of noble men collected
and digested into eight volumes, I have thought better with two of the eight
to ministre unto you a taste of this both delectable and fruiteful recreacion,
then by suppressyng it until y^ whole work might be perfectely absolved and
finysshed, to defraude you of so many goodly histories, so many high poinctes
of counsel, so many notable precepts of wisdom, so great a noumbre of
philosophical lesso^s, such vnestymable treasure of moral doctrine, as may
of this little portion in ye mean time with small labor and incomparable
delight, cou^forte and solace of mind, be perceived, gathered, and acquired.
And although upon consideracions, (at a more propice time herafter by gods
grace to be declared) I have bee^ so bold with mine autour, as to make the
first book and secounde, which he makes third and fourth^ Yet in these
two present volumes which ye see here set forth, I have labou^ed to
discharge the duty of a translatour, that is, keeping and following the sense
of my book, to interpret and turn the Latin into English with as much
grace of our vulgar tongue, as in my slendre power and knowelage has lain: not
omittyng ne leattyng pass, either any one of all the Apophthegmes as they
stand in order (except two or three at ye most being of such sort as
honestee persuaded me, to be better passed over, then rehearsed or spoken of,)
orel^ any Greek or Latin verse or word, whereof ye pith and grace of the
saying depends. Wherein I desire the unlearned readers not to be offended for
that I have in many places entremixed Greek and Latin with the English. For
in^^l things that I have already heretofore or herafter shall set forth, I
have an especial regard unto young scholares and students, unto whom it is
not possible to be expressed, what great vtilitee, benefit and knowelage
does redound of conferryng one strange language with an other. Neither is it
to be doubted, but that such as are toward the disciplines of good
litterature in diverse tounges, may of such doings as this, pieke out a^
much vtilitee and furtheraunce of their studies, as the unlearned shall take
pleasure, and fruit of the English for their use. Whosoever cares not for the
La^ine may pass it over and satisfy himself with the English. Who passes
not on the Greek, may sembleably pass it over, and make as though he see none
such. There is in this behalf no man's labor lo^t but mine, and ye^ not that
all lost neither, if my good zele and honest entente to do good to all
sorts, be in good part interpreted and accepted. Leat the unlearned readers
somewhat bear with young students, as the learned must and will do with
them. For as y^ one part may think it much superfluous to find Latin and
Greek in an English book, so the learned have no need of certain annotacions
(which I have in places not a few entremyngleed, partly to supplye and
redubbe that wants of the whole work, and partly to give necessary light
to ye Greek and Roman histories) of which annotacions eue^ he peradventure
shall find ease, which will find fault with the admixtion of Greek and Latin
and will auouche the same confused medleyng of soundrie tounges rather to
contein some spiece of ostentacion and braggue of the p^incted sheath, then any
argument or prouf of erudicion. To all whom would Christ I could persuade (as
truth it is) that I seek nothing less then such shadoe of unstable glory,
and that my only will and desire is to further honest knowelage, and to call
(away the studious youth in especial) from having delight in readyng
fantastical trifles, (which contein in manier nothing but the seninarie of
pernicious sects and sedicious doctrine, unto a more fruitful sort of
spe^dyng good hours, and by inuityng the same youth unto the imitacion of
honest exercises, to do good if I may. But to proceed in that I was now
about to say, truly for the Englysheman to be offended with the admixtion of
Latin, or the Latin manne to myslyke the pouthreyng of Greek, appears unto
me a much like thing, as if at a feast with varietee of good meats and
drynkes furnyshed, one that loves to feed of a Capon, should take displeasure
that an other manne has appetite to a Coney, or one y^ serves his stomach
with a Pertrige, should be angrye with an other that has a mind to a
Quaylle, or one y^ drynketh single beer should be grieved with his next feloe
for drynkyng ale or wine. Now for the better understanding of the co^ceipte,
trade and conueighaunce of this book, I have thought requisite to admonyshe
you, that in each man's Apophthegmes the saying self is set out in a great
text lettre: after which ymmediately follows in a middle lettre (with this
mark) the moralizacion of Erasmus, wheresoever to the same it seemed expediente
any such moral sense to gather of the Apophthegme for edifiyng of the reader
in virtue or civil honestee. That if any matier dependyng of some Greek or
Roman chronicle hau^ seemed needful to be expouned, if any poetical fable
has come in place, if to any obscure proverb or strange history has been
made some preatie allusio^ needful to be declared, all such things together
with the names of persons here mentioned, ye shall find set forth, and
added of mine own notyng, over and besides the words and matier of the
Latin work in a small lettre, with some directorie mark. Yea and sometimes
in the mids of the text with this mark of mine if ^he place seemed to
require some more light. Sembleably to ye moral interpretacion of Erasmus
(where occasion was minis^red) yea and to some Apophthegmes (where Erasmus
said nothing,) in case my so dooyng might any thing help the weak and ^endre
capte of the unlearned reader, I have put addicions of the same lettre and
mark, to the end that in case it be not all of the fynest, the blame thereof
may not light on the autour, but redound unto my self accordyngly. And to the
entente that nothing should lack which to the ease and commoditee of the
unlearned reader might seem necessary, there is added also a large and plain
table in order of ye A.B.C. whereby to the name of any person, or to any good
matier in the book contained, ready way and recourse may with a weat finger
easily be found out. That if in any of the premises either the interpretour
or else the prienter shall be found to have failled, I for my part shall not
only thynk my laboure^ bounteou^ly rewarded, but also knowelage myself highly
bounden to render most hertie thanks, if the gentle reader shall of his
humanitee and honest heart vouche salve to set his pen and helpyng hand
to emende whatsoever error it shall happen him to espy: and in ye residue so
to accept both our labors as we may thereby be encouraged gladly to
sustein ferther trauaill in writing and setting forth such autours, as may
to the reader be both pleasant and profitable.

Written in the year of our Lord God. M.CCCCC.xlii.

THE PREFACE OF DEsyderius Erasmus of Roterodame unto a dukes soonne of his
country
FOR asmucheas ye did so gentely before receive ye other little books which I
had then sent as a poor earnest penie (such as it was) of my good heart and
mind toward your grace right noble prince, and not only your self, but also
both your most noble parents did so courteously accept the same: I have
thought good at this prese^te to join to ye said books some other thing
both more meet for your nobleness and also (except I be much deceived) more
profitable for your studies. I have therefore out of every good autour for the
most part, chosen and gathered, that the Greeks callen apophthegmata, that is
in english, notable good and brief sayings: for that I saw none other kind
of argument or matier more fit for a prince, especially being a young manne
not yet broken in the experience of the world. In deed full conueniente and
meet to be known are those things which ye aunciente philosophiers have
left in writing of honest behaueour, of well gouernyng and ordreyng a
co^menweale, and of keeping war. But what one manne among many thousa^des (yea
though he be nothing cloggued nor let with any public office or ministry)
has so much vacaunte time, yt he may be at leisure to turn over and over
in the books Plato writes al his books in dialogues and in the most part of
them Socrates is one of the disputers which Socrates prete^dyng echewhere
simplicitee and ignorance did often times convince diverse of them that he
reasoned with all in their own arts, vsyng to the^ such kind of reasonyng as
here in the text is recited
of Plato the ragmannes rolls, and the taryers or toys of the subtle
knackes, of the dry mockes, and of the long induccio^s by familiar exaumples,
which Socrates does there use? And as for Aristotle wrote ten books
entitleed Ethica, that is, of honest behaueour and upright living and dealyng.
Aristotle, in deed he wrote largely of manners and behaueour, which work he
entitleeth in greek Ethica, but by ye entriked obscuritee and derkenesse thereof
he appears to have wryte^ the same for philosophiers, that is to say, for
men of high learning, and not for a prince. More clear and more plain to be
perceived, been the works that ye same Aristotle wrote of householdyng
entitleed Oeconomica, and of ordreyng a city or co^menweale entitleed
Politica, but this ma^ne every where requires a reader both ^eraye attente,
and earnestely myndyng that he reads, and also well at leisure. And besides
this, forasmuch as he uses no such manier of rhetorical style or writing as
may move the affectes and passions, he does not so greatly hold or rauyshe
a man's mind, yt is wholly bent and given to princely cures and buisynesse.
Sembleably in ye books of moral philosophy, which Marcus Tullius wrote,
many things there been of such sort, as it is not much to ye purpose, nor
anythyng at all necessary, yt princes know them: Of which kind are those
things yt he treacteth of the consummacion of good and ill (which we
christian men would call of bliss and damnacion) with more subtilitee of
reasonyng and argumentacion, the^ fruit to edify in virtuous living. And
such manier things seruen well for ye purpose of them, who all the days of
their life do nothing else but talk and dispute of honest^e. But for a ma^ne
born to be a prince and a governor, it is necessary yt a ready and short
way to learn virtue be quickly dispeched, and not at leisure disputed and
reasoned in words. Now rests the histories which because they do
represe^te to the yi^ (eue^ as in a peinted table to be vewed) as well the
noble acts of prowess, as the contrary, and that not without pleasure and
delectacion: seem to be more fit for great men. But in this behalf though
a prince might have void times enough to peruse ye infinite multitude of
books of histories, what manne were hable to comprehend and keep them all
freashe in his memory? But like as those persons who been dooers in ye game
or feacte of wrastleyng have in a readynesse at all times certain suer poinctes
and ways both to catch hold, and also to wend out of hold, when need is,
so they yt trauaill in the busy occupacions of peace and of war must of
congruence have in a readynesse suer rewles, by which they may be put in
remembreaunce what is in that present case needful or expediente to be
dooen, and what not. And in this behalf, we see yt diverse highly well learned
me^ne have assaied and taken peine by their good diligence to ease the
carfulness of princes and noble men, among which, some have written lesso^s
of virtue in brief sentences, as Theognis a Greek poet yt writes in
Elegeiacal uses such moral precepts of virtue as been in ye little treatise
yt is read under y^ nam^ of Cato.
Theognis, and Isocrates a greek orator writing many little treatises in prose.
Isocrates: and others have wryte^ the feactes of arms, or policies of war,
and the goodly short sayings of famous me^ne as Ualerius Max. a latin
autoure that wrote a werk of.ix volumes which he entitleed, of the sayings
and acts of noble men.
Ualerius Maximus, and Sextus Julius Sextus Julius Frontinus writes also in
latin.iiii. volumes, which he entitleeth strategematu^, that is to say of
arms, or policies of war.
Frontinus, which Frontinus declares ye self fame thing by diverse other
writers before him customeably to have been dooen. It is a thing of no small
time of leisure to search out gold in the veins under the earth, or to seek
precious stones in the sand or in the sea. Such a feloe especially above
others to a prince with high and weighty matiers contynually embusied does
acceptable service and pleasure, which to the same exhibiteth and presents
gold already fined and made in fagottes or plate, and which brings to his
hand precious stones that are chosen pieces and well poolyshed, already set
in gold, or upon cups of precious metalle. And this kind of pleasure and
good turn, whereas it has of many writers been attempted, yet (after my mind
and sentence) no ma^ne has with more dexterite^ or better effect accomplyshed
and performed then has Plutarchus was a Greek philosophier and was
scholemaister unto the emperor Traianus in the city of Room where he wrote in
Greek many noble and excellent good works as well of histories as also of
moral philosophy and of virtue.
Plutarchus, who after the setting forth of an excellent good and passing
fruitful work of the lives of noble me^ne, (in which work here and there
been myngled and recited as well the factes as ye sayings of the same) he
gathered in to one little book for the use of Traianus Caesar ye best commended
manne of all the Emperors that before his time had been, the notable sayings
of soundrie renoumed persons, by which as in a veraye true and perfect
glass the heart and mind of every of them is to the yie of ye readers
lively and certainly represented. For in the acts and deeds of princes, a
good portion of the laud and praise the Counsaillour may claim and challenge
for geuyng his auise the Capitain for his chieualrie, and the souldyours for
their stoutness. And a veraye great portion of ye same laud and thank
does lady fortune claim to have, by whose co^ueighaunce often times we see
things not without high counsel and wisdom entreprised to have a veraye
unlucky end, and contrary wise y^ misaduised temeritee and vndescreetenesse
of some persons to have right prosperous chance, and in ye end to prove
veraye well. As it is reported that Siramnes the Persian, (a Capitain as I
suppose) said, when he was asked why his deeds were not aunswerable to his
ioyly sayings, for because (says he) what I will speak, lies in mine own
power, but how such things as I do, shall end or be taken, stands in
the pleasure of fortune and of the king. Albeeit honest purposes and devises
are not therefore utterly defeacted of their due laud and condign praise. But
the said Plutarchus does in this kind far excede and pass all other
writers, not only in choosyng ye best, but also in expounyng and declaryng
yesame. For these sayings (which, as before is mentioned, the Greeks calle^
apophthegmata) have appropriated unto them a certain reason and mark of their
own whereby to judge, so that they do plainly express and set out the
veraye natural inclinacio^ and disposicion of each speaker that they proceed
from, briefly, finely, quippyngly, and meryly within the bounds of good manner.
And as every several person has proprely belongyng unto him a facio^ of his
own whereby he is commended, and whereby his sayings and doings have a good
grace orels other wise: even so like wise has every nation, so that not one
manier sayings are conueniente for Alexander and for Philippus or Antigonus.
One sort are meet for Alcibiades: Again one facion agreeable for a man of
Lacedaemon, and an other for a Scythian or a Thracian: and a diverse from yt
again comely for a man of Athenes, or for a Romain. Now, in expressyng and
vttreyng such sayings Xenophon seems to me somewhat weeryshe, Herodotus
void of quickenesse or life, Diodorus and Quintus Curtius over full of
words, and so forth of the other writers, which I surceasse by name to
speak of. Plutarchus is a perfect feloe in all poinctes, and therefore I have
thought best the same Plutarchus to foloe principally above all others.
Wherefore all yt ever is comprised in ye work of this autour which he
entitleed de apophthegmatibus, yt is, of feacte and brief sayings, ye shall
find here in this work every whitte of it. We do all know that this work
of Plutarchus has been twis translated out of greek into latin, first by
Francisce Philelphus, and afterward again by Raphael Regius, with whom I was
somewhat acquainted in the vniuersitee of Padwaye. Philelphus in diverse places
had missed yt cushe^, which places Raphael does restore and correct, and
yet somewhere stumbleth himself. The truth is, they both were men, and might
err, mystakyng a thing yt they read. Albeit either of them minded to be
nothing else but a plain tra^slatour of the greek into latin, but I for many
causes have thought better the said Plutarchus to foloe, the^ to translate, to
expoune at large, then word for word out of greek only to enterprete^
first that the style might be the more clear and plain as being less bounden
to the greek words: (For this present book of mine is not written unto
Traianus, a ma^ne both in greek and latin excellentely well seen, and also in
long experience of all manier affairs gayly well broken and exercised, but to
a prince being yet but a young thing, yea and by you to all children and young
strieplynges, that labor and sue to atteigne the knowelage of good learning
and honest studies: nor yet in that world when such man^er sayings and
acts were by the report and co^municacion of ye people daily talked and spoken
of in baines or whotte houses, at dyners and suppers and abroad in ye streets
whenever folks be asse^bleed together: and secundaryly that I might have
free libertee to declare and expoune the fine wittynesse of the saying, if any
came to hand that was of sense obscure and derke, as at this present right
many there been hard to be understood not only of such as have never gone
to school, but also of such as do far surmounte the common sort of
clerks. And certes for mine own part, ye geassyng and redyng what diuers^ of
these apophthegmes should mean or signify, has curstely troubleed and vexed
my brains, and I cannot say whether it has some where beguyled me too. And
in places not a few I have had much strougleyng and wrastleyng with the
faults of enprientyng in ye books, at which it could not be avoided, but
that the enterpreters and translatours maugre their heddes did stumble. For it
is a thing uneath beleueable how much and how boldly as well the commen writers
that from time to time have copied out the books of Plutarchus, as also
certain yt have thought them selfs hable to countrolle and emend all me^nes
doings, have taken upon them in this autour who ought with all reverence to
have been handleed of them and with all fear to have been preserved from
altreyng deprauyng or corruptyng. For never has there been among ye greek
writers, (especialli as touching matiers of virtue and good behaueour,) any one
more holy then Plutarchus, or better worthy of all men to be read. But the
veraye same thing has provoked persons desirous of glory and of lucre, to
deprave and corrupt this autour, to put in more then he wrote, and also to
leave out of that he wrote which ought most of all to have feared them from
so dooyng. For every writer ye better accepted and set by that he is, and
ye greater name that he has among learned men, so much the rather shall he
for lucre and advantage be corrupted. That this autour has been so used, ye
veraye diuersitee of ye Greek text not agreeyng one copy with an other does
right well argue and prove. For all others omitted, to speak only of this
present work that now is in hand, the translacion of Philelphus has certain
things, which Raphael left untouched, and Raphael likewise some things of
which Philelphus makes no mention at all. Besides this, where Plutarchus in
the preface by express words does plainly testify that in the lives he
had myngleed the sayings and acts of noble me^ne together the one with the other:
and in this work for briefnesse to have lynked together only their
apophthegmes or sayings, yet do we see right many things admixt and put
in among ye apophthegmes which in veraye deed are no sayings at all, nor any
other thing but me^e pollices of war which the Greeks callen Strategemata.
Now in ye self same work one and yesame things so often again and again
repeated, dooen they not openly cry this argument and matier by some other
feloe to have been co^tamynated and sloubreed? So yt we may now pardone yt in
certain places an apophthegma is recited under ye name of the person that it
was spoken to, and not of him by whom it was spoken, as of Lysymachus and
Philippus. For in this treactise of Plutarchus which is entitleed Collectanea,
that is to say a manual of soondrie and pretty histories and sayings compiled
together for all readers the answer that Philippus made unto Lysimachus, is
told and reported under the title or chapter of Lysimachus. But yet it was an
higher poincte of presumpcion yt of one work they have made it two. For
because Plutarchus of the sayings of Lacedaemonians, which been a veraye
great noumbre, had touched only so many as for ye Emperor being with many
matiers sore embus^ed, seemed like to suffice. He, whosoever it was, (at lest if
it were but one feloe and no mo that set hands thereunto) has assigned to the
sayings of Lacedaemonians one propre volume, and that according to the order
of ye greek letters as they stand in ye alphabeete, which Raphael in his
translacion has turned into the order of ye letters of ye latin A,B.C. But
this was of all the three even the veraye wurst. For Ualerius and Fro^tinus
folowen ye order of such sentencies as they show concerning religion,
concerning affeccio^ and love to me^nes countries, concerning truth in keepyng
promises made, concerning mannefull hardynesse and concerning ^us^ice, and
likewise of other matiers setting ^che of them in his right order and place.
Best sta^dyng with cunnyng and learning, ^s the same order that Plutarchus
followed, ^bseruyng and keeping the order of regions and kingdoms as they stand
in row, and in every of them ye order of times, to every of the kings
ioynyng his own capitaines, and to every of the capitaines their mates. From
the Persians he comes to ye Egyptia^s, from ye Egyptia^s to ye Thracians, from
the Thracians to the Scythians, from the Scythia^s to the Sicilians, from the
Sicilians to the Macedonians, from thens to ye Atheniense, from them to the
Lacedaemonians, following in every of these thordre of the times, and not of
the letters in the alphabete. From the Lacedaemonians he comes to the Thebanes,
from the Thebanes to the Romans, so that the reader by the sayings of a few
persons may familiarly know the order of the whole history, which order
that feloe has pieteously confounded and trobleed and set out of order, that
soondreed and disseuered the sayings of the Lacedaemonians from the others, and
yet here and there repetyng the veraye same things that Plutarchus had
gathered before unto Traianus, albeit in soondrie places one thing repeated is
much more often deprehended and openly found in the other work of
apophthegmes, but in both works so often as the same falling in a slumbre and
forgettyng himself cannot light on Plutarchus a writer of precise diligence.
More over, this part has no preface at all, and the preface that goes before
the apophthegmes unto Traianus will not s^rue to both works. Now, what thank
such persons are worthy to have which do in this wise slabre and defyle
ye books of famous autores, I will not at this time reason, but truly me
thinks it a veraye sacriliege. Yet of me (except a few sayings of
Lacedaemonians, because the self same been repeated in the other table of
rehersall every one of them) is not so much as one omitted af all that goes
abroad under ye name of Plutarchus partly to the^de that the reader being
rather a gredie glutton, then a mynion deintie piece might not mysse any thing
that he would feign have: and partly, for that I saw nothing there but
worthy to be known, though some time rehearsed and told out of his right
place. Nevertheless, all the whole work I have in manier made my propre own
in yt I do more at large and more plainly express the things that be
told in greek, puttyng in sometimes such things as I had well perceived to
be added in other autours, addyng also out of the other works of Plutarchus
veraye many things which were not in this present treactise, and eueriewhere
as it were with little brief commentaries openyng and showing as well the sense of
ye apophthegme as also the use wherefore, and how it may serve, especially in
those places which lacked some more light and clerenesse, albeeit the same have
I dooen briefly in few words, lest I should have clean turned away from the
nature of apophthegmes, which ought not to co^tein many words. But as for
the order is wurse broken and confused eue^ of me, then I found it there, for
that, where at the beginning I had purposed to make rehearsal but of veraye few
and only of the principal best sort, when I was ones entreed in my warke,
the veraye heat thereof pricked and set me to change my mind and to go on
still a great way ferther, neither should I have made any end, had not this
as ye would say an hougemain sea of things still fresh and fresh coming to
mind enforced and driven me to blow retreacte and to recule back. For as
Quintilian among ye virtues and graces of a schoolemaister in grammar puts
this to be one, that he be in some things ignoraunte: so, in this kind of
argume^te it seems to be some part of diligence certain things to pass
over and to leave out. Therefore, I have thought b^tter to make at this time a
deintie feast the a cou^breous or troublesome, especially for y^ if any thing
be in this present supper leafte out, it may at some other supper be set
before my geastes after yt all this shall be perfectely digested. And ye
inco^moditee of ye order of things neglected and not precisely kept I have
with a large reportorie or table redoubbed. For the title, it nothing forces
to be careful or scrupleous, sens y^ among those sayings which Plutarchus
under ye title and name of apophtegmes has gathered and co^piled together,
there be many which an other ma^ne would rather call, scorns, tau^tes,
checkes, iestes, or merry conceipted sayings to laugh at. But forasmuch as
Marcus Tullius in puttyng a several distinction between each of these kinds,
has taken earnest labor and peine, without any effect, and forasmuch as
Marsus a right well learned ma^ne has in this behalf nothing satisfied
Quintilia^, no, nor yet Quintilian in knowlage and litterature far passing
Marsus has satisfied himself: I have not thought it a thing woorthe y^ labor
in this behalf to bestow much buisie trauaill, contented and thynkyng
sufficie^te, here and there by y^ way as occasion serves to have opened and
showed the kind and the nature of the saying or of the merry iest^ Certes in
those things that I have of my self added besides Plutarchus doings, I have
diligentely foreseen and provided in no wise confusely to myngle policies of
war (having no saying of this kind annexed unto them) and apophthegmes
both together, and also that I would in no wise put in here any thing but
taken out of ye best allowed and the same the most auncyente writers both in
Greek and Latin: not that I am ignoraunte the later writers to have recited
many things sharply and also pleasauntly spoken: but such things as
antiquitee has made precious jewels and as ye would say relics, been of
more autoritee, and meet it was that this work should have an end and not
be infinite. Nor this thing neither ought to move any manne that one and
the same saying is of one autour ascribed unto the person of one ma^ne and of
an other autour is attributed to an other manne. For it forces not so greatly
of what person a thing is spoken, as it does, what is spoken: albeit in
deed a famous speaker and one that has the favor and hertes of men gives
to the sayings much weight and grace also. This thing more often comes in
ure, then yt it needs by exaumples to be proved. But yet sometimes it
chances by reason that man's memory failleth, albeeit there is no cause to
the contrary, but ye one and the same sentence may proceed from soondrie
speakers or writers, whether imitacion be the cause thereof orels chance, as
for exaumple, this staff of a meter in greek, (...), that is
Tyrannes by wisemennes conversation,
May soon be brought to goodness and wisdom,
This is well known to be a verse of Sophocles is a Greek poet of whose
writing we have.vii. tragedies.
Sophocles, yet Plato cites it out of Euripides also is a greek ^oete and
wrote ^x tragedies which we have.
Euripides. Again this verse. (...), yt is,
I being aged, as I can,
Will teach the being also an old manne.
Whereas it is in the tragedy of Sophocles entitleed Philoctetes, yet is ye
same word for word found in Bacchis the tragedy of Euripides: like wise
this verse. (...) yt is
Whether thou talk, or hold thy piece,
Thou must in due season, speak or cease.
Whereas it is in ye tragedy of Aechylus entitleed Promotheus; Aechylus is also
a poet that wrote tragedies in greek.
it is found also in Euripides only two lettres changed (...) and (...), in
steed of (...), and (...), Somewhyles autours agree not, neither on the mat^er
not yet on the name. As he y^ cast in ye teethe of Marcus Fabius that he had by
his means recovered again ye town of Tarente, in Tullie is named Liuius
Sal^uator, in Titus Liuius is named Marcus Liuius, in Plutarche Marcus Lucius,
orels as is in the greek exemplaries (...), Also Fabius Philostratus shows
that one Leo a Sophiste brought all the people of Athenes in a laughter with
his body being notable gross and fat, and Plutarche says lanke and
little. Ualerius Maximus and Plinius, in the reportyng of a certain alteracion
y^ was between Cn. Domitius and Lucius Crassus in Room, how wide been they the
one from the other, but without all life or solle been those things, that in
some writers are feigned to have bee^ the words of certain persons, in the
fables of poets mentioned, as in Philostratus the Sophiste, when he forgeeth
and shapeth to Palamedes, to Ulysses, and to other like persons, such tales
and speeches as lusted his own fantastical brain to devise and imagyn, and
the same are made double dedde by evil handleyng, of which sort of sayings I
do in this present work meddle with none at all. In the next degree to these
been such speeches as ar assigned to diverse persons in dialogues, feigned
and endited, not for any truth of the matier to be believed, but for disporte
and passetyme only. But in the speeches of the parts, in comedies (that is
merry entreludes) and in tragedies (that is, sad entreludes which we call
fraige plays) there is some more life and pith, and a great grace they have
being set in an apt and fit place, albeeit the name of apophthegmes, no
sayings can have except the speaker out of whose mouth they dooen proceed be
a person of great name and the words purposely applied to some matter being
even at that present hour in co^municacion, yea and much the better to be
liked, if they be a little disframed to an other sense or a ferther meaning
then the veraye words do purporte. As when Aristotle unto Callisthenes
talkyng with king Alexander more homely and frankely then was expediente, gave
a bywarnyng with this verse of the poet Homere^ (...). That is.
My soonne, if thou bee^ thus large of tongue,
Thou shall surely leese thy life ere long.
Out of Herodotus I have had no great lust to gather any great noumbre of
sayings, because that most part of them appear to have been invented of that
writers own wit. Like trashe and bagguage been those sayings that are
incidente in oracions, which the writers of histories (each as his wit
serves him) are woonte to attribute to men, albeit even those do much
auaill as well to the readers judgment as also to make a man hable well to
frame and promptely to tell his tale. The principal best sort of apophthegmes
is yt saying which in few words does rather by a color signify the^
plainly express a sense not comen for every wit to pick out, and such a
saying, as no man could lightely feign by study, and which the longer ye
do consider it in your mind, the more and more it does still delight you.
And all these universal sort of wrytynges as do comprehend proverbs, sage
sentencies, and notable sa^ynges or acts, is most fit for Princes and noble
me^ne, who for the vrgente causes and busy matters of the commenweale have not
leisure to spend any great part of their life in study or in readyng of
books. And these wrytynges, as they be learned with pleasure and delight, and
do lightly synke and settle in y^ mind, so do they contein more good
knowelage and learning in ye deep botome or secret priuetee, then they show
at the first vieu. We read that Augustus Caesar of a custom did cause as many
as he could any where geat of such good lessons to be exemplified, and the
copies thereof to send into diverse places. Also we see the chief and principal
study of the ioyly auncie^te wise me^ne of old time to have been, yt they
might with the lure of pleasant delectacion enplante in tender young wits
things worthy and expediente to be known, to the end that the unbroken
youngth not yet full ripe for the serious precepts of philosophy, might even
with play and dalyyng learn such things as might afterward do them high
service all days of their life. For this entente and purpose they did as ye
would say spiece and powther Cosmographie, Astrology, Music and philosophy
as well natural as moral with fables and tales preatyly and wittyly feigned.
But in this book that I have now made shall perauenture seem to be
somethynges yt maken nothing to honest behaueour, but do only cause
laughter. Neither do Iesteme it a thing worthy blame ever now and the^ with
laughter to refreshe the mind with cures and matters of charge ^n manner tiered,
so that the matier to laugh at be pure wit and hone^te. For such^ things
gladdeth and makes lusty the wits of young folks, and does passing good
help and fertheraunce as well to ye familiar gentleness of conditions as also
to ye pleasantness of counnyng. For what thing better sweetteh ye endityng of
Marcus Tullius, then that he does ever now and then sauce his style with
sayings of this sort? And I pray you, what been the moralles of Plutarchus,
but aresse hangynges with such like colors pictured? More over those sayings
that seem most fond things of all to laugh at, by well handleyng become
matters of sadness. For what could be a more fond thing to laugh at the^
Diogenes gooyng from place to place with a ca^dle in his hand at high noonetid
saying still yt he did seek a man? But in ye mean time by laughyng, we
learn that he is not by and by in all the haste a man, that has ^he figure
and shape of a ma^ne (which im^ges also of wood and stone have,) but to find
out a ma^ne, the botome of the heart and mind must be found out. If the heart
and mind be guyded by reason and discrecion, rather then lead by wilful
appetite: the^ and else not have thou found out a ma^ne. Also what is so worthy
to be laughed at, as yt Phryne ^ stroumpette in Athenes byndyng by promis^e
and couenaunte that every one of the women that satte then in coumpaignie at
ye table, should do the same thing that she would do first, diepped her
hand twis in the water, and put it to her forehedde discoueryng by this
devise the peintyng of all the other womennes faces, so that all the
cou^paignie fell into a great laughter: where as she by so dooyng appeared a
great deal fairer and better favored? But this laughter teaches us the self
same thing which Socrates said in good sadness, yt we should apply
ourselfes to be in deed of such sort as we would be accoumpted and
esteemed lest that when the peintyng is pulled from our visages we have in the
end shame and reproach in steed of glory and renoume. It gives us also a
lesson that we put not our wholle trust and staigh in things external and
transitory, which by many diverse chances are with a trice taken away from a man, but we should acquire and purchase ye veraye true richesse of ye mind
and solle, on which fortune has no power ne dominacio^, so high a poincte
of serious philosophy does that fond toye of ye said peuyshe harlotte
Phryne, teach us. For this consideracion Lycurgus (although in other matiers
he brought up and nurtured his countreeme^ne after a veraye streicte facio^:)
yet honest mirth and ^estyng, he not only permitted unto them, but also
enjoined and commanded. For he ordained a kind of exercise, which he named
in greek (...) as we say, gossopyng, to the which all the aunciente or aged
men that were past bearyng any public funccions, and for the respect of
their ympotencie were discharged of that burden, resorted and asse^bleed
pleasauntly passing the time with feacte sayings and honest bourding, but
always of such^ sort, as might make either to the commendacion and praise of
honestee and virtue, orels to the rebukyng of vice. He set up also an image
unto ye god (...), that is, laughter for that he judged it to be a thing of
high vtilitee and profit with sobre mirth to refreashe the lustynesse of the
minds, and to make the same cherfull to honest trauailles and labors, because
that in this world as the poet Ouidius says. Quod caret alterna requie
durabile non est.
What thing rests not, now and the^ among.
But still trauailleth, cannot endure long.
Cleomenes also of the same Lacedemon being such a sore and rigoro^s feloe
that he would not license neither rymers, nor women that could sing or play on
instruments, nor any mynstrelles to be in the commenweale, yet allowed that
all the same country should strive their bealyes full one with an other in
bourdyng or iestyng meet for honest men to use, and in poynaunte checkyng
tauntes. For a final conclusion, as often as vacaunte time is given, or the
case requires hilaritee and mirth, how much more decente is it with such
manner sayings as these been, to pass ye time, then to take pleasure of fables
void of honestee, void of learning, and full of rebaudrie. I am of this
opinion, that young children might much more to their profecte and benefit
be exercised in the grammar schools with themes, or arguments to write on,
of this sort, then with matiers to make upon, such as been commenly used,
(which themes for the most part, as they contein nothing but little trifleyng
senses void of all pith or fruit, so do they nothing open the my^teries of
the Latin tongue) so that the shoolemaister do open and declare the rewles
and ways how that which is briefly spoken may be dilated and set out more
at large, and how that that is so fondly spoken, that the hearers or readers
cannot but laugh at it, may be turned or applied to a serious use and
purpose. And this one thing will I say more. In sermones percase it is not
conueniente to miengle iestyng sayings of mortal men with the holy
scriptures of God, but yet might the same much more excusably be used, to
quicken such as at sermones been ever noddyng, then old wives foolyshe tales
of Robyn Hoode and such others, which many preachers have in times past
customably used to bring in, taken out even of the veraye botome and grossest
part of the dreggues of the commen peoples foolyshe talkyng. Julius Caesar
Emperor of Room susteinyng the burden of so many chargeable affairs of
encoumbraunce and buisynesse, as well at home in the city when peace was, as
also abroad in warrefare, used to drieue away ye werynesse of taking thought
for such things as he had in his hedde to carke and care for, with tau^tyng
words of bourdyng and iestyng: with which he was so greatly delited, that
he did allow and take in veraye good part such as were spoken by others even
against his own person, so that they were propre feacte and well conueighed.
Uneth any other of all the aunciente Emperors of Room was either more holy
and better disposed, orels more encoumbreed with buisynesse of the world, then
was Augustus Caesar: But again, what person in this kind more merry
conceipted? Of Marcus Tullius, I will nothing say at this present, who is of
many men thought in iestyng to have remembered or considreed as he ought to
have dooen neither measure nor yet honestee and comeliness. Xenocrates ye
philosophier was of a more sour nature, a ioyly feloe in some other respects:
but Plato more times the^ one auised him, with sacrifice to purchase the favor
of the Graces, that is, so to apply himself, yt his sayings and doings
might have more grace and be better accepted and taken of the world. zeno
being outright altogether a Stoique used to call Socrates the scoffer, or the
Hicke scorner of the city of Athenes: because of his merry conceiptes and
tauntyng, that he never ceased to use: but yet is there no man, but he will
say that Socrates was a more godly feloe then either of those two which I
named last before. And to leave unspoken that no men's sayings are more taken
up and used, then those which be sauced with a certain grace of pleasant
mirth, undoubtedly Socrates, Diogenes, and Aristippus would serve better for
teaching and trainyng young children, then either Xenocrates orels zeno. That
if the most wise aunciente fathers were not deceived in that they thougt it
conueniente, with certain knackes of pleasau^te delectacion to lure y^
tendrenesse of youngth unto the love of sage lady Sapie^ce, much more is
the same conueniente for one that is both tender of age, and also born to be a
prince or governor: whom as it becomes to be vigilaunte, and to have in all
causes a diligente yie, so it behooves not either to have a sour couutenaunce
himself, orels to leat any person with an heavy look to depart from his
presence. Now, the mind brought up in plea^aunte and coumfortable studies of
recreacio^, is made more lusty and courageous to sustein the burden of all
cures, and also more pleasau^te for allmaner co^paignie keeping among me^ne.
With these reasones I might sufficientely have defended myself though I had
gathered together nothing but merry iestes, whereas now such sayings of mirth
are but here and there in few places entremedleed among sayings of grauitee
and sadness, as sauces of the feast. That if I shall perceive your grace
herewithall to be well pleased: it shall never repent me of this my labor
and service dooyng, though (as some persons shall percase judge) it be over
poor and base. Others dooe^ write books for them that be ferther entreed
both in years and knowelage: I do (as ye would say) feed the tender age of
a young babe of noble birth. That if your grace has already outlearned this
gear (as with all my heart I would wyshe that ye had) yet I know well it will
stand with the good mind and pleasure of the same, that the commen studies of
young scholares have been ferthreed, and have fared thus much the better for
your sake. And I shall perhaps here after give you things of more saigenesse
and grauitee, when ye shall perfectely have learned all this by heart. For
these things must in any wise be cunned by heart, to the end that ye may have
them ever ready at hand. Albeeit what needs you to have any things of my
making, ses ye have at home in householde with you Conradus Heresbachius, a man in all kinds and sorts of learning absolute and perfect, whom I see
and perceive to bear toward your grace such good heart and mind, that
(according to the duty and part of an especial good schoolemaister) he
rejoices at the comoditees and the honorable procedynges o^ you his pupille
and scholare, much more highly then at his own. And this ma^ne like as he
has already trained and instructed your childehood with learning, so shall he
be hable with prudente and feithfull counsel to do you great help and
fertheraunce when ye shall be a man. And to me also it shall be a thing to do
no less joy and coumforte, then high honestee and auauncemt^te, in some
behalf (be it never so little) to have ferthered your most excellent
towardness with my industrious labor. To conclude, I beseech almighty God,
that he vouchesalue to conserve, to maintein, and to encreace his gifts of
grace, which he has most aboundauntely bestowed on you, to the end that ye
may as well satisfy the desires and wyshynges of your most virtuous parents,
and that ye may prove even like well in all worthynesse as thothers of your
most noble progeny hitherto have dooen, as also that ye may be an hable
manne to enjoy the possession of that ioyly fruitful Seigniourie to the
which ye are born, and appoincted to be heir. Thus will I make an end,
after one word more. While ye bestow your self in this gear, thynk and
remember well, that ye do read the sayings, not of Christian men, but of
gentiles and myscreauntes, so that ye must read them with a judgment. Yeuen
at Friburge the.xxvi. day of February in the year of our Lord. M.D.XXXI.

A preamble of the enterpreter unto the sayings of SOCRATES.
Forasmuch as among all the gentile Philosophiers of old time, there is none,
either for integritee of manners, for vpryght living, for quickenes and (as ye
would say) liuelynes of sayings, or for the perfeccion of philosophical
humilitee and suffreaunce to be compared with Socrates: And in consideracion
that the same Socrates first of all that sort attempted to wythdrawe men
from vain studies and desires, to the reading of moral philosophy, and to
the trade of virtuous living, not only so framyng and ministryng his doctrine,
that he might effectually persuade unto men virtue and perfect honestee, but
also directyng ye exaumple and pattern of all his life and doings to the same
end, effect and purpose: we have thought most convenient to set his sayings
first, as of ye which the studious reader may gather and take such
presidentes of holy and innocent living, such nourture of vncorrupt manners,
such lesso^s of myldnes and patience, such discipline of eschewyng vice, and
al carnal pleasures, such pattern of bridelyng and refreinyng all
sensualitee, such exaumple of co^temnyng worldly gooddes and other vanitees,
as shall be to the same right pleasant, fruitful, and profitable.

The sayings of SOCRATES.
OUt of the mouth of SOCRATES it came, God is to be followed as nere as we may.
the gods to be of all the best and most blissed: and that every manne the
nerer that he draws to the facions and representacio^ of the same gods, the
better he is and the more heauenlyke. If ye say one God, as he said gods
(for there is but one God) nothing may be spoken more Christianelyke.

It was also a saying of his, that What sort our payers ought to be.
but under this form, and with these wourdes (such things as be good for
us) without any ferther addicion. Where as the most part of men do ask
in their prayers, one a wife with a good dourie, an other asks riches, this
manne honors, that manne rewle, some long life, as it were prescribyng and
appoynting to God what he should do. But God of him self before we ask, does
best know what is good and expedient for us, and what is not.

Sacrifice to God ought not to be over sumptu^us.
for that the gods, as they have no need of the gooddes of mortal me^ so
they have more regard to ye hertes of those yt offer sacrifice, then to their
riches: otherwise, forasmuch as commenly the wurste disposed persons have
most aboundau^ce of worldly gooddes, ye world were at an eiuil point, if god
were better pleased with the sacrifice of ye naughty persons the^ of ye good.
And to yt end he used greatly to allow this verse yt foloeth of the greek
poet. Each man to his power in any wise. (...).
Unto the gods to do sacrifice. This saying touches us Christian men
also, which do bestow co^t and charge out of all measure in adournyng
temples, and in executyng high feasts and ^uneralles, where as we should much
better content and please God, if that, that is above good housba^dlyke
clenlynes, we would bestow in alms upon our Christian brethren, being in
extreme need. Sembleable measure he taught to ^ee used also in receiuyng and
intreteinyng of geastes and strangers when they resort to us, ever having in
his mouth the verse above written: Each man to his power. etc.

When it was told him by a friend Sclendre fare is to much for eiuill geastes.
If they be honest men (quod he) it wylbee enoughe: if not, a great deal
to much.

One lesson of his was, that me^ne Virtue and temperate diet to be used.
and also from that drink which might tempte a man to drink, not being
thyrstie. For meat and drink we ought not to use, but as the the necessite of
the body requires.

Socrates said, Houngre is y^ best sauce in the world for meat.
the best sauce in the world for meats is to be hou^grye. Because the same
both sweeteth all things, and also is a thing of no cost ne charge, and by
this means did he for his part evermore eat and drink with pleasure and
delight, for he did neither the one, nor the other, but when he was houngrye and
thirsty.

The ^^st and appetite must be refreined.
he had purposely exercised and enured him self. For after swette or great
heat taken in the wrastleyng place (where they used to wrestle and walk for
the exercise of their bodies) where as others would needs have drink by and by
in all ye have: Socrates would never drink of the first cup. And being
demanded wherefore he did so, that I may not accustom my self, quod he, to
foloe my sensual appetites, lusts and desires. In taking meats and drynkes,
reason is to be fol^ed and not the appetite.
For sometimes though a man be thyrstie, yet is it a noisome and dangerous
thing to drink. And in this case when reason advises to forbear, and the
appetite pricketh to take drink, a man ought rather to foloe reason.

He said that such as had well Inordinate living, is much more peynful the^
virtuous living.
both much more pleasure and less peines the^ such as with all high cure and
diligence did on every side make provision to have all things of pleasure. The
inconueniencies ensuyng of inordinate sensualytee.
Because the pleasures of inordinate l^uers, besides the torments of their
own naughtye conscience, besides infamy and pouertee, do bread oftymes even
in the veraye body more grief, then delectacion. And contrariewise, what
things been most honest the same weaxen also most pleas^u^t, if a man have
been accustomed unto them.

He said yt it was a foul shame To be as a bond servant to the pleasures of
ye body
made himself such an one as no man would by his good will have to his
servant at home in his house. And in such persons he said that there was
nomaner hope of recovery, except yt others would pray to the gods for the^
that (for as much as they were utterly determined to be bond servants) their
fortune might be, to gea^ good and honest masters. For his opinion was, that
no persons do live in a more fylthy or beastely, and in a more wreched or
miserable state of bondage, then such as both in mind and body, been
captive to naughtee pleasures.

Socrates being demanded for what cause he would not bear some public
office in gouernyng the come^ weal sens that he could singlare good skyll how
to administre the same: To do bn^fite to a whole multitude.
answered, that person to do much better service in a cytee which did make
a great nou^bre of men apt and mete to be rewlers in a come^ weal, then
him that could well govern the same in his own person only. The self same
answer did Nicolaus Leonicenus make unto me in the cytee of Farrar^, Nicolaus
Leonicenus a physician in Italy.
when I said: that I meruailled why him self did not practice Physike, of
which facultee he was a doctor and a public reader: I auayll much more,
says he in that I teach all the other phisicia^s. William war^am arche
bisshope of Canterbury.
Nor a much unlike answer did Wylliam late archbishop of Canterbury the
synguler Mecaenas was a noble man in Rome and a great man with Augustus Caesar
and so great a faunurer, promouter, and setter fourth of Virgil, Horace and
such other learned men, that euersens his time, al those yt do notably
promote help or favor students or learned men, are of his ^^me called
Mecaenates.
Mecaenas of al my studies give unto me stiffely refusing to take a benefice
of his collacion and saying: with what face may I take to my use and profit
the money of those persons, to whom (as being a man ignorant of their
language) I can neither make sermons, nor do good in rebukynge of their
misbehaueour, nor in geuyng them cou^forte: nor yet in duly executynge any
part of the office of a good shephearde or curate As though ye do not more
good, quod he, in that by your books which ye have made and set forth ye
do enstruct and teach al pastors and curates, then if ye should bestow all
your time and service upon one sole parish of the country. I knowleged yt it
was on his party very fre^dely spoken, but yet he did not persuade me, ne
bring me in mind to take the benefice.

Being asked, by what means a man might atteigne an honest Honest name and
fame how it is to be perchaced and acquired.
If he earnestly apply himself, quod Socrates, to be such a man in deed,
as he desires to be accoumpted and esteemed. If a man would fayn be reputed
a good player on the recordres, it is necessary that he perform and do
such feats as he sees dooen of them, who been allowed for perfect good
players on that instrumente. As he that has very s^lendre sight in
ministrynge physike, is not therefore a phisycia^, because he is sent for to
take cure of pacientes, and has by the common voice of men the name of a
physician: so is not he by and by a good gouernoure in a comen weal, or a good
offycer, that is by the voice of the people so bruted, except he know also
the right facion and ways to re^le the city, and to keep it in good order.

The Art of gouernyng aco^men weal.
where as no man sets up any handyecrafte or occupacion without his great
shame and reproach which has not learned the same before, and where no man
will put to making a nest of boxes or a cupbourd full of almeries of Ioyners
work to one that never was a werkeman in that mystery: that to public
offices such persons should be admitted as have never given study to those
disciplynes without which no man may be hable accordyngly to execute a
public office And where as every body without excepcion would cry: fie on
him, that would take upon him to sit and hold the stie^ne in a ship,
having none experience in ye feate of marinershyp, Socrates said, that they
were much more to be cried out upon, which took in hand the regyment and
governance of a comen weal, being vnexperte of ye part of Philosophy which
gives precepts and rewles how to order a cytee or a commen weal. Neither
did Socrates suppose yt person worthy to be called a crafty beguiler of
men which of some foolysh body (persuaded thereunto) did receive and take
either money or some piece of plate which he were not hable to repaye, but much
rather those persons he pronounced worthy to be accou^pted deceytfull
bobbers of men, which by fraud and guil^ did make each manne believe yt they
were hable men to take upon them the rewle and governance of the whole
world, where as in deed they are but vilaines and slaves nothing worthy to
be had in estimacion. This saying much nerer touches christian princes,
officers and Bishops, then ye gentyles or infideles.

A true friend is an high treasure.
nor of any other thing in the world besides, to be found more good, profit
orels pleasure. And therefore, he said, that many persons do arsee versee,
They do ars^e versee that take ye loss of money moore grievously the^ the
loss of a friend.
in that they take the loss of a little money more grievously at the heart, then
the loss of a friend, and in that they cry out and say they have cast away
and lost a good turn being so bestowed that they have not as good again for
it, whereas by the same they have perhaps purchaced a friend more to be set
by then any gaynes of money in ye world.

As we do not put images to What mane^ persons ough^ to be received into
friendship.
but such as we perfectly know to have tried theimselfes feithful and
serviceable friends to others aforetymes.

Of a certain manne somewhat Socrates asked wherefore he was so vengeable eagre,
marie (quod the other) because this knave, whereas he is the greattest glutto^
and rauener of meats that may be, yet is he the most idle lubber alive and
whereas he is the most covetous feloe in the world, yet is he the most
slowethful that is possible to be. Many men punyshe in others the same
things in which their selfs are offenders.
Then said Socrates, have ye never yet unto this day cast well in your mind,
whether of both has more need of coylynge, ye, or or your servant.? Would
God, yt every body whenever they rebuke and punish in other persons
the same thing that they perdone in theimselfes, (or if not the same a much wurse
thing) would say to theimselfes that Socrates said to that manne.

Olympia, were certain games of rennyng and wrastleing, which Hercul^s did
first ordein in the honor of Iuppiter to be celebrate and kept ^uerye fifth
year, in a certain place called Olympia, situate and lying in ye country of
Achaia, between ye two towns Elis, and Pisa, in which Olympia Iuppiter had a
temple and was therefore called Iuppiter Olimpicus or Olympius.
Olympia, with the tediousnes of trauaillyng so far aiourney, utterly
discouraged, thus said Socrates: whereas being here at home thou walk too
and fro, ofteseasons in manner all y^ whole day, as well before dinner, as before
supper: if thou stretch ye walkynges that thou use at home, and lay them on
length by the space of five or six days together you shall easyly reach to
Olympia. This high witted manne did evidently show that thing that makes us
false herted in taking peines and labors, to be rather our imaginacio^ and
conceipte, then the very labors in deed. If any danger, loss or trauaill
must be sustained about any honest matters, we find excuses, we will none of
it, it stands clean against our stomakes, whereas in matters not worth a
blewe point (for I will not say in things dishonest) we will spare for no
cost: Thus some persons being invited and exhorted to fall to the study of
lettres, make their excuse that they be sickely, To take pein or trauaill in
honest matters each man fyndeth excuses.
that the^ can not sleep ne take their natural rest in ye nights, that
books are very chargeable: and yet in the mean time, they will play all the
whole night through at dyce they will with bollyng and drynkyng geat the feure,
the gout, the hydropsie, and a pair of blered iyes: Diseases of late
banquettyng and whorehauntyng.
they will with whoorehau^tyng catch the paulsey, or ye great pockes,
otherwise called ye french pockes.

An other certain manne co^plainynge Socrates asked, whether his boy had
been hable enough to keep foot with him all the way? he said, yea. Went he
leere (quod Socrates) orels charged with the charge of any burden? he carried a
good preatie pack on his necke^ said the manne. And what? does the boy
find any fault that he is werie, quod Socrates? When the feloe had said,
nay, and art thou not ashamed (said Socrates) of such nicenes, yt gooyng on
ye way empty and void of any burden, thou should be werie, sens that he
having carried a fardelle co^plaineth not of werines. Nicenes and tendrenes
makes men unapt to labor.
Socrates declared the servant in this behalf to be in much better case
then the master, that for as much as he was better e^ured with labouryng, he
feeled less gref^ of his labor.

Atheniens, (...), by the which wourde he said yt we were put in
remembreaunce that meat ought to be taken with such measure and sobrietee,
Repastes measurably to be taken.
as neither the body, nor the mind might be ouercharged. Alludyng (I
suppose) to this, that the Greek word, (...), souneth in english to be
carried, whereof is derived a nowne, (...) in english a carre. Albeit, (...) is
greek also for meat, and thereunto is added this syllable, (...), that upon the
body might not be laid a more heavy burden then it were well hable to away
withal. For this syllable, (...), in composicion of greek vocables betokens a
certain facilitee and co^modiousnes annexed to the thing. The^ (...) is to be
not over full gorged, but to be refreshed with a light repaste, such as the
body may easyly and without incommoditee away withal, taken by translacion
of the easy ladynge or burden of a carte.

He said that upon such children The better of birthe that a child is, the
better ought his bryngyng up to be.
ought to be bestowed virtuous educacio^, and good bryngyng up, as were best of
birth and came of the most honest parentage. For in such is comenly seen
(said he) the same thing that is seen in horses, among who^, such as been
coltishe or full of courage, and of kyndely towardnes, if they be broken in
season, and well taught eue^ while they be very young coltes, they grow to
be pure bonie ones, and applyable to do whatsoever a man will put them
unto: if otherwise, they weaxe ski^tishe past maisteryng, and good for no
purpose. And therefore it chances, that in manner all excellent goodly wits
be marred through defaulte of ^kylle in their teachers and bryngers up,
Excellent goodly wits marred by e^vil masters.
who even at the first dashe, of quick horses make^ very dulle asses, because
they ca^ no skylle how to master, haulte couraged stomakes, and such hertes
as will not be brought under, ne be made vila^^es.

as he made his oxen every day fewer and fewer, yet required in any wise to
be accou^pted a good cowheard: but yet a thing much more sta^dyng against
reason, if a man would desire to be reputed a good governor in a comme^
weal, when he daily diminishes the noumbre of his people. These words he
spoke aferre of against Critias and Charicles, Critias and Charicles, were two
of the thirty tyrannes in Athenes.
which had put to death many of the cytizens, neither was the same unknown unto
them. For Critias manaced and thretened him, that onelesse he chaumbreed his
tou^gue in season, there should ere long be one ox the fewer for him. And what
he thretened in words, he performed in deed. For by ye means of Critias was
Socrates put to death.

He had chosen out of the old Hesiodus was one: (...).
Idleness evermore worthy blame.
No kind of labor is a thing of shame,
But idleness evermore, worthy blame.
By this verse he did counsel young folks not only from idleness, but also
from all unprofitable or vn^ruyteful accions. Unfruitefull doings be as
eiuill as idleness.
For Socrates rekened them also in the noumbre of idle persons, which spent
all their time in dy^yng, in reuellyng or banquettynge, and in whoorehountyng.

Gellius and Laertius: (...).
That is. What ever is done each where about,
As Well within our house as without.
By this verse he did not only call back such as would give ear to him,
from buisie medleyng with other me^nes matters, To be ouerfull of medleyng in
every bodies matters.
but also from al kinds of learning being not necessary to be had: (as from
the exa^te knowlage of Astrology, or of geometry, or of natural causes, or of
things supernatural,) to the knowlage of moral philosophy, What goodness
ensues of the knowlage of moral philosophy.
the perfect intelligence whereof do^eth make, that we may thoroughly know our
selfs, and that we may govern and conueigh as well our own private matters,
as also the publyque affairs of the common weal accordyngly, and to good
purpose.

To y^ same purpose serves this Socrates, and is of great autoritee what is
above our reach, we have naught to do withal. Whatso is above our reach we
have naught to do withal.
For thus was he woonte to answer men, woondreyng why he would evermore be
reasonyng of manners and of good behaueour, but never of the sterres nor of
things gendred above in the aier, or of any Such natural effects as be
dooen nigh unto the sterres, or as ye (would say) above the reach of man's
familiare knowlage, are called in greek, (...), as for example: the generation
of mystes, haille, rain, sn^we, lyghtenyng, shootynge of sterres, openyng of
the aier, blasyng sterres, heggues that are seen in the feldes by night like
f^erbrandes, or torches, with such other things. Of the natural causes
producyng, and generation of which things Aristoteles, writes four books
and entitleeth them (...). But Socrates would never take upon him, to determyn
such things as were above the coumpace of man's familiar handleynge.
impressions there chauncyng.

When a certain feloe had of a him a spurn on the shynne, as he was gooyng on
his way in the street: to such as wondreed that he could pacientely suffer
it, why, what should I do (quod he?) when they counsailled him to take the
law on the feloe: A gentle ieste (said Socrates: Patiently spoken.
) If an Ass had given me a strype with his heel, would ye have said to me,
take the law on him? He thought no di^ference to be between an Ass, and a man behauyng him self like a brute beast, Between a beast and a man of
brutishe conditions there is no diference.
and ^ndewed with no virtue or honest qualitee, and to seem a thing much
against al reason, not to suffer at a man's hand, yt ye could find in your
heart to abide of a brute beasts dooyng.

Socrates therewith any thing disconte^ted. But his friends meruaillyng thereat,
and fumyug at the lewd facion of the feloe, he said as foloeth. If one should
pass by us that had some wurse disease in his body the^ we, none of us would
for that respect be angrye with him, The patience of Socrates, and anger well
refreined.
why then should I be displeased with this feloe, that has a more cancarde
stomach then I have?

Euripides came and brought unto Socrate^ a book of Heraclitus his writing and
making, Heraclitus was a philosophi^r, but he wrote so obscure and derke a
style yt sca^ely any man was hable to understand him, wherefore he was named:
(...) Heraclitus the derke.
which book perused, Eurip^des asked, what he thought of it. By Iuppiter
(said Socrates) that, that I have been hable to understand me thinks to be
ioyly good stuff, and of like goodness I suppose to be the residue also, which
I have not understand. But we have need of some young Marlian to expoune the
meaning of it. He ^yd in this saying (not without a shar^e taunte and poynaunte
check) note the obscure and derke style which the said writer with great
study and labor purposely sought to have: whereof in deed he had this name
given unto him (...), that is: Heraclitus the derke. Of ye proverb Delius
na^ator in ye greek proverb was called a cunnyng swymmer that could keep him
self still above water without peril of drounyng. And Socrates applied that
to the readers of Heraclitus books, meaning that except they were very
cunnyng they should soon be drouned and choked, that is to say: confused and
set at a stay with readyng the same.
Delius na^ator (for whom is here put Merlian) I have spoken at large in my
work of Greek and Latin proverbs entitleed Chiliades.

Alcibiades had by the way of free gift offreed him a fair large platte of
ground, Alcibiades was a young gentleman in Athenes, whose life Plutarchus
writes at large.
to build himself an house upon, what? (quod Socrates) if I had need of a
pair of shoes, would thou come and give me a piece of leather, whereof to
make my self a pair of shoes? And in case thou should so do, were not I
worthy to be laughed to skorne if I took it? By this similitude he re^used
ye gift which should stand him in no service. A gift that will do no
profit is to be refused.


side the abundance of wares yt were there to be sold, he used thus to say
to himself, how many things have I no need of. The frugalitee o^ Socrates
But others be sore vexed at their hertes, thus thynkyng: how many things
do I lack. Socrates was of his own behalf ioyeous and glad, that living
according to nature, and accustomed to the use of few things, he neither was
desirous to have, nor yet did lack, cloth of gold, of purple, precious
stones, iueraye, ares^e hangynges, and the other delices of rich men, which
he veraye many times said to be things more apt and fit for disguisynges
in stage plays, then for any service, use or occupiyng to the life of man
necessary. To which menyng he used these iambyque verses of a certain greek
poet whatsoever he was. (...)
(...).
That is This silver plate, and rich array
Of purple hew, does wondrous well
For disguisynges in a stage play,
Our life needs them not a dele.


He said that manne to be most like unto the Gods, which feeled lack of
fewest things, sens that the Gods feel lack of no manner thing at all. But
the common people thinks next cousyns or feloes to God himself to be rich
men, whose del^ces nothing is hable to satisfy. For of those is sa^ed in one
of the comedies of Terence, how ye lead your life in all ease and pleasure.
What persons liue^ in all ease and pleasure.
And that does Homerus attrybute unto the Gods whom in many places he
calls (...), ^iuyng in all ease and pleasure. And he lives in all e^se and
pleasure, yt with a veraye little is thoroughly contented and satisfied.

Frugalitee.
And to who^ no manner drink comes amysse, the same requires none other cup
but such as is ready in the way. Houngre and thirst, the best sauce for all
meats.
For hou^gre and thirste is for all things the best sauce in the world.

for every manne if he had any notable good things of his own, to name what
it was, whereas it was a veraye hard thing to name what true friends he had, No
possession so good as to have a tru^ frende^
and yet no possession to be more dear and precious or harder to come by, then
a true friend. In this saying, he checked ye preposterous and ouerth wart
judgment that the commen sort of people have of things, as the which
passes lest of that thing, which ought to be set by most of all. A body
thinks himself well emended in his substance and riches, to whom has
happened some good goubbe of money, and makes a great whynyng, if he have had
any loss of the same. The preposterous judgment of the common people in
estemyng things.
But he that has gotten a good friend, thinks himself in no more happy
state, then he was before, nor makes any mournful chere when he has lost a
friend.

Unto Euclides being veraye studious Euclides ye may percase match with
Sophistes at the first beginning were men that professed to be teachers of
wisdom and eloquence, and the name of Sophistes was had in honor and price,
and they were of the same estimacion and of the veraye same order, facultee and
science, that afterward were called Rhetores, that is Rhetoricians, yea and
also Logicians. For when the Sophistes fell to cauillyng, brableyng, and
triflyng, by little and little, their estimacio^ decayed, so that ere the time
that Socrates lived in, a Sophiste was a name of contempt and hatered, and so
is it yet still unto this day.
sophistes, but with men ye cannot have to do. Signifiyng that Sophistry
does no help, He that will live emonge men must frame himself to the
facions of men.
use ne service to doings in public affairs or bearyng offices in a commen
weal. Which public offices whosoever is a suitor to have, it behooves the same
not to play hieke skorner with insolubles, and with idle knackes of
sophisticacions, but rather to frame and facion himself to the manners and
conditions of men, and to be of such sort^ as other men be.

Science and cunnyng is ye only good thing of the world, and ignorance the
only eiuill thing.
and contrariewyse ignorance the only eiuill thing. For whatsoever persons
do commytte any unjust thing, the same offende^ in this behalf, that they
be ignorant what is to be dooen toward every party each in his degree. And
such as be ma^ful hardye, for none other thing be manfull hardye, but in that
they know those things worthy to ^ee sued for, and to be desired, which
the multitude demeth worthy to be abhorred. And such as be intemperau^t,
that is: foloers of their naughty ^ppetites and lusts, do in this point
err, that they think those things to be sweet and honest, which are
nothing so. Therefore the highest good thing in the world, said Socrates, to
^ee the science or perfect knowlage of things to be desired with her^e and
mind, and of things to be refused or avoided.

To a certain manne saying that Antisthenes the philosophier came of a mother
that was of the country of Thrace, and so by the way of reuilyng or despyte,
laiynge to the charge of the same Antisthenes tha^ he was a moungreell, and had
to his father a citezen of Athenes, but to his mother a woman of a barbarous or
saluage country: what? (quod Socrates) trowest thou that it had been possible
for such a ioyly man as Antisthenes to be born of a father and a mother being
both of the^m Atheniens? Noty^g the most corrupt manners of the Atheniens, The
corrupt manners of the cytee of Athenes in Socrates his time.
that much rather of a Thracia^ or o^^ Scythia^ ^ight issue an honest or
weldisposed manne, then of an Athenien: and of all the honestee that
Antisthenes had, he thought he might thank his mother.

Time of vacacio^ well spent is an especial good possession.
vacaunt time of leisure is one of the veraye best. But by vacaunt time of
leisure, he mened not slouggyng, loyteryng or slothful idleness, but to be
quiet from troubleous ruffleynges, and coumbreous buisynesse of the world,
and from the affectionate appetites pertour^yng and corruptynge the
tranquillytee of the mind.

The humilitee of Socrates.
as that he said, that he knew nothing, sanyng only this, that he knew no
thing. For he enquiered of every thing as though he were in doubt: not y^ in
deed he had no certain knowlage of any thing, but by this dryenesse, he did
declare his own modesty and softnes, and reproved the arrogancy of others,
who professed and openly took upon them that they were ^gnoraunte of nothing,
The arrogancy of Sophistes.
whereas in deed they knew nothing at al. Certain Sophistes did openly take
upon the^m, that they would at the first ^ight make answer to all manner
matters that should be laid before them or put to them: the presumptuous
ignorance of such persons did Socrates often times blanke and confou^d. And
for this very thing and none else (as himself took and expouned the matter) was
be by the voice or testimony of the God Appollo ^udged a perfect wise manne,
because that al^eit he had ignorance of al things like as other men had:
yet in this behalf he was above them, that he knowlaged his ignor^u^ce where
as the residue were unknowing of this thing also, yt they perfectly knew
nothing.

Laertius ascrybeth to him this Laertius is a ^r^ke autour that writes the
lives of all the ancient philosophers
to have well begoo^ne is a thing half dooen. For he said: yt he ^ad eue^ now
already finished half his work, who had ones entreed ^ begone. For some there
be, that in lyngreyng and driuyng forth and consultyng, spenden out all their
life, The saying is half a verse of the greek poet Hesiodus: (...).
Beginning, is half of the whole.


As grene geece strawberies, cheries, peason, quadlinges, damase^es, wynes^ etc
made ripe by art, ere they were full in season, at high prices, he said to
be in despair, lest they should not live until the same might be through
ripe. Except it be for such a respect a great folly it is, Folyshe haste and
nedelesse.
to bye such things both with more charge, and also the things being not
yet come to their goodness: but being wurse then shortly after they would be,
whereas within a while after they may have the same thyn^^^ both for less
money and twyse as go^^. Thus did he by all ways possible ^^ll back unto a
sobreindgeme^t the desirefull appetites and lusts of men, being void of
reason.

Euripides was in such wise treatyng of virtue, that he brought in these
words. (...).
These things, at adventure in this case
It is best of all, even to leat pass.
As though virtue might by no means possible be found out. Up stood Socrates,
saying: that it was a mad thing, whereas we think it labor well bestowed
for our slave, lackey or page, (if he be not found at the first seekynge)
still to make ferther enquierye until he be found out: to judge virtue
unworthy any such diligente serchyng, yt the same may at length be found
out Virtue, though it come not at ye first, yet by dilligent seeking at length,
it may be fon^d out.
if it come not to a man at the first assaiyng.

Being asked of a certain young To marrye or not to marrye, both iues bring
repentance.
whether of both thou do (said he) it will turn the to sorrow.

Signifiyng as well to live out of wedlock, as to live in matrimony, to have
disquietynges and vexacions a^nexed unto it, the which vexacions utterly to
endure, it was necessary to prepare the mind before. To living a single lif is
annexed solitarynes or lack of coumpaignie, The in commoditees of living out
of wedlock.
lack of issue, utter decaiyng and wearyng out of the name, a stranger to
enherite your gooddes and possessions after your deceasse. With matrimony
comes ^arefulnes without end, The in commoditees of living, in matrimony.
co^tynuall querelyng and complaynyng, to be cast in the teethe and to have
daily in your dishe the dourie that your wif brought with her, the sour
browbendyng of your wiffes kinsfolks, the tatteleyng toungue of your wiffes
moother, liars in a wait to make the cuckolde, the doutbful end or prouf and
vncertaintee what your children shall come to, with other incommoditees and
displeasures innumerable. And therefore in this case, there is no such
choosyng, as is between good and eiuil, but such, as is between lighter, and
more grievous incommoditees.

Athenes the prices of all things was very high for wine that was called
Chium should stand a man in xx. s. an hogeshed, Vinum Chiu^ of the Isle Chios
where it was made.
purple silk or crymasyn, Hemina was the half measure of Sextarius, which
Sextarius was the sixth part of agalo^ so tha^ Sextarius was less the^ our
quart and Hemina less then our pynte, at lestwise if ye galo^ measur among ye
Atheniense in old time were equal with the galon measure yt we use now.
woold cost after the rate of three pounds the yeard: a pynt of honey xx.d. He
took him by ye hand and led him into his boultyng house, saying, of this may
ye have a pynte for an half penie, therefore is corn nothing dear but cheap
enough. From thens ledyng him to his storehous of olives, of this (says he)
ye may have a quarte for two brass pens. And therefore not all things in ye
city be dearly sold.

He that is contented with a little, Where none excess is used al things are
good cheap.
and satisfied with things necessary, is as good as a clarke of the mercate
to make al things good cheap for his own use and occupiyng.

Archelaus king yt had called Socrates Archelaus king of Macedonie.
promisyng unto him many gaye things. Socrates made answer, Socrates refused
to take gifts which he was not hable to reco^pense.
that he would not come to him, of whom he should receive any benefits, se^s
that he was not hable to give him as good again. This saying does Seneca
improve, Seneca was a great ma^ne in Room, and a noble philosophier, school
master unto the Emperor Nero, by whom he was put to death, after yt he had
written many excellent goodly books of moral philosophy.
for yt a philosophier (says he) persuadyng the conte^pte of gold and
silver, gives a greater gift, then if he should give gold and silver.

Socrates was much high suite, of which of their gifts Socrates should have
this cloak. Socrates could lack nothing among h^s scolares.
And He yt gives a thing after yt it is asked, gives it over late.
yet who so ever gave it after that word spoken (as Seneca writes) gave it
over late.

Unfruitefull being from home in strange cou^tres.
had nothing auailled him: Not without cause (quod Socrates) has that chanced
unto the: For thou were in strange places still That is: vsyng ye same facio^s
which thou did at home.
accou^paign^ed with thyself. Many folks, think prudence to be gathered by
rouyng into far countrees, whereas Horatius cries out saying. Coelum, non
animum mutat, qui trans mare currit.
Who renneth over ^ea, from place to place.
Though he change aier, his mi^de is as it was.
The coumpaignie and conversation of wise and perfect good men, A ma^ne may
come home from beyond ye sea, as wise and as well learned as he went forth,
except he seek to use the coumpaignie of wise and learned men.
bredeth knowelage and experience of the world, not the mountains and the
seaes.

When he had caught a good The patience of Socrates.
he answered nothing else but that men had no knowelage at what seasons they
should come abroad with their salettes on their heddes. A thing much like to
this does Laertius father upon Diogenes.

He said yt he woondreed, where veraye like unto a lively creature, that they
did not sembleably provide, that them selfs might not both appear, and also
be in very deed like unto stones insensate. In deed, some writers there be
of this opinion, that Socrates, before he diuerted to spend his time in
philosophy was a werker of imagerie in stone. Socrates a maker of stone
images, before he went to the study of philosophy.
And that is the cause why he does make the most part of all his
similitudes by images of Maceons work.

Young folks, to vewe them selfs in a glass.
to the end, that if they were beautiful and of good feacture of body they
should beware to commytte nothing uncomely for the same: if otherwise, that the
defaultes of ye body might with exercise or furniture of the wit, and with
honestee of manners and behaueor be redubbed. The defaultes of ye body must
with honestee of manners, be redubbed.
So duly did that gaye manne (of al manner things) pro^ptely take occasion to
auise and exhort al persons to the earnes^ appliyng of virtue.

He had suddenly called two or Xantippe taking great care for the matter
because the provision was veraye scle^dre. Xantippe, was Socrates his wif y^
curstest que^ne that ever wetted cloute.
Take no discou^forte (said he) for if they be men of an housba^dlyke or
thriuyng sort, Honest geastes, taken all manner fare in good part.

The fourth apothegmata before of Socrates and this is in a manner all one.


and any thing sobre of diet, they will take it in good part: if otherwise, we
ought not to have any regard of any of them all. Both the one part and y^
other of this sentence might justly shake of from us all the curious and
chargeable pompeousnes and desire to excede, in receiuyng geastes to dinner or
supper.

He said, ye many persons do Some persons live only to be gluttons.
and that he contrariewise, did eat and drink, to the end that he might
preserve his lif. For that he used these things, not for se^sualitee of ye
body, Feed only to maintein life.
but for y^ necessitee of nature. This sentence did the poet thus express in
one of his satires word for word.

Non uiuas ut edas, sed edas, ut uiuere possis.
Live not as a glutton, still for to eat.
But feed to maintain life, by thy meat.
Socrates affermed to do even like, as if a ma^ne refusyng one piece of money
of four grotes, would not take it in paymente, and yet a great noumbre of like
refuse pieces cast in an heap together, he would allow for curraunt and receive
them in paymente. Whom ye would not trust by himself alone, He that is not to
be trusted by himself, is not to be trusted in a multitude, of such like as
he is.
is not one whitte better to be trusted in a great rabble of such like feloes
as himself is: for it forces not how great a noumbre they be, but how grave
and substanciall. A counterfaicte piece of coin, be it even in never so great
an heap, is a countrefaicte piece. This makes against the estemyng of
witnesses by the multitude of them and against the judgments of the commen
people being unlearned.

AEschines was afterward a greek orator, and at continual strif with
Demosthenes. His sayings foloe in thissame work.
AEschines sued to be one of the noumbre of Socrates his disciples and
scholares, and did shamefastly lay pouertee for his excuse, saying that it was
a great greef unto him, where the other friends of Socrates, being welthie,
gave unto him many great gifts, that he had nothing for to give, except his
own self: The gentle towardness of Socrates i^ receiuyng scholares.
dooest thou not understand (quod Socrates again) how great a present thou
have brought and given me, except percase thou estemest thyself at a low
price? The office of a good schole master.
Therefore I shall do my dilygence yt I may restore the home again to thyself
a better manne then I received the. Other Sophistes whereas they taught nothing
but mere tri^les, yet they would receive ne take not a scholare without a great
fee. But Socrates took this poor ma^ne, eue^ with as good a will as the great
rich gentlemenne.

When a certain person told Atheniens have judged the to death: Death, co^me^
to all persons though to some one way to some an other.
even so has nature dooen them, quod he again. Menyng, that it is no very
great shrewd turn, if a body be violentely put to death, assured naturally
to be dedde ere long after, although no man should slay him. Albeit
certain writers ascriben this saying to the philosophier Anaxagoras.

Better to dye an innocente then an offender.
ah my sweet housba^de, thou shall dye nothing guiltee, and without any
offense dooyng: what, wif (says he) had thou rather that I should dye an
offender? The death of good men, The death of good me^ne, is not to be
wailled.
even for this point is not to be wailled, that they be put to execucion
without deseruyng: A much more miserable thing, to have deserved punisheme^t,
the^ to have suffered.
but they been double worthy to be wailled for, which suffer death for
hayneous offenses, but yet of the two, a much more miserable thing it is, to
have deserved punishment, then to have suffreed.

Socrates should drink the In Athenes the facio^ was, that persons condemned
to death should drink^ te^preed with wine y^ juice of Hemlocke which is so
extreme cold that when the heat of the wine does suddenly conueigh it to y^
heart, it is veraye poison and death remediless. For ymmediatly shall the
extreme parts of the body (as the hands and fete) weaxe cold, and so by
little and little the cold draws to the heart, and as soon as it streketh to
the heart, there is no remedy, but death out of hand. Albeeit, if one drink
the same juice first by it self alone not tempreed with wine, there is remedy
enough. For if one drink a good draught of wine after it, the heat of the
wine shall overcome the cold of the herb and drive it from the heart and so
save the lif.
poison, one This Apollodorus was of Athenes a poet that wrote comedies, there
was another Apollodorus of the same city a teacher of grammar, there were also
four moo of the same name, but of other countrees.
Apollodorus (for to coumforte him by such means as he could) came and
brought unto him a rich robe of a great valor, yt he might have it on his
back at his diyng hour. But he refusyng the gift, what (says he) this robe
of mine own here, which has been honest enough for me in my life time, woll
it not be even like honest for me after I be departed out of the world?
Utterly damnyng the pompeous facio^ of some people, with woondrefull high
study, making provision before hand, that they may be carried to their
buiryall, and that they may be laid in their graves with all worship
possible.

To one bryngyng him word, of him: Unwrathfully spoken.
and gave him a very eiuil report. Marie (quod Socrates) he has not learned
to speak well. Imputyng his toungsore, not unto maliciousness: but unto the
defaulte of right knowelage. Neither did he judge to pertein to him, what such
persons talked on him, as do speak of a ca^cardnesse of stomach, They yt
give us eiuil report not of a judgment but of a ca^cardnesse of heart, are to
be contemned.
and not of a iudgeme^te.

When Antisthenes a philosophier Ciniques, Of ye sect of the Ciniques in
the same place.
did wear upon his back a robe with a great hole or rupture in it, and by
turnyng the same rupture outward, did purposely show it, that every body
might look upon it: through the rent of thy cloak (quod Socrates) I see thy
peignted sheathe and vaingloriousnesse: Feately notyng that vainglorie of poor
garments and coure clothyng, is much more shameful and abhomynable then of
gorgeous apparel or galaunt array. And would god there were not among us
Christian men many Anthistenes, Pride may as well be in sacklo^has in rich
array.
which under a rustie, a course, and a sluttyshe vesture hyden more pride and
ostentacion, then the rich gentlemenne have in their veluettes and fine silks
This was verified in England also until the deiuil had his Mounkes, Freeres,
Nuns, and other cloystreers again. The cloystres were full of pride, ambicion
and vain glory.


To a certain person woondreyng Unwrathfully spoken.
He railleth not on me (quod Socrates) for the things that he speaks are not
in me, nor take any hold on me. But the most part of people is even for this
very cause the more tes^ie and fumyshe, if aught be spoken against one having
not deserved the same. Good men when they be eiuil spoken of, are glad of
their own behalfes, that they be clear of those myschiefes, which are put
upon them and laid unto their charge, Good men rejoice yt they be clear of
such mischiefs as be put upon them.
nor do take it to be spoken against them: no not a whitte more, then if a
feloe being deceived in his yie sight, should call Plato by the name of
Socrates, and should call Socrates all that naught were, and speak all thee
mischief possible against Socrates: that feloe railleth not on Plato, but on
him who^ he supposes that Plato is.

The old comedy used commonly to make iestyng and scoffyng at the citezens by
name. And because there came muc^e strif and debate thereof a decree was made
that no ma^ne should be named to his reproach and that was called ye new
comedy.
The plain open speaking of who^, where many did fear, Socrates said, to be
expedient that a man should weetyngly and willyngly come in the presence or
way of them. For if they speak any thing against us (says he) worthy to
be rebuked, being told of it we shall emend it, and so they may in deed do
us good: but if they shall spowte raillyng, slanderous or reprochefull words
against, us and no truth in them it nothing touches us. Raillyng against us,
without truth nothing touches us.


Socrates after that he had within doors forborne his wif Xantippe a great
while scoldyng, and at y^ last being werie, had set him down without the
street door, she being much the more incensed, by reason of her housbandes
quietness and stillness, powered down a piss bolle upon him out of a wyndoore
and all berayed him. But upon such persons as passed by laughyng and having a
good sport at it, Socrates also for his part, The patience of Socrates.
laughed again as fast as ye best, saying: Meryly spoken and patiently withal.
Nay, I thought veraye well in my mind, and did easelye prophecy, that after
so great a thoundre would come a rain.

To Alcibiades greatly wondreyng Xantippe in his house, The patience of Socrates^
being such an unreasonable scoldyng brathel: I have (said he) now a long
season been so well enured with such manner gear, that I am therewith no more
offended, then if I should hear the squekynge of a wheel yt draws up water
out of a well. The scoldyng of brathels is no more to be passed on, the^ the
squekyng of well wheles.
For that manner squekyng, such persons may very civil abide, as have not
been accustomed unto it, Custom eases the tediousnes of incommodit^e^
and he that daily hears the same, may so well away with it, that to his
knowelage he hears it not.

Alcibiades saying a much like thing, why, even your self (quod Socrates) do
ye not patiently suffer at home in your house ye cacklyng of hens when they
make a clockyng? yes, I leat them alone (said Alcibiades) but my hens lay
me eggs, and bring me forth chekyns. And my sweet spowse Xantippe (quod
Socrates) brings me forth children. Wives must be suffreed for bryngyng
forth children.


Socrates to have kept in his house two wives at ones Myrtho and Xantippe.
Socrates had two wives at ones Myrtho and Xantippe.
Therefore to a certain manne greatly meruaillyng to what use he kept two
women at ones (especially being scoldyng quennes, ever chidyng and braullyng)
and did not beat or drive them out of his doors, thus he said: these women
do teach me at home within the house, ye patience and suffrau^ce which I must
use when I am abroad forth of doors. Being exercised before and well broken
with the facions of these two, I shall be the better and more gentle to live or
to deal withal, for ye coumpaignie of other men. The demaunder of this
question Aulus Gellius makes Alcibiades. Aulus Gellius, a Latin writer of
elegancies for ye Latin tongue and of other many preatie rehersalles and
dyscussynges of diverse things.


When Xantippe had pulled away her housbandes cope from his back even in the
open street, and his familiar Merely spoken and patiently withal.
gayly said (quod he) yea Marie, that while she and I be towzyng and topleyng
together, ye may cry to us, one, now go to Socrates, an other hold thine own
Xantippe. For with such manner words dooen the lookers on chere and herte^ two
parties matched and set together by the ears. But this wise ma^ne thought
better to show of himself an exaumple of paciente suffreaunce, then to show a
gase or sight for folks to laugh at, in stryuyng or co^tendyng with his wife.

Xantippe, The ge^tlenes and patience of Socrates.
being a woman of such conditions and facions, as no man might well away
withal or abide he said: that men ought in like manier to live with crabbed
and testi^ wives, as they that exercise and practice theimselfes to the feate
of being good horsemenne, Crabbed wives be compared to rough stieryng horses.
get horses of feerse stieryng natures and of rough co^dicio^s: which if
they have ones thoroughly maistreed and made to the bridle, and be hable at all
assayes to abide: they shall have al other horses as gentle and easy to rewle
as they can desire. And semblably he yt has learned to bear with ye facio^s
of a crabbed and testie wife, shall with much more ease be hable to cou^paignye
with all others, He that ^an abide a cursed wife, needs not to fear what
coumpaignie he lives in.
of what sort so ever they be.

Lysias had rehearsed and read over unto Socrates an oracion, Lysias was an
orator in Athenes and a friend of Socrates, and a ma^ne (as says
Quintilianus) of sweet and pleasant eloquence.
which he had made for Socrates to pronounce in the defense of him self before
the judges: It is a ioyly and an elegaunt oracion, said he, but it is nothing
convenient nor comely for Socrates. For it was more fit to be made of some
manne of law, Not all manner oracions will seru^ for almaner persons.
in pleadyng a court matter or a case in law, then to be pronounced by a
philosophier, and namely by such a philosophier as Socrates. Again to the same
Lysias demau^dyng, for what cause if he judged the oracion to be good, he
thought it to ^e inconvenient for him. Why (said Socra.) is it not a thing
possible, yt a garment, or a shoe may be galau^tly made and well facioned,
and yet the same not be mete for some bodies wearyng. This self same history
does Ualerius Maximus report after a more churlishe sort, and more unlike
to y^ manners of Socrates. For he reports Socrates, in this wise to have made
answer unto Lysias: Away with thissame I beseech y^ hertyly. For if I could by
any means be brought to pronounce this oracio^ from the beginning to the
endyng, eue^ in ye ferthest and vttermust wilderness of the barbarous country
of Scythia, then would I grant and yield

Boldness and trust on a man's weel dooyng, and on an upright conscience.
When they that sat in judgment upon Socrates could not agree among
theimselfes what punishemente Socrates was worthy to suffer Socrates even of
himself suddenly brake out and said: for the things that I have dooen, I my
self judge and give sentence, that I am worthy to have my fyndyng allowed and
assigned for term of life, out of ye chau^bre of the cytee, in the (...)
Prytanis in greek, was ye same officer yt w^^ call presidente of the counsel,
and chief or head of all ye rewiers Which office he that had in Athenes, had
assigned unto him, out of y^ ^ofers and chamber of the cyte^, an honorable, and
a great living in the Prytane^, that is to say: in y^ chief place of the tou^e
or castle of the cytee, where ye said head counsaillour had his lodgeyng and
dwelling place. That if it chanced any ma^ne to do unto the city some
singular and incomparable benefit, then had he a lords living, or an
honorable portion to live on, assigned out of the chaumbre of the cite^, and
was allowed with the presidente of the counsel, during his life, and this
was the highest honor that might be among the Greeks. And this did So^rates
claim, as one that with good enstr^ccion, and bryngyng up of youth in virtue
and good manners, and in right moral philosophy, had dooen as high benefit to
the commen weal, as did the chief counsaillours of the city, and that he
thereby had deserved as good and as beneficial^ a living as the best of them
all.
Pritanei. For yt honor was wont to be showed and dooen to such men as
had dooen some especyal gaye benefit, to the commen weal. Marcus Tullius in
the first book, entitled Marcus Tullius writes two volumes entitleed in
Latin, De oratore, that is of a perfect orator, which work himself ^ekeneth
the best that ever he made.
of a perfect orator, reherseth this history. There was (says he) in
Athenes, when any person was upon arainment condemned (if it were not by the
law a penaltee of death) as ye would say a set fine, and an ordynarie
forfeiete of money at the arbitrimente, pleasure, and discrecion of the judges,
when the party arained, or defend aunte was ones yielded into the hands of the
judges: he was asked what fine he would confess himself very well to have
deserved to pay. Which thing when Socrates was asked, he answered, that he
had well deserved, to be auaunced with very high honors and rewards, and to
have contynuall fyndyng for term of life, of the charges of ye city, freely
allowed unto him, which honor and preemyne^ce was esteemed and accoumpted the
highest that could be among y^ Greeks. With whose answer the judges were so
set on fire with anger, that they condemned to death ye most innocente
person of the world.

Socrates met full butte with Xenophon, when he espied him to be a young
strieplyng of rare towardness, and like to prove so well as few did, he held
out his staff, and charged him that he should not a foot ferther. As soon as
he stood still, Socrates asked of him, The autoritee of Socrates, in matters of
philosophy.
where soondrie wares were made and sold, that me^ne did commenly occupy, when
Xenophon had thereunto readyly and quickly shaped an answer: Socrates eftsons
demanded, in what place of the city, men were made good, honest and
virtuous, Few persons know or take heed, where virtue is to be learned.
when the young manne had answered, that he was of that matter ignoraunte: Then
come with me (quod Socrates) that thou may learn. From yt time forthward
begone Xenopho^ to be disciple and scholare unto Socrates. How Xenophon
became scholare unto Socrates.
It is a thing contrary to all good reason, to have knowelage, where thou
may be served of a welfauoured and clenly garment or of a fair cup, and
to be ignorant, where thou may purchase the good furniture of the mind and
soul, The furniture of the mind,
That is virtue and cunnyng.

On a certain time as he was Socrates, by thus dooyng? I procure my self some
cates for my supper (quod he) menyng of houngre, which he provoked with
chafyng up and down Marcus Tullius does set it out with these words: That
I may suppe the better, I do with walkyng procure houngre, One of y^ be^^
dishes at a supper is houngre.
for my chief cates and viandrie.

His saying was, that sweet savors Sweet savors and oils been more meet
for wome^ne then for men.
were to be leat alone for womenne, and as for in young men no sweet
saueoure to have a better smell, then the oil which they occupied in
exercisyng their bodies at ye prouyng of maisteries, or at work. For with oil
of bau^ne or of spike, a slave and a gentlemanne, have both of them by and by
one manner sauour^ The sweet savors, meet for men.


Of what savor it is comely for aged men to smelle.
of honest and virtuous disposicion (quod he) then being eftsons asked, where
pouma^dres there of were to be sold: Xenophon among other books writes one
which he entitleeth (...). that is the banquet.
he rehearsed this verse of the greek poet Theognis. (...).
Of honest men, wheresoever they be.
ye may at all times, learn honestee.
Diverse sentences of this sort, Xenophon beapeth together in his ba^quet.

Socrates, for to examyn and try his towardness, and the tutour that had
been the brynger up of the same from his childhood, had said in this wise: the
father of this ladde has sent him unto you Socrates, that ye should have a
sight of him: by and by said Socrates to the child: speak some what then,
good soonne, that I may see the. Signifiyng that the disposicion of a ma^ne
does not show so clear in his face or visage as in his talkyng, A man's
talkyng does more clerelye show his conditions then does his face.
for this is the most sure and true glass of the heart and mind, and fewest
times liyng.

He said that ye woman kind, if The woman sex is no less apt to learn al
manner things then men are.
to take as well allmaner disciplines or facultees of learning, as also allmaner
virtues moral, yea eue^ fortitude and hardiness, which as though it should
proprely appertin only to men and not to women, is called by the greek
vocable (...), (...).
in englisshe, manhood, Manhood.
or mannely hardynesse. This did he gather by the sight of a maiden that was a
dauncer and a tumbleer, who being brought in where coumpaignie sat at a
table, did with woondreous slight and conueighaunce cast up and receive again
one after another, twelf trendles or rowndelles, the space of the height, and
the measures of footyng the dance so tempreed and proporcioned, that she
never myssed. And the same maiden where the lookers on quaked and trembled for
fear, daunced without any fear at all among sweardes and knives, being as
shar^ as any thing.

Socrates being bidde^ to a supper by one Agatho was gooyng with trick voided
shoes on his fee^e^ Agatho was a young gentlemannne of Athenes of excellent
beauty and favor.
and perfumed with sweet savors, and that contrary to his accustomed usage:
when he was asked of a friend of his that met him on the way, why he was more
net and piked at that season, the^ he had used to be aforetymes? he said
meryly in this wise: that to such a mynion feloe as Agatho is, I may go
trymme net and well beseen. Where in deed there was no man alive, that had
less mind or fancy to such things.

Socrates should drink the poison, when he after ye strykyng of, of his
shacles or fettres, had feled great pleasure of clawyng where it itched, he
said to his friends: how woondrefully is it of nature ordained, yt these two
things do by course foloe either other, pleasure, and greef: Pleasure and
pein, by course folowen either other.
for except peine and greef had preceded or gone before, I should not now have
feeled this pleasure.

Of the under gailloure deliueryng The poison yt Socrates should dye of he
called a medicine.
he demanded, how that medeicine was to be taken? forasmuch as ye same
officer was well practiced and could good skille in that science. Alludyng to
the sick folks, Alludyng to y^ sick folks, that is: vsyng such words and
terms, as if the gaillour had bee^ a phisician, and he a sick manne and the
gaillours pacie^te.
who do learn of the phisicia^s when and how it is best to receive a
medicinable drink that they have made. And when the seruannte had answered,
that he must up with it all at a draught if he could, and that after it he must
walk up and down so long until he feled such weakness and feblenesse that
he should draw his legs after him, and that after this he must lie him down
in his bed upright upon his back, and then y^ drink would wercke his woonte
effect: Socrates enquiered, whether he might not leefully pour out some part
thereof in the way of sacrificyng and taking assaye to the Gods, because in
merry dyners, suppers and banquettes it was the guise and facion (a little
quantitee of the wine poured out) to sacrifice the same in the way of assaye to
some God by name (which was called in greek (...), In feasts and dynners, the
guise was to power out a little of the drink in the way of sacrifice, and
taking assay to some one of ye gods.
and in latin, Libare) The officer au^swered, y^ he had tempreed so much and
no more as was requisite for the purpose, menyng by those words, that there
was none thereof spare to be poured out. The^ said Socrates, well, yet is it
both leefull, and alsoo requisite to beseech the Gods that this my passing
out of this world may be happy and fortunate^

Crito (quod Socrates) we be now endebted to y^ God Aesculapius of a cock,
Aesculapius the soonne of Appollo, the first inue^tour and practiser of
Physic. Whom for ye science the antiquitee, honored as a God and such as
recovered from any discease did sacrifice unto Aesculapius a live cock. But ye
poets do fable that he was slain, with lightenyng of Iuppiter, because he
had with his cunnyng of Physike restored Hippolytus again to life.
which duly to pay, in no wise be ye negligente. Even as though he had upon
the taking of a medicinable drink, perfectely recoured again all his health.
For Crito was an honest citezen in Athenes, and a true friend unto Socrates,
and the other as good, and as loving a friend again to him in all points, of
mutual familyarytee.
Crito had before dooen all that ever he might possible do, yt Socrates should
make means to save his life. And in Socrates there was so rooted a certain
vein of honest merynes, eue^ naturally given him in his cradle, yt he could
jest and speak meryly even at the hour of death, for these are reported to
have been the last words that ever he spoke.

He taught that the beauty of ye The beautee of minds, is more to be loved
then the beautee of the bodies.
and that the same pleasure which a welfauored face when it is looked on does
engendre in us, is to be translated and removed to the beauty of the mind
far excedyng the other in fairness, albeeit liyng hyden from the bodyly
yie. But to have a sight thereof, philosophical yies to be requisite and
necessary. He noted the greek vocable (...) to be of significacion
indiffere^te to kissyng or loving, of which two things the former pertains
to them that do carnally love the body, the other t^ such as do
verteously love the mind.

Crito after a very earnest facion counsaillyng and auisyng him, that if he
for his own part passed not on his life, yet at lest wise he should preserve
the same, and continue in his former good state and condition, for the respect
of his children being even then but little babes, and for his friends sakes
which had all their stay in him. As for my children (said he) God, who gave
them unto me, shall take care. Socrates dyed in perfec^e securytee.
And as for friends, when I depart from hens I shall find either like unto
you, An holy kind of dying, in a gentile or heathen manne.
or else better then ye be, and yet I shall not long be defrauded of the
cou^paignie of yourselfes neither, forasmuch as ye are like shortly to come
to dwell eue^ in the self same

Those persons, which do bear carnal love only to the body, Socrates
affermed to be much like unto physicians that be ever need^e, Honest and
virtuous love.
and that still do call on their pacientes ymportunely crauyng one thing or
other. And again those that be honest friends, rather the^ carnal lovers, to
be like unto persons possessyng and having land of their own, The difference
between a carnal lover and an honest friend.
which they contynually studied and labored to make better and better. A
carnal lover seeks to satisfy and to fulfill his beastly or bodyly pleasure.
A true and honest friend having none yie nor respect to his own person,
thinks himself so much the richer, how much the more honest and virtuous he
makes his friend to be.

Sittyng at the table at meat in Xenophon his house, every one of ye geastes
being bidden to tell in what occupacion and craft, or in what good property
or feacte that he could do, he liked himself best when the course and turn
to speak came unto Socrates, he said in the way of iestyng, Lenociniu^.
the best thing that he could brag or crake of, to be lenocinium, Ue^iue
principally above all things purchaceth to manne beneuole^ce and love.
which souneth in english enticyng and alluryng, of such sort as is used in
houses of bawderie. But the menyng of Socrates was, that he taught true and
sincere virtue, which does specially above all other things commend and
set out y^ hauer: and the which as well privately as in y^ open face of ye
world does purchase unto manne benevolence and love.

The art and profession of physiognomiers.
and by ye proporcion and setting, or coumpace of the face or visage, to be
hable infallibly and without myssyng to find out and judge the natural
disposicion of any manne,) when he had well vewed Socrates, gave plain
sentence, that he was a lowtishe feloe, a dulle blockehed, besides that also
much given to the wanton love of women, Of what nature and disposicio^
Socrates had been, if he had not given himself to ye study of phylosophie.
foul steyned with the filthy concupisce^ce and desire of boys, a great
boller of wine, and a vicious foloer of all naughty appetites and lusts of ye
body. And when the fr^ndes of Socrates, being brought in a high fume,
thretened the feloe, and would have been upon him, Socrates kept them back,
saying: he has not lied one whytte, Philosophy altreeth, and clean changes
nature.
I should have been such an one in all points in veraye deed, if I had not
committed myself unto philosophy to be governed, and kept in better stay.

When Aristippus, the disciple of Socrates, Aristippus first of all the
schoolares of Socrates, set up teaching of phylosophie for money.
had of his gaynes, of setting up the teaching philosophy for money (which
thing he first of all the scholares of Socrates, did set up and begoonne to
do) had sent twenty pounds unto his master: Socrates sent ye money back
again unto him forthwith, allegyng, yt his familiare good angel would in no
wise suffer him, to take it. For Socrates ^a^ed, that he had a familiare
ghost, The famyliare ghost or au^gel of Socrates, called in greek (...), in
Latin, Genius.
or angel peculiare and propre to himself, of whom he was by a privy token
forbidden, if he attempted, or went about to do any dishonest thing. Uerayly,
that familiare good angel, I suppose, was reason. Socrates allowed not yt an^
manne ^h^uld take money for teaching virtue, and esteemed money so gotten to be
sacrilege.
And in ye mean time unto Arist^ppus he did after a gentle sort signify
himself not to allow, n^ to think well dooen, that he kept a school of
moral phylosophie for money, and therefore the same gift of his, as a thing
gotten by plain sacrilege he utterly refused, and would none of it.

Euthydemus returnyng and coming away from the wrastleyng place, Euthydemus
one of the familiare friends of Socrates in Athenes, and a phylosophier.
Socrates, when he had met with him by chance, brought home to supper with
him. And as the^ two were studiously disputyng and treactyng of many things,
Xantippe being therewith veraye angrye, arose up from the table, and spoke many
byttur words of co^tumelye and despite against her housbande, The
cancardnesse of Xantippe.
with which words, forasmuch as he was nothing moved at last she typed ye
table over and over and floung down all that ever was upon it. But when
Euthydemus being therwithall very sore moved, arose and begone to depart,
why, The pa^ience of Socrates.
what harm have ye (quod Socrates?) Did not even this self same thing chance
at your own house the last day, that a hen mountyng, cast down all things
that were on the table? yet did we your geastes then, not one whitte fume at
the matter.

When in the comedy of Aristophanes Soc^ates ^ore railled at by name, in y^
comedy of Aristophanes entitleed, ye clouds, or, mystes.
he was with many and bittur words of raillyng and defamacion, as ye would
say torn, and mangleed in pieces: and one of the coumpaignie standing by,
said, does not this go to your heart Socrates? The patience of Socrat^s.
By Iuppiter says he again, it greueth my stomach nothing at al, if I be
snapped at, and bytten with merry tauntes at the staige where entreludes are
played, no more then if it were at a great dinner or banquet, where were many
geastes. The custom of diverse places^ to have iesters and s^offe^s ^^solemne
feasts.
This custom and usage, even yet still endures among ^ertain of the Germans,
(yea and in England also) that in feasts of great resort, there is brought
in for the no^es some iestyng feloe, that may scoff and jest upon the geastes,
as they sitten at the table, with the which iestyng to be stiered to anger, is
accou^pted a thing much contrary to all courtesy or good manner.

enough. By this saying he did allow moderate exercitacions of the body,
especially after meat taken: Moderate exercitacions of the body allowed by
Socrates, and the contrary disallowed.
and e^ercises any thing buisie or full of stieryng ^e disallowed.

Unto Socrates, somewhat sharply Plato said: Had it not been better, to have
told him these things aparte out of coumpaignie? To who^ Socrates said again:
Meryly spoken, and nippyngly withal.
And should not ye also have done better, if ye had told me this aparte out of
cou^paignie between you and me? He meryly and sharply withal taunted Plato^ as
y^ which in rebukyng him did commit the veraye self same fault, that he
rebuked. In rebukyng another, to commit theselfe same fault, yt one rebukes.


Socrates as he sat among coumpaignie at this table (quod Socrates) which of
you uses his bread in stead of his meat, and meat instead of his brea^e?
Immoderate and gredie eating, rebuked by Soc^ates.
A disputacion hereupon arisynge among the coumpaignie: (For, it is not I, quod
one, and it is not I, quod an other,^ the young manne perceived ye matter, and
blushed as read as fire, and begoonne more leasurely and moderately to feed
and eat of the meat.

The chief virtue of young men, not to eagerly to attempt any thing.
that they do not (says he) over fervently or angrely attempt, assaye, or
entreprise any thing. For the feruen ^n^^^e of tha^ age being as hot as
^oles, will not suffer them to keep a meane^ Terence a latin po^te, a writer
of comedies, ^ in the first comedy, entitleed Andria. Simo having espied, that
his son Pamphilus, had fallen in love with a single woman, named Glyceri^,
talks of the matter, with his late servant Sosia, and in process of
communicacion, where Simo would have Pamphilus, not to far to proceed in
wanto^ love of paramou^es, no by saint Marie, says Sosia, for this I think
in the life of man to be as good a thing as can be, that he attempt not, ne
entreprise any thing ouermuche.
To this thing had Terence anyie an^ respect in the young manne P^mphilus

Letters or writing (which the Socrates said to be veraye hurtefull to the
memory. Whether lettres or writing do help the memory, or^ls rather hurt
the same.
For in old time, me^ne (if they had heard any thing worthy to be known)
they wrote and graued the same, not in books, but in ye heart and mind. And the
memory by this confirmed and made steadfast, The exercise of ye memorie^
they kept in their remembrance whatsoever they were willing, and what every
man perfectly knew, he had always ready with him at his fyngers ends.
Afterward, the use of writing being ones found out, After ye feacte of writing
ones found out me^ne trusted more to their books, then to their memories.
while men put all their affiaunce and trust in books, they were nothing
like earnest to enprinte in their mind, such things as they had learned. By
that means it came to pass, that the exercise of memory neglected and
nothing passed on, the knowelage of things was nothing so quick nor fresh as
it had been, and each manne knew still less and less. So much ^ no more
does every of us know, as we have suerlye enprinted in our memorie^
For so much and no more does every of us know, as we have fast enprinted,
and do keep in our memory.

When the time of his diyng drew fast upon him, being asked of Crito, how his
mind was to be buiried: The solle passet^ out of this world more swy^tly
then any byrd ^lyeth.
o my friends (quod he) a great deal of labor have I spent in vain. For unto
Crito your friend and mine I have not yet persuaded, yt I shall more swiftely
then any bird fly from hens, and not leave behind me here any part or
portion of me. Yet nevertheless Crito, if you shall be hable to overtake me, or
if you shall in any place come by me or geat me buirie me eue^ how so ever to ye
shall seem best: but believe me, not one of you al shall overtake me, when I
shall be departed from hens. The solle is ye ma^^^, and the bo^ye the tabernacle
of ye solle.
Socrates mened the solle to be the manne, and the body to be nothing else
but the instrume^te or tabernacle of the solle, To take care how to be
bu^ried is folysh (...).
and therefore those person^s to do like fools yt take care or thought how to
be buiried.

Socrates was woonte to say that death is like to sound slepyng. Death is like
unto sound slepyng, or to being in a strange country.
And of this, we call in english a sound sleep, a dedde slepe^ orels to a long
pilgrimage, yt is to say, long being in a strange country, from whens at
length to return home again. That ye solle shall at length return again into
ye body, not only shall be at the general resurreccion according to our
belief, but also was the opinion of Socrates, of Plato, and of their disciples
albeeit after another sort.
Ueray sound slepyng takes away for the time all operacion of the bodily
senses, and the solle being departed away from the body, shall at length
return again into his tabernacle, that is to say

The Same used also many times to say, that if the universal calamitees of all
men should be gathered all in an heap to gether, If the universal
calamitees of al men were in an heap egually to be distributed, each manne
would rather take his own again, then eguall portion with all his feloes.
and ymmediately to each manne severally by himself should be distributed
eguall porcions out of the same heap, it would come to pass, yt each manne
would rather choose to receive his own former calamitees again, then eguall
portion with his feloes out of the common heap. This makes against the commune
manners and guise of me^ne, who grutche and repine at the state and condition of
others, and whyne contynually at their own.

He learned to play on the harp after y^ he was well stricken in age, and
that, among children. And unto such persons as meruailled at the same as a
thing very vnconuenie^te and foolyshe, he said, that it was no shame nor
folyshe thing for a man to learn those things of which he were ignorant. It
is no shame for a man to learn that he knows not, of what age soever he be
For it is turned to no man's rebuke to procure and geat such things, as he
has need of, if they be wa^tyng, neither in this behalf is to be regarded a
man's age, but his need.

To have made a good beginning, is no small portion of the work do^^.
is not a little, but next cousin to a little, orels thus, to make a good
beginning, is not a little, but a little more. The greek words run thus,
(...), which he y^ translated Laertius out of greek into latin, has
inter^reted in this sense: that to make a good beginning, is not a small matter,
but a very great thing. Albeeit the words of Socrates do express an
other sense in manner contrary. But he meneth (if I be not deceived) that, to
make a good beginning, is not a little matter in very deed, but to be little
esteemed, orels to make a good beginning, not to be a little, but to be next
door ^y a little, or next cousyn to a little. For men ought to begin things
fair and soltely and to proceed by little and little, The more have ye wurst
speed.
because that such persons as do make most have in y^ beginning have
co^munely (according to our english proverb) wurst speed toward y^ endyng.
So that he alludeth unto the poet Hesiodus, who bids, that we shall add a
little to a little. The quickenes and pith of the saiy^g rests in the greek
vocables (...), and (...), No nor yet in english neither. Albeit I think the
saying of Socrates to have this sense and menyng, that to have made a good
beginning or entreau^ce, is not a little but a little more, or a degree ferther
then a little. That is to say: as good a forth deal, and advantage toward
the end of the work, as if a good porcio^ of the same were already finyshed.
For according to our english proverb, a thing well begoonne, is more then
half dooen. For who so has ones made a good beginning of his work, shall
easily bring the same to such end, and to such pass and effect as he would
do. As for alludyng unto Hesiodus (as Erasmus here takes it.) I suppose
Socrates mened nothing so, at lest wise, in this present saying. For in
Hesiodus is no such word as (...). Which Erasmus interprets, Iuxta
pusillum, besides a little, and (...), is an aduerbe signifiyng, Fere poene, yt
is in english: almost, or welnigh, so that the saying of Socrates may
purporte this sense, and be thus interpreted, to be ones entreed, is not a
li^le begoonne, but the whole matter welnigh dooen.
and the same cannot well ^ee expressed in latin.

(...).

What geometry Socrates would to be studied and labored.


and also to give out or deliver ground by measure. I suppose he mened, yt
men ought not to purchase, but lands and possessions moderate, which it
might well stand with a bodies ease and commoditee, both to receive of his
ancestors, and also to leave to his heirs. For over great possessions of
lands, as they be not purchaced ne gotten without much a do, so they come
to the heirs hands not peaceably nor without great trauerse. The quickenes and
pith of the saying consists in the greek word (...), Over great
possessions are inco^modious both to the owner and to his heir.
which in significaconn is indifferente to the art of geometry, and to
meters of lands or ground in a field. Yea, and also in the greek word
(...), that is, by measure. For he would men's purchaces not to extend beyond
the coumpace of sufficiency, Purchase of lands ought to be moderate.
but to consist within ye bounds of mediocritee. Whereby he reproved y^
insatiable desire of men to have possessions infinite. Albeeit, this saying
cannot well be expressed to have any grace in y^ english toungue.

regard and estymacion at what time the thirty tyrannes had invaded and
usurped ye governance of the communeweale: In Athenes y^ comenweale was
governed by the co+^men^, til y^ in So^rates time, thirty tyrannes usurped and
took upon them, the regimente which tyrannes were afterward destroyed by the
policy of one Thrasibulus Of the noumbre of those tyrau^tes were Critias and
Charicl^e, of who^ is made mencio^ afo^e in the twe^tieth saying of Socrates.
why, have thou dooen any thing (quod Socrates) yt greueth thy conscience or
repe^teth ye? Menyng, that it is not to be taken in y^ evil part, if a man
be despised or made an abiecte by dishonest and naughty disposed feloes: and
that no person ought for any such cause to myslike himself: but if ^e have
dooen some fault trespa^e, or offense wherefore he should justly encurre the
displeasure and indignacion both of himself, and of other honest men. For to
be myslyked of e^uill persons, is a point of high praise and commendacion.

When him seemed that one sai^d Homerus (...).
On the third day, next after this,
Come to Phthia, and do not mysse:
he said unto Aeschines, Socrates knew and said that he should dye, three
days before by a vision and voice yt he had in his sleep.
this day thr^e days shall I be a dedde manne. Interpretyng and expounyng
the verse of Homerus for an annswer o^ declaracion of Gods will and
pleasure, and the thing came even so to pass. Phthia a city in the country
of Thessalia the region of Achilles.
Phthia was a city in y^ regio^ of Thessalia, y^ co^tree of Achilles, was the
soonne of Peleus king of Thessalia, and of Thetis daughter of Chiron, the most
puissaunt and valiant warrice that was among all the kings of the Greeks, at
the battaill of Troie.
Achilles. And the fren^des of Socrates did what they could to persuade unto
him, that he should flee into Thessalia, because he had there many good friends.

The rewle to live by for y^ wife, is her housbande, if he be obedient to the
lawe^ public
is the housbande^ which wif lives well and uprightly, if her housbande, be
obedie^te to the laws public of the Realm.

He that hastes toward virtue must anoyde the naughty pleasures of the
body, as he would y^ mo^stres of ye sea.
ought none other wise then the Mermaides of the sea called Sirenes, to be
passed by and eschewed of any person y^ makes haste in his way toward
virtue, as though after a long journey had gotten at last a sight of his
country. He alluded unto the fable of Ulysses, who stopped his ears with
wax, and by that means in sailling, passed away by the m^nstres of the sea
called Sirenes (in english mermaides / when he had after his return from
Troie ^nes espied the smoke of his country Itacha mouniyng into the aier out
of the chymneyes. The po^tes fables saien y^ Sirenes, were these three,
Parthenope, Lygia, and L^^cosia, daughters of the floodde A^helous, and of
Calliope one of the nine Muses, and that they had their abydyng in a certain
Is^e between Italy and Sicilie, and by the swet^nes of their syngyng, the^
allured passengers on the sea, and when the^ had them, slew them. Wherefore
U^ysses returnyng from Troy, to Ithaca his country, stopped the ears of all
his coumpaig^^e with wax, and caused himself to be fast bound to the m^st of
the ship, and so escaped from the Sirenes, as Homerus write^h. And the
Sirenes for anger and sorrow that they were so despised, ^umbleed hedlong into
the sea and do still remain there.


When he heard the dialogue of Plato entitleed Lysides, Socrates of an
hu^blenesse of mind would not knowlage the lands and praises that Plato
attributed unto him.
reade^, oh lord in heaven (says he) how many lies the young manne forgeth on
me. B^t^er for tha^ of his ^umilitee and lowelynes he would not knowelege the
lauds and praises which Plato did attribute unto him, orels because he
feigned many things on Socrates in tha^ dial^gue.

Aeschines, who was sore oppressed with pouertee, (...) How an eiuill housba^de
may borowe money of him self to get afor^hande.

Magnum uectigall persimonia.


he used to give warning and auise, that he the said Aeschines should borowe
or take usury of his ownself, and moreover showed the ways how, that was, by
abatyng of his sumptuous fare at his table. According to the proverb: good
housbandrye and sparyng in an house, is a great penie rent of yearly revenues.
Good housbandrye is a great^ y^rely reu^n^e to an householder.
The most ready way to increase a man's richesse, is to abate of his
^harges. And (as our english proverb says) house keepyng is a prive thief.

Being asked concerning Archelaus Perdicca, Archelaus ye son of Perdicca.
who at y^ season was esteemed a very valiant and hardy manne, whether he
judged him to be in perfect bliss, or not: I cannot tell (says he) I never
had communicacion with him. And to the other party then saying, after that sort
or manner ye may as well doubt of the king of the persians whether he be in ye
state of perfect felicitee, or not: yea what else (quod Socrates) forasmuch as
I know not how well learned he is, or how good and how honest he is. Socra^es
measured the blissefulnes of a ma^ne by the very true good qualitees and
virtues of the mind. The state of blissefulnesse of a man consists in the
virtues of y^ mind and not in worldly things.
This does Cicero report and cite in the fifth book of the Tusculane
questions, out of the dialogue of Plato entitleed Gorgias.

THE SAYINGS OF ARISTIPPVS.
Next after the master I think most congruente to set his own scolare, yt
was both in age and time first and in autoritee chief of all the others^ that
is, Aristippus: Aristippus a phylosophier of an excelle^te wit and of
singular dexteritee: y^ first and chief of of all the disciples of Socrates.
Who taught phylosophie for money, as is aforesaid. The disciples and foloers of
Aristippus were called after his time, Cyrenaici, because he came to Athens out
of y^ country.
then whom, among all the philosophiers, there has not been any one eith^r of
a more apt or ready and prompte wit in conueighaunce or castyng of things,
and more agreeable to all manner states, sorts or facions of living, orels in
his sayings more merieco^ceipted, within the bounds of honestee, or more
pleasant. Albeeit he seems not to have showed that holiness of manners, and
behauour in living which all men do honor and highly esteem in Socrates.

Aristippus and Diogenes ye Cynike, there was much good cockyng, Between
Aristippus and Diogenes was much good cockyng and emulacion.
and striuyng, whether of them should win the spurs, and bear the belle,
because they were of two sondrye and in manner contrary sects, trades, or
professions of living. Diogenes called Aristippus the kings hounde, because he
was a daily waiter, and gave co^tynuall attendaunce in the Court of Dionysius
the Tyranne of Sicilie. Against whom Aristippus on the other side used to say:
Aristippus one of the court with Dionysius the Tyranne of Sicilie.
If Diogenes could behave himself to be familiare with kings and daily about
them, he should not need to eat raw or grene herbs. Then Diogenes again
countreyng, The countreyng of Aristippus and Diogenes.
said: If Aristippus had learned to be contented with raw herbs, he should
not need to be the kings hounde.

When he had on a time commanded A Drachme was about ye value of a ^ro^e
s^erlyng or somewhat more.
or there about, unto a certain person detestyng and crying abominacion on
such riotous superfluitee or prodigal excess in a philophier: why eue^ thou
thyself (quod Aristippus) if ye price of a per^rige were an halfpenie, would
not thou bye of them? when he had answered, yes: And even as much and no
more do I set by a merke and fowertie pens (said Aristippus) as thou dooest
by thy halfpenie. Aristippus despised gold ^ silver.
The Same thing that the other judged to be an ab^minable point of riot,
excess, and prodigalitee: Who so is driven from byyng, by reason of the high
price, sets not little by y^ thing, but sets ^uch by the money.
the philosophier turned an other way, to the land and praise of despisyng
money. For who so is by reason of the costlinesse or high price feared and
driven away from biyng, the same does not set little by the meat, but
sets much by ye money. But to the estimacio^ of the philosophier, no whitte
more i^ valor were fifty drachmes, then to the other feloe an halfpenie. A
right philosophier despises money.
Then^ Ar^st^ppus being in the desirefulnesse of that cates, nothing wurse
then y^ other feloe, in y^ conte^pte of money, was far better.

Dionysius had brought forth before him, three beautiful young damyselles of
light conversation, biddyng him to choose one, which soever he would of the
three: Aristippus laid hand on them all, and took them to him, saying:
When Eris, ye goddess of of strife and co^tencion, had trilled along ye table
(where all the goddesses were at a banquette assembleeed) a golden aple with this
poysee written or engr^ued about it. Be this given to the fairest. Juno,
Pallas, and Uenus, all th^^e claymed to have the said aple. After much
striuyng in presence and coumpaignie of all the gods. In fine, Iuppiter sent
Mercurius with the same three goddesses and the aple, unto Pari^ the soonne of
Priamus, then king of Troie, who adjudged the aple unto Uenus, which Uenus
promised him in reward, that he should have the fairest lady that was on the
earth of all mortal creatures, and that was Helena, the wife of Menelaus, then
king of Lacedeamon, whom the said Paris stole from her housbande, and
conueighed to Troie And for her begoonne the battaill of Troie, whereof ensued
not only the utter destruction, extermynacion, and death of him and of all his
blood, but also the subversion and desolacion of the noble city of Troie,
which the Greeks burned, not leauyng so much as one house standing.
that Paris of Troie had found it a thing not a little to his peine, yt of three
ladies, he gave preemynence to one, before the other twain. And so be brought
them all three unto the court gates, and there took his leave of them and
suffreed them to depart, no less ge^^le, quick and read^e in abandonyng,
then he had been before in embracyng

Strato, or after other writers, Plato, Aristippus: To Aristippus only was
given this gift to be both a galau^t courtyer, and also a sage philosophier.
unto thee only is this gift given, to wear both the short or cutted cape
of a galau^te and ruffleyng courtyer, (which was called Chlamys) and also the
side robe or rope of homely and course cloth, such as the beggerye
philosophiers and none else vsen to wear. The Same thing did the poet Horatius
note when he said. Omnis Aristippum decuit color.
All colors, and facions of array
Became only Aristippus, allwaye. Aristippus evermore considered and
remembreed honestee and comeliness.

In the court of Dionysius he would dance in purple and crymasyn silks or
veluettes, and sometimes he would wear a course pilche, ma^tle, or cope down
to ye foot, but yet evermore having in mind what, when, and how, best became
him, and to do neither of these things other wise then might stand with
honestee, comeliness and good facion.

Dionysius, Aristippus took pacie^tly to be spetten upon so yt he might w^nne
Dionysius to the study of phylosophie.
he took it veraye pacie^tly, and to them that fumed at yt spiteful touch,
thus he said. The fisher men to take a little gougeon do abide to be all
embrued with ye foul salt water of the sea: and should not I, to take a great
whale be contented to be sprincleed with a little spettle of ones mouth? By
the name of a whale, notyng the king, whom he d^d all that in him lay, with
his patience to allure unto y^ study of philosophy. No small vtilitee grows
to co^me^weales, by the sapience of learned princes.
And in deed no small vtilitee and benefit it is, that grows to comenweales
by the sapience and high knowlage of learned princes.

The fruit of philosophy is that a man shall speak plainly as ly^th i^ his
heart.
Marie (quod he) that I can to all persons whatsoever they be talk boldly,
frankly, and plainly as lies in my mind. For neither did he fear men of
power and autoritee, Aristippus feared no man nor disdeigned any person.
nor disdeigne inferior persons of low degree, forasmuch as he had a mind
free and clear void, as well from hope, as from fear, he was no man's
dogbolte, ne in any man's bondage, nor held up y^ yea and nay of any person
contrary to yt he thought in his own heart.

When certain persons did by ye Aristippus loved gaye apparel and good fare.
being one that professed philosophy: Whether in gaye clothyng and in dentie
fare be any vice.
If that were a vice (says he) it should in no wise be dooen in ye solemn
feasts of the Gods. For in the same solemnitees me^ne vsen of a coustome
both to be gayly and trymmely apparelled, and also to have the most deyntie
fare yt can be gotten or dressed. And forasmuch as the Gods been earnest
enemies to all vices, they would not be appeaced, but rather sti^red to wrath
and anger by such manner royaltee, if the same contained any spiece of sin or
viciousness. Thus in deed he avoided and clean defeacted the co^tumelious
check, but he did not show what was best.

Dionysius demaundyng of him, Phylosophiers would live well, though there were no
laws.
what high thing was in the philosophiers more then in other men, he said:
that if all laws were anulled and fordooen, yet would we live still after one
manner rate. The most part of people is barred from offendyng, To a
physophier, ^eason is a law.
only by prestripcions of laws, but a philosophier accou^pteth and uses
reason instead of laws: not dooyng that is upright and honest, because the
law has so commanded, nor refreining fro deeds of myschief, because the
law has forbidden the same: but for that he knows the one to be of it self
upright and honest, and the other of it self to be abominable.

Aristippus and Plato both of them were awaiters in ye court with Dionysius.
Plato and Aristippuz both were in court with Dionysius.
But Aristippus absteined not from the pleasures of the court when they came
in his way. Plato even in the mids of all superfluitees and excess of ye
court^ endeavored to keep a sobre t^ade in all behalfes. Therefore when Plato
checked and rebuked Aristippus for that he was so sweet mouthed, and drouned
in the voluptuousness of high fare, he asked of Plato, what he thought of
Dionysius, whether he seemed to be an honest manne, or not, when he had
answered, yt he seemed to be honest: And yet he (quod Aristippus) lives much
more delycately then I do. Therefore nothing leatteth, but that a ma^ne both
may live taking his part of good fare, and also live well and virtuously.
There is nothing to ye contrary, but yt a man may live, taking part of
good fare, and yet live virtuously.


Unto Dionysius demaundyng how Why phylosophiers hau^t rich men's houses and
not co^trariewise.
he said: because the phylosophiers do know what they want, and the rich
men know not. The philosophiers do know that without money, there is no
living, Without money there is no living.
and therefore they draw to such persons as been hable to give them, that
they have need of. That if ye rich men, did like well understand and
perceive, that they lack and need wisdom, they would much more haunt and
trede the doors of the philosophiers houses. For more miserable is the pouertee
of the mind and solle, then of the bodye^ More miserable is the pouertee of
the mind the^ of the body.
And so much the more pieteously beggered, and with extremitee of need
oppressed are the rich me^ne: that they do not understand, of how precious
and how necessary a thing they be destitute.

What difference there is between the learned and the unlearned.
in the same point (says he) that horses well broken, do diffre from the
unbroken. As ^n unbroken horse is unapt to do any service, so they that be
leed by affeccions, are unmeet for all cou^paignies and sorts of living.
As an horse not yet broken, is by reason of ignorance what he should do,
and of skittishenesse, nothing apt, but all untoward for any use or service to
be put unto: so he that is forceably rewled or violently leed with
affeccions, that is to say: with the corrupt mocions and sudden pangues or
passions of the mind (which pangues and affeccio^s or passions, nothing but
only phylosophie, maistreeth and subdueth) is unapt and vnmeet^ for all
coumpaignies and facions or sorts of living.

one of the young men yt were there present, to blushe as read as fire, as
though it was a foul shame for a phylosophi^r to set his foot in to any
house where bawderie were kept: to him Aristippus turned, and said: youngmanne,
to enter into such a place as this, is no shame at al, but not to be hable to
go out again, in deed that is a foul shame. He mened that it is but a venial
and a pardonable matter, if a man do moderately use the coumpaignie of
women, not offendyng ye law B^t to be a thing worthy no perdone or
forgiveness, if one be as a bondeseruaunt under the contynuall yoke of
fylthie pleasures of the body. This saying might in that world be well taken,
when no temporal law, nor civil ordinance did forbid me^ne to coumpaignie
with harlottes: but now beside ye wyttynes of making a ready e^cuse of his
sin, That excuse of sin, that may seem to serve a Gentile, may not serve
a Christian man.
there is in it nothing worthy laud or praise. And it was the saying of a
corrupt Gentile, to whom the law of God was no part of his profession, and
not of a Christian manne.

To a certain person that had propouned an hard reedle, and was veraye
earnest to have him soil the same, he said: Meryly spoken.
what thou foolyshe feloe, would thou have me to looce that thing, which
eue^ being fast bounden sets us all work enough to do? He found a merye
toye i^ the ambiguite, of ye word loocynge, for ye greek word, (...), and
latin word, soluere, (which souneth in english to looce, or to unbind) is
indifferente to soylyng a doubtefull question, and to loocyng a ma^ne or a
beast, that is fast bounden. And in deed it were a foolyshe pranke, to unbind
and looce a mad manne, or a perilous beast, which being looced would do
the more scathe and myschief.

Better it is to be a beggar then a man without learning.
then to be a man without learning, for that the one wants only money,
and the other lacks all points to a man belongyng. He ^s nevertheless a man that has no money, but he is no man, that has nomaner knowlage nor
learning. And yet he that wants money, beggeth of such persons as he
meets wit^all, but he that lacks wisdom, Such persons a^ ^ack^ w^sedom
will not seek it.
is nothing buisie in askyng any manne to have it on him.

When he had many despiteou^ ^^istippus beeyn^ ^ailled at went his way and
gave not a word again to answer.
and au^swered not so much as one word: but when the railler, the faster that
he w^nt away came still ye faster after him saying: why rennest thou away?
Marie (says he) because thou have power to speak railyng words, and I to
choose whether I will hear them or not. To give ^l^ce to a railler.
He did wh^th a ^eraye curs^e ta^n^e, check and re^uke the shameless fa^io^ of
the feloe, which whereas himself took upon him free libertee and autoritee to
speak all that ever naught was, would not grant to an other at lestwise so
much l^bertee, as to co^ueigh himself out of presence, and to leave hearing
eiuill. For this voice, why rennest thou away? was, as it had been of a man
laiyng to ones charge, and making a querele for some injury or shrewed turn
dooen unto him.

A certain person of rancour, malice, and great hatered speaking against
philosophiers the wurst words that he had in his bealy^ Philosophiers baunte^
ye houses of rich m^nn^, as physicians dooen ye houses of sick folks.
among other things said also, yt he might espy and see them evermore
awaytyng, and as it were laiyng siege at rich men's gates. To whom Aristippus
said: And the physicians to, be contynuall resorters to the houses of sick
folks, and yet is there no man yt would rather choose to be the sickemanne,
then to be the physician. Sapience is diffined to be y^ knowelage of things
perteining to god and m^^ne, or of th^nges divine and worldly, which they that
had ^otten were called Sapientes, y^ is^ me^ of perfect knowelage, virtue, and
honestee. For of right knowelage co^seque^tly ensues honestee of life.
He did fynely and su^tilly turn the check to a contrary purpose. The
p^ilosophiers make much preaching of felicitee and perfect bliss, which
they do wholly reserve and auouche to belong to a man of perfect s^pience
only, and to none other, and yet they be daily and hourly conuersaunte in
rich men's houses, prollyng for somewhat at their hands, whereby the feloe
g^thered that the rich men are in a more blissful state, then the
philosophiers. But Aristippus interpreted and declared the philosophiers
chiefly for this entente and purpose to be co^tynuall resorters unto
richemenne^ because the same being through superfluitee or excess, and through
delicious pleasures more foolyshe, Rich men are through excess and
delicious pleasures, more foolyshe and more corrupt then any others.
and more corrupt then any other living creatures, had more need of the
precepts and wholesome lessons of sapience then any other persons. And a
philosophier is the physician of minds and solles diseased. A philosophier is
the phisician of minds diseased.
And to conclude more nere the state of bliss it is to be the physician, then
to be the sick manne: ergo etc.

On a time when he was in a Corinthus, and a tempeste being suddenly arysen,
made them every mynnte of an hour to look when the ship should synke and
be drowned, Aristippus being in ieoperdie of death feared and weaxed pale.
Aristippus weaxed wanne of color and pale as ashes for fear. One of ye
passyngers a gross carle and souldyarlike feloe, and one yt loved no
philosophiers, espiyng and markyng the same, as soon as the tempeste was laid
again, begoonne proudely to cock and crow, saying: why do ye philosophiers,
which are ever preaching and teaching that death is not to be feared, yet
nevertheless look with pale faces by reason of fear in time of peril and
ieoperdie, and we being men unlearned are in no fear at all? Aristippus
au^swered: A great difference be^wene the solle of a phylosophier and of a
verlette.
Marie because thou and I do carke and fear for a solle or life of vnegual
valor. Aulus Gellius adds this to it, I fear perishyng of the life of
Aristippus, and thou fear not leesyng the life of a knave: which words
yet for all that be more full of galle, We fear not harm taking of things
of small valor.
then to be conueniente for Aristippus, whose vrbanitee and merieconceipted
words are not of so poynaunte a sort. We fear not the harmetakyng of
things of very small valor, whereof comes the latin proverb, Hydria in
foribus. Hydria in foribus.

A stene or a can in the more, is a proverb, by which Aristoteles and other
ancient writers, used to signify a thing so vile and of so small valor y^
no ma^ne would attempt to purloyne or stele, or if any did, there were no
great loss in it, forasmuch as an other of like sort might be every where
gotten for an half penny or less money. And because it was a thing of so small
price, if an yearthen pot stood in a bodies door, no thief or false knave
would stoop to take it up, nor set his mind to conueigh it away. But ouches
and perles with other like things, dooen such feloes study how to come by. As
for a pitchaer every body may without any fear of stealyng set (if him
please) in the open street. So writes Plutarchus, that the briars which by
them selfs will catch and take hold on each bodies gown, every manne
neglects and passes by, but vynes and olives no man but desires and will
seek for. Seneca also in his epistles writes in this manner. Many persons
do pass by things that lain open, but for things lyyng hidden in secret
corners, they will make narrow search. Things curiously and suerly sealed, or
fast locked up, do say to a thief, come steal me. It seems not worthy
taking up from the ground, whatsoever lies abroad And things lyyng open a
breaker of houses will not foil his hands withal: but to break into secret
corners, is set all his mind and desire.


A stene or a can in the door. For this respect Aristippus found a merry
toye, that the other feloe changed not color: not forthat he was of a better
stomach and courage, or of more hardiness in time of peril, but because
forasmuch as he was a feloe of no price, but a villain and a rascal, and had
a mind or solle clear void of all virtue, it should have been a small loss
or none at all, if he had turned up his heles and perished. A man of
profou^de learning and highly endued with sapience, perishes not, but to the
sore loss and damage of the commenweale.

To a certain person making Aristippus said: like as, not those per^ones that
eaten most meat, and do by good digestion void the same again, be in
better health of body, then such as take that is sufficie^te and no more:
even so, not they that have had most varietee of readyng, Uarietee of learning
and readyng diverse books makes not a learned man.
but such as have read things profitable are to be accoumpted good
students, and men of learning. He gave a vengeable check to those persons,
who with troubleous or inordin^te and unmeasurable readyng porre their throtes
and bealies thrastyng full, and do not conueigh unto the botome of the mind
or heart such things as they read to live there after, but do only lay it
up and couche it in the memory. by reason whereof in ye end, they be neither
any thing increased or ^ert^ered in cunnyng, nor yet any thing emended or
bettered in their living.

Aristippus being there personally arayned, and preuailled in the matter of
trauerse. An^ when the same orator, as auauncyng his art of rhetorike above
philosophy, said what good has Socrates dooen the o Aristippus? Phylosophie
is of more excellent dignitee then rhetorike.
This profit have I gotten by Socrates (said he again) that the oracion,
which thou have made in my defense and commendacion has been true. The
orator had defended him as being a right honest manne, and innoce^te in the
matter that was laid to his charge. And, that ever he was a man of such
sort, as he was by the orator reported for, had been the act of only
Socrates whose scholare he was in philosophy. It is no part of an orators
play, to make that a man be of perfect honestee and virtue, but that he
may appear to the judges to be such an one, although in very deed he be
not so. Then a thing of much more excellency it is, that the philosophier
does perform, then that the orator can do.

His daughter, being named Areta, Areta the daughter of Aristippus.
he brought up and enstructed with wholesome doctrine and precepts of virtue,
accustomyng her in all cases to refuse and renounce what soever passed the
bounds of mediocritee. Measure is in all things a treasure.
Because in every thing measure is chief, and principal, and in a woman it is
a point of most high virtue to rewle the sensual lusts and appetites. The
chief virtue in a woman.


What auau^tage children geatte^ by going to schole.
if he should bestow the labor and cost to set him to school: though
nothing else (said he) yet at lest wise at May games and open sightes there
shall not one stone set his tail upon an other. In old time the places, The
facio^ of stage plays in old time.
where open sightes and shows of games where exhibited, were made circlewise
round about with settles or benches of marble, staier wise one above an other,
on which ye people sat and beheld the games and sightes. A person void of
learning and sufficient vttr^aunce, diffreth nothing from a stone.
And a stone^ they comme^ly called. Even as we also do) a feloe yt had
neither learning nor good vttreaunce of toungue.

Aristippus, to take his son to school to him, but when the philosophier
required in reward for his peines of teaching, five hundred drachmes (which
was above the sum of eight pounds sterlyng.) The other party being clean
discouraged with the greatness of the price, said: for less money or better
cheap then so, might I bye a bondeman, that should do me tall and hable
service: But here now (quod Aristippus) thou shall have twain. The peines of
teaching is worthy great wages.
His menyng was, that with the same sum of money which was to be paid for
one bondeman, he should purchase both a philosophier yt should stand him in
good steed, and also a son obediente to his father. Most part of me^ne
give moore wages to their horse kepers, then to the good bryngers up of their
children in learning and virtue.
He did feactely check the judgment of the comme^ people, who in no behalf
are greater haines and niggardes of their purse, then in prouidyng to have
their children well and virtuously brought up in learning and manners, and do
bestow more cost on keeping or dressyng their horses, then on the good guydyng
and ordreyng of their sons and daughters.

Being reproved for yt he was a taker of money of his friends, Why Aristippus
took money of rich folks.
he said, yt he did not take any such money to the entente and purpose, to
convert it to his own use and commoditee, but that they might learn upon
what things money ought to be bestowed. The due and right use of money.
For the most part of rich folks casts away their money, either upon
horses, or on buisie and sumptuous buildings, orels other ryottous ways:
whereas it ought to be given in alms to good and honest men, if the same be
in need. Yea and a man may an other way also understand and apply this
saying. Aristippus ^id not spend any money, but on things for his living
necessary, Aristippus did not spend money, but upon things necessary.
and therefore he took rewards of richemen, to declare plainly unto the same
the right way to apply it to good uses, and that could he not do, onelesse
they had found unto his hands wherewithal to do it: as he that has an
earnest desire to learn the feacte of writing, fyndeth and delivers papyre,
pen and ynke to the party that shall teach him.

to his own person apperteinyng he had with money hyered ye help of an
orator to plead for him at the bar, he said: why, that is not so great a
woondre, for when I would have any supper dressed too, I hyer a cook. The
other parties mind was, that it should appear ye orator to be of more
excellency or dignitee then ye philosophier, A philosophier to be of more
excellency and dignitee, then an orator.
for this point, because ye philosophier gave money to have his help, and he
turned it clean co^trarie^ notyfiyng him to be ye inferior and of less
dignitee, yt is hyered. For the office of an orator, or a man of lawe^ is of
a more basse sort, the^ to become a philosophier.

He was on a time bidden this and that to talk out of his books of Dionysius
woondreous earnestly and instau^tely required him theru^to, being at that time
very eiuill willing and loath to meddle, he said: It is a fond and a mad thing,
if ye desire me some what to say in philosophy, and yet yourselfe will teach
me and appointe when my most oportunitee and occasion is to speak. He mened
that one of the chief points to a philosophier belongyng, is eue^ this, to
know what times it is most meet to speak, and when not to speak. The
philosophier self, best knows when to speak and when not.
But he that makes request to hear any one thing or other out of
philosophy, declares that he would learn philosophy of the philosophier. On
the other side again, he yt would constreigne a man to speak whether he be
disposed or no, sem^leth and pretends to be master or superior in learning
to the philosophier self, in yt he takes upon him to have better knowelage of
the due and co^ueniente time when to speak, then the very philosophier
indede. The king being for this answer of Aristippus in an high fume
commanded him to sit in ye lowest place of al, at the table. Aristippus in
this case nothing disco^te^ted, said in this manner: Sir king it is your
pleasure (I perceive) to nobilitate this place and to make it honorable. Not
the low place makes the manne of less dignitee, but of ye worthynesse of ye
person much honor grows to the place.
Signifiyng not ye place to make the man of less dignitee, but of ye worthynes
and honestee of the person much honor to redounde and grow unto the place.

A certain feloe standing highly Aristippus could not abide. And art thou not
ashamed, says he, with ^uche a saucy and presumpteous braggue to boste
thyself of those things which been natural propreties of the dolphin fishes?
It is a folishe thing for a ma^ne to boste himself of such feactes as other
things ca^ of their natural propretee do better then he.
It had been more preatie and feacte, if he had said, of frogues. It is comely
for a man to glory and braggue of such things, as be natural for a man
only to do. And nothing is more aggreable with ye nature of ma^ne, then to
excelle in reason, wisdom, and discretion. There is no man so expert a
swymmer, but that in this feacte and qualitee he is far passed and ouercomed
of the dolphin fishes. The dolphin fishes have a propretee to swymme above the
water, and the^ are delited in the melodious armonye of all musical
instruments. They bear notable love toward manne, in so much that diverse
of them have carried children about, and over the sea daily of course and
custom, as we read in Cicero, in Plynius, in Aulus Gellius, and in other
writers^


Being asked in what thing a sort naked, says he, unto men unknown, and
thou shall see. He signified, that a man indewed with sapience, carries
about with him wherewith to commend him self and to be welcome unto all manner
persons in the world. If therefore ye should send a learned manne, and a
person unlearned, either of them as naked as ever they were born, in to a
strange conntree, where neither of them both have any acquaintance: What
difference ^here is between a learned manne and a p^rsone unlearned.
the sapiente manne vttreynge and showing forth ye treasures of his high
knowelage and cunning, should anon find and geat both money and friends, the
other not having a raggue to hang about him, should be skorned and laughed at,
as a Jack of bethleem, and should hard^y escape to perish and dye for hou^gre.

Boste of drinkyng, is vain
what great wondre is it thou talkest of, said Aristippus, sens that every
mule and horse does the same?

Aristippus as a vice, that he kept coumpaignie with a comme^ stroumpette.
Whom he confuted with an induccion, such as Socrates commenly used, in manner
as foloeth: Goo to, tell me this, dooest thou think it to make any matter,
whether a body take an house, which many have inhabited, orels an house, which
nomanne has before dwelled in? When he had said that it made no matter: What
said Aristippus, does it any thing force whether one be a passinger and do
saill in a ship that has carried a great nou^bre aforetymes, orels in a
ship yt has carried none? When he had said nay to that also: what matter of
force is it then, quod he, whether a man have to do with a woman, that has
bestowed hirselfe on many soondrie persons before, orels upon none at all. This
saying also might be (as a thing meryly spoken) accepted among them, in whose
opinion simple fornicacion was not rekened for a sin.

Socrates, he was (contrary to the usage of Socrates) a taker of money for his
teaching of philosophy: Why Aristippus was a taker of money for teaching
phylosophie, more th^n Socrates was.
I do that (quod he) not without good cause why. For unto my master Socrates
a great nou^bre of rich and welthie fre^des did send both wheat and wine,
of the which, his manner was to reserve a small portion for his necessary
occupiynge, and the residue to send back again. In deed he had to his
stewardes, the greateste gentlemenne of all the Atheniens, and I have none
other steward, but mine own boundseruaunte Eutychides whom I boughte with my
money. Eutychides ye servant of Aristippus.
He notified that he did set even as little by money as did Socrates, but that
Socrates had fre^des of more bountee. By this color might some persons
excuse theimselfes even now of days professyng outwardly in words excedyng
great contempt of gold and silver, whereas they have right good store of
money lyyng in the hands and custody of their friends, The excuse of some
persons that in words professen contempt of money, and yet have money
enough lyyng in store in the hands of their friends.
that forenyers, they had bounteous stewardes and proctours for all their
necessary store of food and viandrie, but that now they should make full
many an hungry mele, if they had not a good sum of money in one place or
other laid up in store.

The report goes that Aristippus Lais a very notable mysliuyng woman.
Aristippus a customer of Lais the harlotte.

Lais was a stroumpette dwelling in Corinthe, unto who^ for her excellent
beauty resorted many rich lovers, out of al parties of the country of Greece,
but no man had his pleasur on her except he gave her own askyng which was
evermore a great


For which matter whereas he had a veraye eiuil name abroad among all ye people,
to a feloe obiectyng unto him yt being a philosophier he was at the beck and
co^maundeme^te of Lais. Nay marie (quod he) Lais is at my commandment, and
not I at the commandment of Lais. Signifying that it was no matter of
dishonestee, now and then to take pleasure: which at that season was thought
lawef^ll, but to be as a bondeman, and to be wholly given thereunto, worthy
to be reke^ed in the noumbre of things skamefull and abomynable.

Aristippus, so earnestely mind or te^dre sensualitee, as thou dooest avarice.
For he would fain have used as delicate fare as Aristippus, I^ it would have
come of free cost, or for a very little money. Man^ y^ (...) the contemp^^ of
del^^^^t^ would fa^^ of y^ best ^f th^i mig^t of f^^ cos^^ or for a little money.
In the same wise dooen certain nations lay unto the Germains quaffyng, The
Germain^ are noted of much drynkyng^ and the Engl^shemen of much eating.
and to the english men gourmaundyng and eating while y^ bealye will hold,
whereas there be no gre^ter raueners or gluttons in the worl^e, then
theimselfes, if at any time such chance do fall, that they may of free
cost eat and drink their fille. Covetousness often times be guileth y^ bealye.
Then more covetous are those nations, and not more te^perat^ or sobre of
diete. Ueray much like unto this^ it is: that I showed of the pertrige before,
in the secou^de saying of thissame Aristippus.

The receiver general and treasourer Dionysi^s, named Simus, Simus y^ receiver
general and treasourer to Dio^ysius.
a Phrygian born, showed unto Aristippus his mainour place, being in every
corner very neat and clean, yea even the veraye floor covered and checkerwise
set, throughout with square pauyng stones of great price. Aristippus, when he
had well looked about and vewed every thing, voided the spetle of his mouth
even full in the bearde of Simus: Aristippus s^e^ted on the eiuill favored
face of Simus^
and to the same Simus highly fuming at the matter, he excused himself by this
color, yt he could espy no place ne thing in all the whole house more meet to
receive the filthye dreiuill or spattreyng of the mouth. Notyng thereby, that
in y^ whole house there was nothing more loathsome to behold, or more unclean,
the^ the face of that barbarous feloe, The face ought to be the most clean of
all the parts of the body.
whereas that part of a man ought to be most clean of all. Albeit this
saying is more like to be of some Cynike, the^ of Aristippus, how so ever it
is fathered on him.

Many good thyn^es be reie^^ed through the fault of lewd persons vsyng y^ same
naughtely.
be abandoned and rejected from honest men's occupiyng, through the fault of
other lewd persons who put the same things to eiuill uses.

Socrates ended his life: Aristippus wished to dye no wurse th^n Socrates had
dooen.
even so as I would wish to do, says he. Menyng that such diyng is
rather to ^ee wished for, the^ any kind of life in this transitory world.
Neither was it possible for him in fewer words to describe a more blissed
manner of diyng. The pith of y^ saying consists in this point that the
philosophier au^swered an other thing, then the demaunder looked for. The one
asked his question of the kind of death, It forces not what kind of death we
hau^ so we dye verteously.
that is, whether he had dyed of some sickness, of a sweard, by poison, or by
breakyng his neck by reason of some fall from an high place: the other thynkyng
that matter to be of small force, answered that he had made a blissed,
Socrates made a blissed end.
a perfect, and ^ ^ertuous end.

Poliaenus ye sophiste being entreed Aristippus, Polyaenus a Sophiste.
when he espied there, women gorgeously apparelled, and a feast of high
provision and furniture, begone to reprove such great excess in a
philosophier. Aristippus making as though he had not marked that chy^yng,
within a while said unto him: may ye find in your heart to take peines at
dinner here with us for this ones? when the other had answered that he could
be contented so to do with all his heart: Many y^ reprove dentye fare and
delicates, can well find in their hertes to take part of the same.
why find ye fault at it then, quod he? for ye seem not to reprove ye table
for the dentie fare, but for the cost^ For if the feast had for this point
mysliked him, that it was over delicate, he would have refused to be one of
the geastes. To allow the fare, and to be offended with the cost of the same,
argues not a man sobre of diete, but loathe to spend money^
And as for the ordeinaunce to allow, and with the charges of the same to be
offended or discontented, seems to be a point, not of one that abhors
excess of meat and drink, but of a niggarde, and of one that is loathe to
spend any money.

Aristippus a despyser of gold and silver.
when his seruau^te bearyng money of his, as he trauailled in a journey, was
ouercharged with the heavy burden of the same, he said: cast away the
overplus, and carrye that thou may with thyn ease.

Aristippus cast his gold into the sea.
and begoonne to tell it, and anon after soodainly leat it fall over boorde
into the sea for the nons, and then gave a great sigh, sembleyng that it had
fallen out of his hand vnaw^res, and much against his will. By this ingen or
sub^^^e devise ^e found means to save his own life, when the matter and
occasion why to kill him or to try maisteries with him for his money was ones
taken away from ye pirates. Some writers there be, that reporten him to have
spoken these words also. Better y^ money be cast away by a man, then a man to be cast away for moneys sake.
Better it is that all this gear be cast away by Aristippus, then Aristippus
to perish and to be cast away for this geares sake.

Unto Dionysius demau^dyng why Aristippus was come into Sicilie forsakyng
Socrates, Why Aristippus left Socrates and went into Sicilie.
he au^swered: Marie to ye end that of such things as I have, I may give
you part, and of such things as I have not, to take part with you. There
been that reporten him in this wise to have answered. When I wanted sapience I
resorted unto Socrates, and now because I want money, I am come to your grace.

Aristippus unto Plato chydyng with him for yt he had bought a great deal of
fish for one dinner, Aristippus chidden of Plato for biyng diverse cates at
ones, what he au^swered.
he answered, that he had bought it all for an halfpenie. And when Plato had
thus said: of that price even I myself could have found in my heart to have
bought it: ye see then o Plato, quod Aristippus, Plato loved money, better then
Aristippus loved good fare.

In the.ii. in ye vii. and in ye xxxii. sayings of Aristippus.


that, not I am gredie to to have plentee and varietee of sondrie cates, but
yourself to bear great love to money. Ce^tain sayings much like unto this
been a fore recited.

Aegina, was a goodlye cytee adiacente unto Pelopo^nesus not far from the
havens mouth, called Pyraeus, and it stood even directly against the country
of Attica, and therefore was of a certain Atheniens called Lippitudo Atticae. yt
is the bleryng of Attica. For the goodlynes of Aegina did much disgrace ye
beauty of Attica, and did, as ye would say: drown it.

Some give ye name of Aegina to the whole Isle.


Aegina at the solemn feasts of Neptunus Iuppiter and Pluto, were three
brethren and soonnes of Saturnus gotten upon Ops the sister and wife of the same
Saturnus. They so divided the regions, that Iuppiter should have under his
dominion, the high countrees, Pluto the lower countrees, and Neptunus the Isles
and the seaes. Whereof the poets have feigned Iuppiter to be the God of
heaven, Pluto of hell, and Neptune of the waters. In honor of Neptunus were
yearly celebrate in the Isle or town of Aegina, certain solemnitees, which
were called Neptunalia, of Neptunus his name, and by another name Salatia of
Salum, the sea.
Neptunus, had to do with Phryne was an harlotte of exccellente beauty, but
so commen that she refused none, whatsoever he were: and (as occasion ser^ed
for her mercate) she customably resorted to all places, where any sole^nitee of
sacres or martes, or any other occasion of great haunte and resort was.
Albeeit her most dwelling was in the city of Athenes. She is much mentioned,
not only in the poets and historiographiers, but also in sondrie places of
this present w^rke.
Phryne a mysliuyng woman there. And when a feloe had cast him in ye nose yt he
gave so large money to such a naughty drabbe, who sticked not to leat
beggerie Diogenes the Cynike to have part of her body: Aristippus in this
manner answered: I give her money and many other gaye good things, to have my
pleasure on her for mine own part, and not to thente^te, that nomanne else
should. This is left in writing of ye said Phryne, yt although she was a
passing fair woman, yet was she as common as the carte way, on who soever
came, without preferryng or choice of this manne, or that manne, whether they
were rich, or poor, showing ^ir self disdainful and coye to wards no
person, come who would. To this had ye poet Horatius respect in thus saying.

Me libertina, nec uno co^te^ta Phryne macerat
I frette and pein with burning love
Of Phryne, who this other day
Out of her bondeship did remove,
And now is commen, as cartewaye.
Diogenes in this manner rebuked Aristippus for having to do with Phryne:
Aristippus rebuked of Diogenes, for keeping coumpaignie with Phryne the
harlotte^
o Aristippus, thou art a great medleer with this woman, being a stewed
stroumpette, and therefore either play the doggue as I do, or else leave such
facions, as thou dooest use. Aristippus by induccio^ in this wise shifted him
of. Diogenes seems it unto the a thing to be abhorred, that a man should
dwell in an house, which others aforetymes have inhabited? when he had said no:
what (says Aristippus) is it shame to saill in a ship, that has aforetymes
carried a great noumbre moo? when that also he had denied to stand against
reason: why then dooest thou suppose it to be unreasonable, quod he, to join
with a woman, of whom a great noumbre of persons have tofore had their
pleasure This is above mentioned, saving that Athenaeus does in this manner
and form tell the tale. Before in the xxii. saying.

Athenaeus, a greek historiographier.




When he had lost a woondre full Aristippus a man of good possessions ^ lands.
what, dooest thou not know well enough, you haste but one little poor house
with a small piece of land to it, and that I have yet three whole lordshippes
leafte? when the other party had theretoo granted, he said: why do we not
then rather lamente thy case? Menyng yt it had been an unwise part of him
rather to take sorrow for yt that he had lost, When a man has lost any part
of his substance, he should take coumforte of that, that is leafte.
the^ joy and coumforte of that that was leafte.

To one that by the way of opposyng every place. Aristippus with a mock^ alone
wiped away the sophistical question, whether one and the same body may at one
time be in diverse or soundrie places at ones. Whether one and the same body
may be in sondrie places at ones.
When he answered, that so being, there was no peril of leesyng his freite
money or of spendyng freite money in waste. For he leeseth his freite money,
who, when he has paid his money, is not carried thither as his desire is It
may, by leauyng out the negacio^, be taken in this sense also. Then have I in
my days lost some freite money, or then have I spent in waste and have lost
much good money given hereto fore for freite or ^ote hyere.

As though he should have said: if one body may be in moo places then one
at ones^ I have many a time in my days paid money in vain, and have like a
fool spent money in waste, to be carried over sea in a ship from one place
to an other, forasmuch as I was there already before I came.

The menyng and sense of the words of Ari^tippus in so saying, (as I under
the correccion of Erasmus take it^ was: I leese no freite money the^ etc. I
cast way no freite money then etc. that is, I spend no freite money then etc.
For he leseth his money that spends, when he has nomaner need nor occasion
to spend it. And he that is already in every place where he would be, needs
not to spend money to be carried thither. As if he should have said to the
feloe: If one body may be in all places at ones, thou may be assured, I
would not be so mad as to give freite money, when I were disposed to take
shippyng and to go ouersea from one place to an other.

Being confounded and made blanke in a disputacio^ of a certain Aristippus was
nothing grieved to take a blanke in disputacion.
but the same a furious rageyng feloe, of no more wit^e then a beast: when he
saw him hoppe and fette his gambaudes for joy, and swellyng in pride by
reason of that victory. In deed, quod he, I goo away confounded, but yet like
to sleep this night more sweetly and soundely, Unwrathfully spoken.
then thyself, that have put me to this blanke.

Helicon of the town of Cyzicus or Cyzicum, an Isle in Propontis, having a
way to the main land by two bridges, and having also a city of the same
name, with walls, castelles and toures of marble stone as fair and goodly as
might be, and in largeness, cou^pace and amplitude hable to compare with the
chief citees in all Asia. It was so named, by one Cyzicus sometime king there,
whom Jason unawares slew. It was also a city of great power, and
indifferently set, either for peace or war.
Cysicus Plato his time had prognosticate ye eclipse of ye soonne: Helicon
Cyzicenus a philosophier of Athenes excellyng in all the mathematical
sciencies, in the same time when Plato was.
who, after that it had chanced according to his prognostication, had of
Dionysius a talente of silver in reward. Then said Aristippus to ye rest of
the philosophiers: I also have a right woondreous thing yt I could prophecy.
They heartily desiryng him the same to vttre: I prophecy (quod he) that Plato
and Dionysius will ere many days to an end break a straw between them.
Dionysius offended with Plato, long ere he would show it outwardly.
For he had already perceived ye king now a good while to keep his mind
secret, and to dissemble his anger and displeasure conceived against Plato. A
talente of silver, the french enterpreter following Buda^us does translate,
six hundred crounes, which after the rate of fowerteen gro^es the croune,
ammounteth to the sum of one hundred and forty pounds of our current money.


Fre^des ought to be tried ere they be received into famyliarites.
that in public sales they do narrowely search pottes and pannes ere they
will bye them, and will not search and examyn the life of such persons as they
match to theimselfes in friendship, and entiere familiaritee. And yet a much
higher vtilitee and profit redoundeth to a ma^ne of feithfull fre^des, then of
pottes or pannes: and a much greater loss and disauanntage except he choose
of the right sort, A great disauau^^age if a man choose not his friends o^
the best sort.
such as should be.

When Dionysius at a ba^quette had Purple in old time was for the wearynge of
none, but kings and princes.
where now it is co^munely taken up with every sowter and cobbler. Plato refused
to do it, Plato refused to dance in purple at ye request of Dionysius.
recityng for his purpose these me^re verses out of some tragedy. (...) To be
disguised in womannes clothyng, is unfit for a man.

(...).
My heart abhors, that I should so
In a womannes kirtle, myself disguyse,
Being a man, and begotten to
Of a man's prosapie, in manly wise.
But Aristippus made no courtesy at the matter, Aristipppus refused not to
dau^ce in purple at the biddyng of Dionysius.
but being dressed in purple, and ready to goo to dauncyng, he pronounced
these verses without any study soodainly.

(...)
(...).
Nothing ca^ corrupt a mind wholly dedicate to virtue.
Even em^ddes, the furious rageing
Of sacrifice dooen, to the God Bacchus,
A mind, wholly addicte, to sobre living
Will not be corrupt, ne made uicious.
Dionisius in the behalf and favor of a friend of his, and the king would not
hear his suite and peticion, Aristippus falling down flat on the ground
before him, begoonne to embrace and kiss the kings feet, and by yt means at
last obtained his purpose and request. And when certain persons reproved
the same fact of his, as more vile and more humble then was comely for a
philosophier I am not in ye blame, quod he, but Dionisius, Wittyly spoken.

Dionysius had his ears in his feet.


which has his ears standing in his feet. Aristippus a man of a passing
ready wit, as well to do as to excuse any thing.
A wit like pro^pte and ready at all assayes, as well to do, as also to
excuse any thing whatsoever it were.

In the country of Asia he was attached by Artaphernes the high capitain, or
leuetenau^t general there, Persians. Artaphernes leuetenau^t general in Asia
under y^ king of the Persians.
And at the same present season, when one demanded of him, whether eue^ there
also his old accustomed stoutness of heart failled him no more then it had
been wont to do. Aristippus arested in Asia by Artaphernes.
Folyshe dawe quod he, as though I have at any time in all my life bee^, of a
better courage or stomach, Aristip. stood in dread of no ma^ne living.
then eue^ at this present hour, yt I must speak to Artaphernes. Uerayly this
thing by the benefit of philosophy was roted in him, that he stood in dread
of no man living, but would be fra^ke and free with every person to say
his mind.

Those persons, who being Such as being furnished with other disciplines,
do neglect moral phylosophie, are like the woers of Penelope.
he likened to the wooers of Penelope the daughter not of Icarus, but of
Icarius, and the wife of Ulysses: who during the absence of her housband ten
years, b^yng away at the battaill of Troie, and other te^ne yer^s wandreynge
o^ the ^eats, ere he could g^atte home into his cou^tre^ of Ithara, kept
hirself chaste and true wife unto the same Ulysses. And where she had most
ymportune, and the same contynuall suite made unto her, by many ioyly ruflleyng
wooers, to have her in marriage, she drove them of all by this color, that she
had ^ lou^e of lyne^ cloth in weauyng, which being ones finyshed she would
give unto her wooers a determynate and a fynall answer. Then used she this
policy, to unweave in the night as much work, as she had made up in the day
before. By reason whereof diverse of the gentlemenne that wooed her, being with
their long suite weryed and tyered, fell in hand to have wanton conversation
with Melanthon and Polydora her handmaydens, as vttrely despairyng that ever
they should achiue to the obteinyng of Penelope hirselfe.
Penelope. For t^ei entreed love with Mela^thon and with Polydora being her
handmaidens, and conceived hope sooner to obtein all the world besides, then
marriage of the lady her self. His menyng was, that y^ liberal sciencies been,
as it were, the handmaide^s of moral philosophy, which moral philosophy is
with the f^rst of all to be put in ure, and for whose respect and cause all
the other disciplines For moral philosophy was to them, that diuinitee and
holy scriptures are to us Christian men.
are learned. A much like thing Aristo This Aristo was a philosophier, and was
called in manner as by a surname, Scepticus, because he was altogether occupied
in considering and serchyng the state of humain things. He was borne in the
Isle of Coos, albeit some say he was Chius, and was scholare (as some writers
saien) to zeno, the first autour and brynger up of the Stoikes sect, after
some writers, he was a Peripatetike, that is, of Aristoteles his sect. But as
concerning philosophy, as well moral as natural, his determinacions and
doctrine is of all the aunciente good writers reproved and utterly condemned as
naught. For by his opinion all things are in differente, and no diuersitee
between being in perfect good health and in extreme sickness, and so of other
things. Wherefore his doctrine was disallowed of all men, as testifies
Cicero in the proheme of the offices and in his work, d^ finib^s bonorum et
malorum. There was also another Aristo ^^^her unto Plato.
also is reported to have said of Ulysses, who when he was descended to hell
the said Aristo aftermeth that he talked familiarely with all the other solles
there for the most part, saving that he could not so much as ones come to
the sight of the queen hirself.

To one demau^dyng what things What things are most requisite to be learned
of young folks.
he said: the same yt may do them best service when they shall be at ye full
man's state. This saying is ascribed to others also besides Aristippus. The
principal best things are eue^ at y^ first beginning to be learned, The
principal best things, are even with the first to be learned.
neither the tender and unbroken youngth, which is of it self most apt to
learn, Young age most apt to learn.
is to be forepossessed with things superfluous.

After that Aristippus had gathered of money, Aristippus gathered together much
richesse.
and Socrates having conceived great meruaill thereof, said: how have you come
by so much richesse? how have ye come by so little, quod he again? For he
t^ought it a thing no less wo^^hie admiracion, that Socrates being ^
p^ilosophier of so great estimacion, ^ having such great friends, should be
poor, the^ that himself should be rich.

Aristippus: Wittyly and ^eatly spoken
that can ye not for a ^uertie know (quod he again) any more then gooyng on
thorns standing as thick as is possible one by an other, ye may truly
auouche this thorn it is, that has pricked me.

Aristippus cast of his son, and leat him run at roners.
as if the same had never been begotten by him, he said: do we not cast away
from us, as far as we can, both phlegm and spettle, and also lyce, with
other vermyn bredyng of our own bodies, as things. seru^ng to no good use ne
purpose? He mened them not worthy to be accoumpted for a man's soonnes,
Men may justly refuse those sons, in which is no grace at al.
that had noothyng else wherewith to show theimselfs worthy the favor of
their pare^tes, but only that they were of them begotten and brought into this
world. So the old manne in the comedy says.

The words of Menedemus to his son, Clinia in the third comedy of Terence.
Ego te meu^ dici tantisper uolo, dum id quod te dignum est facias.
So long and no longer, thou shall my soonne be,
As thou behauest thyself, with honestee.
When Dionysius had given in reward, Aristippus money, and unto Plato books,
Aristippus being checked of a certain person, as one whose mind was more on
his halfpenie, then Plato had set his: Dionysius gave in reward, to
Aristip^us money, and to Plato books.
what matter makes that, quod he, I had need of money, and Plato of books.
Menyng, that neither of them both was blame worthy to take ye thing which
might best serve his purpose: for of a likelihood Dionysius had put either of
them to the choice, whether they would have money, or books.

Dionysius did in such wise call him fool and all to naught, Dionysius would
ca^l Aristippus fool, and all to naught.
for the ve^aye same cause (quod he) that other folks dooen. Menyng the plain
and frank speaking of a philosophier to be ^oumbreous and hateful to all
persons, The plain speaking of a philosophier, no m^^ can well allow.
and therefore no meruaill to ^ee, if the king might ^iuill abide it: all under
one together intimatyng the kings judgment nothing to di^fre from the
judgment of the gross multitude, forthat fortune does not confer the
endewemente or gift of sa^ience. Sapience is not given by fortune.


Dionysius at a time by the way of peticion a talente. And when the king
having gotten an occasion to confound him by his own words, and to cast him
in his own turn, said: did not thou openly afferm^, and say that a
philosophier is never in penury of extreme need? A philosophier is never in
extreme penury.
well, give me the talente (quod he) and then we shall afterward reason of
that matter, when he had received ye money: And was it not well and truly said
of me, quod he, that a philosophier is never in ex^^emitee of need? That
person is not in extreme penury, He is not in penury, who at al times of
need is assured where to have enough.
who at all times of need is assured where to receive, and to have enough.

Unto Dionysius recityng out of a Sophocles, these two little verses. (...)
(...).
Whosoever a Tyrannes court, does haunt.
There to be a continual d^eller,
Is unto the same, a bondeserua^nte.
Though he were no bond man, ere he came there:
Aristippus au^swered only a syllable or twain of the later verse corrected
in this manner. (...)^ A free mind is euerywhe^ free.

Is not to the same a bondeseruaunte.
If he were no bondeman, ere he came there.
Signifiyng none to be free and out of bondage in deed, except whose ^eraye
mind and heart, philosophy has delivered discharged and made free both from
hope and fear, for to be a free manne outright, it is not enough, to have
been born in freedom^, True libertee pertains to ye mind more then to birth.
or out of servitude and bondage. Some writers ascriben this saying unto Plato.

Aristippus and A^schines, A breach of love between Aristippus and Aeschines.
had befallen a little distaunce and breach of love, and a certain feloe had
said, where is now that your great high friendship become? It slepeth, quod
he, but I shall awaken it and raise it up again. Herupon Aristippus by reason of
this seasonable, A small variaunce does commenly, by reason of silence grow
to a scabbe of open ^^mitee.
or oportune ^^d plain speaking of the said feloe, wi^^ a tryce ended all ye
strife and made all well again. To thentente that the sore might not by reason
of silence grow to an open scabbe, (as most commonly it does) he of his
own voluntary will came unto Aeschines, and said in this manner: Shall not
we two, even now out of hand be at one again as good friends as ever we
were, and cease thus to play ye children? orels shall we rather tarry until
we shall ministre to iestyng knaves matter to prate and iangle of us twain on ye
ale benche? To whom when Aeschines had made au^swer, that he would with all his
heart be reconciled and full agreed. Then, yet remember, (quod Aristippus,
Aristippus being the elder manne, offreed first to be agreed with Aeschines.
) that I being the elder and the more aunciente person of the twain, have
come and sought on ye first. Then said Aeschines: of a very truth thou art a
great dele more perfect honest manne then I am, for of me begoonne all this
our falling out, and of the to have a perfect atonemente. By this means they
were reconciled of new, and as good love and friendship between them as ever
there had been tofore.

At a certain season saillyng in ye Aristippus saillyng to Rhodus, was cast on
land by shipwreck.
And when he had on the sands espied the priente of mathematical figures of
geometry drawn in ye sand: All is well masters, quod he, I have espied the
steps and signs of men. And being entreed the city there next by, he
never leafte serchyng until he found out what p^rsones were there studious of
disciplines: Aristippus after (...) met w^^^ learned (...) in a (...)
cou^^^^^ was high^^ ^^ll entre^^^^d both he ^ ^ll his cou^paignie for his sake.
and after that he was ones met with the same, they did with all humanitee
possible entretein not only him for his own person, but also the others that
came with him, yea and besides y^, g^ue them money enough in their purses for
their costs and charges, until they should return thither again in their way
homeward. After certain days when the others that had come at the first with
Aristippus addressed them selfs to return into their country and asked of
him, whether he would any message to be dooen at home to his neighbors and
countreme^ne, he said: Nothing but that they apply theimselfes to acquire and
purchase such manner richesse, True and ve^^^^ r^ches of the mind.
as may not perish and be lost by shipwreck but may geat to land with
their owner. The self same matter does Uitr^uius report in ye sixth volume of
Carpe^trie or deuisyng, Uitruuius writes in Latin volumes of carpentrie, or
deuisyng of buildings.
saying more over that Aristippus at that season came to the city of Rhodus.

When Socratesspake fore against Charondas, or (as some writers holde^ opinion)
Phaedon demanded what feloe it was, so perfumed with sweet oils and savors,
Aristippus said, even I it is miserable and wretched creature yt I am, and a
more miser then I, the king of the persians. But mark, says he, that like as
he is in this behalf nothing superior to any other living creature, so is he
not a jot better then any other manne. His menyng was, A man by e^ternall
gooddes, is not made better.
that manne by e^ternal or outward gooddes is made not a whitte the better.
Both an horse all be smered with oil of baulme or spyke, should have the self
same savor, that should a king: and a sely poor ^egger being anointed or
perfumed with ye like kind of oil or savor, smells even as well as does
y^ highest prelate of them all.

THE SAYINGS OF DIOGENES Cynici, were philosophiers of the sect of Antisthenes
and Diogenes and were called, Cynici either of the place Cinosarg^, where
Antisthen^s kept his schole, orels of y^ greek ^otable (...) doggues. Because
they were ever most importunely barkyng and raillynge against the vices of
men, orels because i^ words of rebaudrie and shameless speaking, they did
with their foul mouths represente the curryshenesse of doggues.
THE CYNIKE^
THe order (as I suppose) shall appear to hang very well together, if next
after the holiness of Socrates, by sayings of mirth vttreed, and after y^
merry plainness of Aristippus, we make mention and rehersall of Diogenes was
scholar unto Antisthenes. And they two were the first and principal autours of
the sect of the Cynikes, and therefore was he called Cynicus. Whose life does
Diogenes La^rtius write and largely prosecute.
Diogenes of Sinopa, ^o, long) was a city in Pontus orels veraye nigh to it.
Bui^ded by the Milesians, a florent city, and of great power, in which were
many goodly houses and mansio^ places of royal buildyng, with schools,
mercate steedes, walkyng places and gorgeous temples. And in this city were
borne Timotheus Patrion, Diphilus a writer of comedies, and Diogenes Cynicus,
who was thereof called Sinopensis or Sinopa^us.
Sinope, who in allmanerfolde grace of his sayings, far passed and excelled
y^ others. howbeeit, all these three philosophiers though in deed for unlike
and in manner contrary qualitees, yet nevertheless do I judge one eue^ as
highly as an other to be esteemed and had in honor: so y^ although they were of
veraye unlike facions, yet may ye well say that they were in degree, feloes
like one with an other^

First of all having departed out Athenes, he resorted to the philosophier
Antisthenes, Diogenes would needs be schoolare unto Antisthenes.
to be his disciple: by whom although he was often times put back and
shifted of^ (for Antisthenes would take no scholares) yet would he not cease
still to be an hanger on about him: Antisthenes would have no scholares.
in so much that when Antisthenes on a time offreed to give him a strype with
a staff, he willyngly put out his hedde under the staff, saying: Stryke if
thou be so disposed, yet shall thou not find any staff so hard, wherewith to
beat me away from ye, as long as thou shall speak that may concern matters
of learning. A notable exaumple of sapience with whole heart and mynde^
fervently desired and zeled. Diogenes had a woondrefull love and zele to
sapience.


When he by chance saw a mous rennyng and whippyng about from place to place
in a certain green with in ye city of Athenes called Megaricu^, which mous
neither sought any hole, nor was afeard with the stieryng of folks, nor had
any lust to eat meat: A ioyly gaye exaumple of libertee, said Diogenes. And
even forthwithall, renouncyng and forsakyng the world, he begoonne to take up
his dwelling in a tubbe. Whereof Diogenes took occasi^n to take up his dwel^^^^
place in a (...).


Why Diogenes had no house of his own to ^a^e and ^^ynke in
he showed with pointyng of his finger the galerie or walkyng place that was
called ^ouis porticus, and said, that the people of Athenes had builded to his
use a royal mansion place where to dyne and suppe, Iouis portieus Iuppit^^ his
(...) galerie (...) Iuppiter his walk, a pl^ce in Athenes
and to take his repaste. The thing that was public, he enterpreted to be
made and ordained for him also particularely. A thing publiq^e is (...) for ye
use o^ every p^rtic^lare person also severally
Neither could he wish or desire a fresher or a more galaunte parloure to eat
in.

The school of Euclides, (for that Euclides seemed to teach in deed witty
conclusions, Euclides was in ye later days of Plato who wrote much of
conclusio^s in geometry, which w^rke we have yet in greek and lati^.
but yet nothing to ye furtherau^ce or help of virtuous living,) he called not
(...), a school as ye usual word was in deed, but by a nicke name (...),
which souneth in english cholere, anger and trouble, Diogenes nickenamed the
schools of Euclides, and of Plato.
contrary to y^ significacio^ of ye right word (...), which souneth quiet
vacacion. Sembleably, the scholastical exercitacion and co^ferryng of Plato
called in greek (...), (...),

(...),

(...),


Diogenes by deprauyng and corruptyng the word called (...), (...),
yt is, myspendyng of much good labor and time, because that Plato being
sequestered and exempted from the practike living among men abroad in ye
world, did spend all his days and time in disputacio^s of words, where as
Diogenes living emonges ye thickest of the world abroad, had more mind and
affection to live philosophically, Diogenes set his m^de more to live after
phylosophie, then to dispute thereof.
that is, according to perfect virtue, then only in words to dispute and
reason thereof.

Dionysiaca, which were with great charges and much pomp celebrated and
holden at the city of Athenes in the honor of Bacchus ^ after the feignyng of
the po^tes^ was ^uppiter his ^^^e, bego^^^n upon Semele the daughter of Cadmus,
who being slain with lightenyng, Iuppiter took the child, and sowed it
within his thighe and so kept it, until it was of maturitee to be born, and
then was he borne out of the thighe of Iuppiter. He is called the God of wine,
because he first found out the use of wine, he is called in greek (...), and
thereof is derived Dionysia. And of Dionys^^ is denominated Dionysiaca
certamina, which the Latin m^nne callen of Bacchus Bacchanalia, the rites of
Bacchus, which in the most part of the citees of Greece were kept every third
year.
Bacchus, he called the great woondrementes and gazynges of fools. For that
in the same was nothing dooen, but all to gether foolyshe and worthy skorne.

Athenes,) he called the common droudges and pages of every Jack and Iille,
for that they were of force co^streigned to speak all that ever they did, to
please men, and even like bond slaves to flatre ye beastly foolyshe rabble of
ye people. And the assemblees of ye people swarmyng about the same orators, he
called the pymples or little wheales of glory. Frequente assemblees of y^
people gatheryng about y^ orators been y^ pymples of glory.
The greek word that he used, was (...), that is, little pymples or pushes,
such as of cholere and ^alse fleagme budden out in the noses and faces of many
persons, and are called the sapphires and rubies of the tavern. Menyng thereby
(as I suppose) that like as such pushes in the visages of men, are angrye
things and greeffull, and also final discoumforte to the parties, that
the same may not for shame show their faces, but hyden theimselfes, and
refrein to come in coumpaignie: so the freque^te assemblees of people, swarmyng
about oratoures, do finally purchase and conciliate unto the same much envy,
displeasure, hatered, trouble and vexacion, ensuyng of the glory that they
have in the beginning. As chanced to Demosthenes, and to A^s^hines in Athenes,
and to Cicero in Room.

Diogenes as often as in the life of and philosophiers, affermed no living
thing to be more sapiente then manne. Nothing more sapiente th^n manne.
The Same Diogenes considering in his mind expouners of dreams, reeders what
shall folo^ this dream or yt, southsaiers, and others of like sort, orels
such persons as were wholly subi^cte to glory and richesse: avouched, yt to
his seemyng there was nothing more folyshe, the^ manne. (...) manne.
Notifiyng the wit of ma^ne to be applyable and apt to all goodness, if it
be exercised and e^ured therwithall, The wi^te of man, ap^e to all
good^nesse if it be s^^te thereto.
but if it fall from his right kyn^^ to vice, then to be many degrees wurse
then ye dummebrute ^eastes.

sermonem, (...)
in english communicacion or talkyng. And ye greek vocable, (...), (...)
is in latin, laqueus, in english an halter or a streng, ^uch as a body may
by ye neck be hanged withal. Which he spoke, for that such persons as are
werie of their lives, and are in such despair, yt they would ^ain be out of
the world, do many of them by and by hang and stra^gle theimselfes, What
thing desperate persons should do.
whereas they ought rather to have recourse to good co^municacion yt might
recou^forte their spirits and bring them a gain from despair. For to y^
heart being in heauynes and utter disco^forte: ye best phisicia^ is good and
wholesome co^^unicacio^. Neither shall the sense be out of square, ^fye take ye
greek vocable (...) (as in an other significacio^ it may w^l be taken) for
reason. And then ye sense shall be, yt men ought rather in times of displeasur^s
^ misauc^tures, to stay theimselfes by reason, ^ to use their discrecio^ and
wisdom, In times of mysfortu^e is wisdom and discrecio^ most to be used.
in taking my^chau^ces patiently as men should do, then upon trifleyng
occasions to fall in despair, and so wilfullye to cast away theimselfes, as
many have dooen. Albeeit taking (...), for talking, I think, Diogenes mened,
yt me^ ought so to provide, that their words and co^municacion at al times
be virtuous and fruitful, as well to ye heater as to the speaker, Me^ne ought
to have no co^municacion, but such, as may be fruitful and ^difiyng, as well
to the hearer, as to ye speaker.
and not of such sort as ye speaker may afterward have cause to repent and
wish within his beallye again. As Seneca notes the improuidencie and
unadvisedness of many persons, which often times (as he speaks it in
Latin) Emittunt uoces per iugulu^ redituras, as, that is, leatten escape
words, that must afterward come back again by their own throtes, No man
ought to leat escape words, which must afterward come home again by ye
throt^^
and cost them their necks. So that Diogenes would no men's co^municacion to
be such as might afterward be found hangyng matters and redounde to their
own confusion, but rather to be fruitful and virtuous. For only such
words and none other, No words been worthy the name of talkyng, but such
as been fruitful.
been worthy the appellacio^, or name of communicacio^ and talkyng, of which
redoundeth as well to the hearer, as to the speaker some fruit, profit, and
edifiyng: and for which both parties may be the better, and not have cause
afterward to be shrewe theimselfes. And such as vsen naughty and pernicious
bableyng, Such as vse^ pernicious words are co^me^ly autours of their own
confusion.
dooen often times procure their own harms, and been autours and werkers of
their own confusion.

When Diogenes at a feast of high Plato not ones to put his hand to any of
the dentie dishes but to feed only upon a few olives, he said: what is
befallen most sapiente father, Plato a man of sob^e diete.
that whereas to come to such manner fare as this, ye made ones a viage in to
Sicilie, ye do here now abstein from ready provision of meats purposely
dressed for you. Syracuse the head city of al Sicilie, yt nobleness and
richesse, of which Tullie does at lar^e describe in the accions against
Uerres
To this said Plato again, yet iwys, o Diogenes, even in Sicilie also I was
satisfied with such meat for the most part as this that I eat now: why
then needed you to saill unto the City of Syracuse, said Diogenes? were there
no olives at that season growyng wtin the country of Attica? This saying some
writers ascriben to Aristippus.

Diogenes on a time, as he was Plato, and offreyng to him a few of his
figgues, said: ye may take some part with me, if ye be disposed. And when
Plato had taken some, and eaten them, Diogenes said: (...).
ye may take some part, with me, were my words, and not to raumpe them up
on that facion. This merry ies^yng word may be applied to a serious matter,
that is to weete, to be spoken on such persons, as abusen ye gentle
permission and suffreaunce of their prince, of their scholemaister, or of their
parents, to the attemptyng or dooyng of things unlawful. As (for exau^ple,)
if one being advertised, yt it is a thing not unprofitable to take a taste,
and to have a little sight in logique, do bestow all the days of his life on
that study. The saying is, in such wise recited by Laertius, that one may
doubt whether of ye two did offer the figgues to the other.

Plato in deed was a frugall man and a great sparer or housba^d, Plato a
sparyng mann^, but a lover of clenlynesse.
but yet one yt loved to have all things picked net, and clean. And
co^trariewise, Diogenes a veraye sloouen, Diogenes a very slooue^.
and one that cared for no clenlynesse. Therefore trampleyng with his durty
fete upon Plato his fine piloes and other beddyng, Diogenes tra^pleed with his
durtie feere upon Plato his p^loe and beddyng.
to certain y^ familiare friends of Dionysius being there in coumpaignie, whom
Plato had desired to dinner, he said, I do now trede the ambicion of Plato
under my feet Plato anon answered thus, yet in how great pride swellest
thyself o Diogenes, The ambicio^ and pride of Diogenes.
while thou thynkest thyself to trede another man's pride under thy feet. The
self same thing is by other writers more pleasauntly reported. To Diogenes,
saying: I trede the pride of Plato under my feet: So thou dooest in deed,
(quod Plato) but it is with another kind of pride, as great as mine. For even
the same was a point of pride, To make bost of conte^nyng pride, is an high
point of pride and ambicion.
that he made so great boste and vaunte of contemnyng clenlynesse. And those
persons yt do glory and braggue of their niggy she sloouenry, and
simpleness of their habit, been of their appetite, and in their hertes, no
less ambicious, then such as setten out theimselfes in gorgeous apparel,
albeeit of an other sort, and in an other kind. More dishonestee is in
seeking prease^ by countrefeacted virtue.
And a great deele more dishonestee is there in that ambicion which seeks
laud and prease of the false color and cloak of virtue cou^trefeacted. Yet
Socio^ ascribes this saying, not to Diogenes, but unto Plato the Cynike.

Diogenes had desired of Plato a little What thanks Diogenes re^dred unto
Plato, for geuynge him wine and fyggues more the^ he asked.
and eftsons to have also a few figgues. Plato sent him a whole stene or
pitcher full. To whom ye Cynike rendreed thanks in this manner: when it is
demanded of the, how many is two and two, thou aunswerest, twenty: so
neither dooest thou give things according to a bodies askyng, ne make a
direct answer to such questions as are demanded of the. He noted Plato,
Diogenes noted Plato of unmeasurable verbosite^, and so did Aris^ot^l^s also.

The eloquence of Plato is of all writers est^^ed, to be such, that if Iupp^t
should sp^ake Greek h^ would v^e the (...) of (...).


as a man out of measure ta^katif, which selfsame thing did Aristoteles also
note in his wrytynges. Notwithstanding Aristotle his notyng, which proceeded of
envy, Plato is of all the Greeks esteemed to be of so wyttie inu^ncion in his
wrytyng^s and of so great varietee, shift, eloquence and good vttreaunce in
speaking, that the same Gr^kes pronounced, that in case Iuppiter should or would
speak Greke^ he would speak with Plato his toungue and phrase. And no less
digni^ee and ^^^^l^encie is to the same Plato attributed by Cicero,
Quintilianus, and all other latin writers also, being of any judgment.

To one demaundyng in what The m^ste corrupt and vicio^s manners of all ye
country of Greece thr^ughoute, in the time of Diogenes.
Notyng the most corrupt and vicious manners of all greece throughout, in so
much that even among the lacedemonians^ a nation lest corrupted of all others^
only in the children remained the aunciente integritee and vncorrupcion. And
all under one he signified that in the residue of the country of Greece, not so
mu^he as the children neither were good, honest, or virtuous. And this thing
moreover did he notify, the men to be much more vicious, then ye boys,
whereas as of congruence the children ought by them to be trained and nousleed
in virtuous disposicion, Children ought of congrue^ce to be trained and framed
to virtuous disposicion.
and framed to an honest trade of living.

When Diogenes on a certain time treactyng, and making a declaracion How
Diogenes rebuked the people, for that they were ready to harken unto matters of
lightness, and slack to give ear to matters of grauitee.
he begoonne to sing such an other foolyshe song, (as Robyn hood, in
barnesdale stood etc.) and sembleed as though he would dance withal. And when
a veraye great multitude of people had now gathered together, and swarmed
about him, he took them all up for stumbleyng, because that to things
foolyshe and seruyng to no good purpose, they came rennyng by whole flocks,
and as merye as pyes, where as to serious matters, and the same much auailable
unto good living, they neither would resort or approach, nor diligently give
^are. Ueraye like unto this it is, y^ some writers ascriben to Demosthenes, of
the So it was, that Demosthenes on a time being hot in making an oracion to
the Atheniens: the people were soodainly in such a great rore among
theimselfes, that they gave no ear to Demosthenes, but rather troubleed him in
his tale. Whereupon he said, that he had two or three words to say unto
them, requiryng them to hold their noise, and to give good ear what he would
say. Immediately was made silence, and Demosthenes in this wise begoonne. A
certain young manne had hyered an Ass from Athenes, to the town of Megara.
And both the parties went together in cou^paignie. And being somer season,
about noone the son weaxed so feruente hot, that for to cover theimselfes
from the son, either party would needs hyde himself under the shadoe of
the Ass. But they fell at variaunce about it, and either party would needs
put of the other. The one said, that he had set out the Ass to hyere, but
not the shadoe, the other on his party avouched, that forasmuch as he had
hyered the Ass, he had best right and title for the time during, to the shadoe
of the Ass to. And ymmediately after thus much of the tale told, Demosthenes
came down from the pulpite or scaffolde. The people were so fain to hear the
rest of the tale, that they caught Demosthenes by the gown and held him
back, nor would at no hand suffer him to depart, but required him in any
wise, to make an end of his tale. Then said Demosthenes unto them: Why are
ye so desirous and fain to lysten a tale of the shadoe of an Ass, and have no
will ne mind at all to harken me speaking of matters weighty, serious, and
touching the commen weal?
shadoe of an ass.

Men will put theimselfes to peines for the atteignyng of all things,
saving vertue^ honestee.
to the end that they might at length be exercised and cunnyng therein, and not
one of them all would put him self to any peine, that they might in fine
prove weldisposed, and honest men.

From no sort of men in the Diogenes sp^red tauntyng no man living.

Diogenes checked the grammarians.


He said that he greatly woondreed at the Gra^matici, were those yt spent their
study in humanitee, and who^ we call schoolemaisters.
Grammarians, that they did with such earnest study make deep inquisicion of
the hard auentures of Ulysses, and knew nothing of their own myschaunces.
The grammarians in old time spent most of their study and were most
famyliare in the Rhapsodies are, that we call things patched together, as the
works of Homerus were. For Homerus himself was blind, and made voluntary, and
soong ex tempore, that is without study. And after his death Aristarchus
gathered all his makynges together, and compiled them into two works, the one
entitleed Ilias which is of the battaill and destruction of Troie, and the
other Odyssea, of the wandreyng of Ulysses, ere he could geat home to Ithaca,
after that Troie was burned. And because those works were co^piled by patches,
they were called, rhapsodiae, as ye would say patches or ^loutes boched
together.
rhapsodies of Homerus. And he in his wercke entitleed Odyssea makes mention
and rehersall of diverse the wandreynges of Ulysses on theseaes and about
soondrie countrees ere he could geat home to Ithaca after the burning of Troie.

How Diogenes found fault with ye Musicians.
for that about their harpes and other musical instruments, they would
bestow great labor and diligence to set the strings in right tune, and
had manners gerryng quite and clean out of all good accord or frame.

How Diogenes reproved ye professors of the Mathematical disciplines.
He reproved also the professors of the Mathemati^^, war the professors and
^^ude^^^s of geometry, Music, Arithmetike and Astrology. For (...) were
called scie^cies Mathematical, because that where they ar^ learned by clean
intelligence of the wit, yet they proceed of (...) and sure principles and
conclusions, that they may be ^^re c^^t^inly and perfectely perceived and
proved, then Logike, Rhetorike and Philosophy, or any other such.
Mathematical sciencies, for yt they were always gazyng and staryng upon the
soonne, the moon, and the sterres, and yet could not see what things lay
before their feet.

to speak things standing with right and justice, How Diogenes reproved the
orators.
but to put the same in execucio^, and to do therea^ter, they were veraye
slack.

The covetous persons he ratleed How Diogenes ratleed and shook up covetous
persons.
for yt in words they dispreased money, whereas in their hertes they loved
the same of life. For this special propretee the covetous persons have, None
do in words more cry out on avarice, then ye covetous person^s.
that none alive do in words more defye and deteste avarice, then
theimselfes do.

The common people also he took How Diognes checked y^ commen people.
for that they were despisers of money, and yet in ye while, they would never
the more foloe the steps of the same good men whom they most highly
commended: but rather foloed those persons that had the grummelle sede and
mucke of the world, whom in words they did greatly dispraise.

How Diogenes rahated such persons as did sacrifice to have bodyly heith.
(in yt they were unmeasurable raueners, and gourmaunders, and would not leave
eating while the bealy would hold) they did al together against the good health
of the body. Diogenes hated gluttons.


What fault Diogenes found with bond servants.
that when they saw their masters devour meat beyond all reason or measure,
they took not away the meat from them, allegeyng that to be ye way to
preserve their masters in health. And for bond servants, or slaves is it
more conueniente then for honest me^ne, to be ever maunchyng, It is not for
honest men to be ever ra^e^yng.
and fillyng the gutte.

sort of men he praised. He allowed them that were toward wiuyng, and yet
wiued not: What persons Diogenes allowed and praised.
yt were in a readynesse to saille on the sea, and yet took no ship: that were
about to give children their fyndyng, and yet found none at all: that adressed
theimselfes to enter doings in the commen weal, and yet entreed not in
deed: that had prepaired and framed theimselfes to be in court, and to live
in householde with high states or men of great power, and yet came not thereto.
Signifiyng, that best it was from all the said things vttrely to abstein, and
therefore those persons to seem wise, which having had ^arnest mocion or
prouocacion to any of the same, had in season changed their minds, for that
when men are ones already entreed in such matters, it is not in their own
power or free libertee to altre that they have advisedly resolved upon, When a
man has ones entreed any great matter, it is not in his own power, to goo
back again, or to change his purpose.
although it repent them of y^ trade or way yt they have chosen. Whosoever has
ones married a wife, is not now from thensforthe all together his own ma^ne:
but in manner half maisterfast: The state of married men, of saillers on the sea,
and of officers in a common weal.
whos^ has auentured to commit himself to the sea, must of force stand in
the grace of the wyndes whither to be co^ueighed or carried: whosoever has ones
stepped forth, and set in foot to take charge of a commen weal, and to
have doings in public affairs, must remedylesse serve To serve y^ staige,
is a proverb taken out of ye latin Scenae seruire, by which is signified^ to
do as the time will suffer, and as the present case requires, so each
person to a^^l^e himself. Cicero writing unto Brutus, says to him: Tibi
nunc populo and scenae, ut dicitur, seruiendam est. Nam in te non solum
exercitus tui, sed omnium ciuium, ^c poene gentium coniecti sunt oculi. that
is, Thou must now of neces^^^e serve the people, and the staige (as says the
proverb) For on the are directely and wholly cast the yien, not only of thyn
own army, but also of all the Citizens of Room, yea and in manner of all
nations in the world too. So that the proverb may vera^e congruently be
spoken of such persons, as have taken in hand some high office or charge in
a commen weal, orels the conueighaunce and e^ecucion of some veraye noble act
or matter to be dooen in the face of the worlde^ which they must of force,
either to their high honor, praise, glory, and renoume go through withal and
finyshe, orels with the great infamy, shame, and reproach, quail and lay all
in the dust, because of the expectacion of men in such a case.
the staige, and goo through with the part that he has taken in hand to
play: yea and though his heart would never so feign, yet is it as much as his
life is woorthe, from a public office of gouernyng a commenweale, to retiere
unto a private state and condition of living.

Diogenes has the name to be the How we ought to behave our selfs to our
friends.
but that to the same courtesy of behaueour, we ought, also to couple
liberalitee and bountee for a coumpaignion. Whosoever dooen gently and courteously
handle and entreacte their friends, are said proprely in greek (...), (...).
that is, to take by the right hand, and courteously and louyngly to entretein.

At what time Diogenes being taken Crete, which is now called Candie, was
brought forth to be sold, unto the ^ryer demau^dyng wherein his chief feacte or
cunnyng did stand, By what title Diogenes would be commended to the buyers,
when he should be sold.
and by what title he should commend him to the buyers, Marie, (quod he) say yt
thou have a feloe to make money of that has ye right knowelage how to rewle
men of freedom, Xeniades a Corinthian bought Diogenes to his bondeman.
one Xeniades a Corinthian having much meruaill at ye strau^gnesse of ye cry,
approached unto Diogenes, and demanded whether he had perfect skylle to do
yt he professed and took upon him. And when by the co^municacio^ of ye
philosophier he perceived him to be a man both of high wisedo^, and also of
profounde learning, he bought him, and had him home with him to his house, and
committed his children to him for to be taught, Xeniades committed his sons
to ye guydyng and tea^hyng of Diogenes.
which children Diogenes took unto his cure, and the same right gentlemanlike
trained both in learning and manners. And first and foremoste, he taught them
ye liberal sciencies, What things Diogenes taught ye sons of Xe^iades.
and shortly after he taught them ye feacte of ryding an horse, he taught
them to bend a bow and to shoot in it, to whurle with a slyng, and to pick
or cast a darte. In the wrastleyng place, he would not suffer that their tutour
(which had ye cure of their bodies and health) should exercise them with
peinfull labors after the manner of men of fense, What exercise of body
Diogenes permitted to his young schoolares.
but so far and so much as might be auaillable to ye roddynesse of color,
and for good health of ye body. He found the means yt they should learn by
heart and memory al yt ever good was out of ye poets, Diogenes his manner of
teaching poets and other autoures.
and other writers. In co^sideracion yt we have true knowlage and perfect
intelligence, We have perfect knowelage of no more then is engraven in our
memory.
only of such things as we have suerly enprinted and engraven in our
memory. At few words, ye sum, ye effect and pith of al doctrine he drew
out for them, Diogenes drew out the su^me of all disciplines for his
scholares.
co^piled together by abrigeme^te, to the end yt both they might in shorter
time have a through sight in it, and also the more substancyally for ever
co^tein it in their memory. How Diogenes trained ye soonnes of Xeniades in
their manners.
The Same children he broke and taught how to awayte on their parents at home
in their house, Childre^s diet composed or assigned by Diogenes.
and to be weel pleased with light meat, and such as was easy to be
gotten, and to be contented with water to their drink: and where others kept
their long locks well trymmed and decked, for an ornamente, and for the
better setting forth of theirfauour and beauty, Diogenes commanded these
children to have their heddes polled. And if at any time such occasion
chanced, that they must goo forth of doors, he brought them forth
vnkembed, and vnpiked, without cotes, barefoote and bareleggued, and not a
word with them. Over and besides this, he did break them in the feacte of
huntyng, in this behalf following the guyse and custom of the Lacedaemonians.
The Lacedemonia^s broke and exercised their children and youth in huntyng.
By reason of these things it came to pass, that Diogenes had much reuerente
attendaunce dooen to him by the said children, and that he was for their sakes
highly esteemed and accepted with their father Xeniades. Other writers tellen
the tale, that the crier by the biddyng of Diogenes did in this manner speak
his words. Is there any manne that is willing or minded to bye a master?

When he sat him down in the Diogenes) what matter makes that, sens that
fishes after what facion so ever they lain, be bought up. Notyng ye
folyshenesse of the commen people, which gooyng about to bye a bondma^, wylbee
wise and well aware that no fault of the body may escape unespied, The
habit of the mind is best perceived by a man's talkyng.
and will not with like provision and caucion search and try what state and case
ye mind is in. And as for ye habit of ye mind is most evidently perceived
by a man's communicacio^ and talkyng. And not by sittyng or standing.

He said that it seemed to him a men would not bye a pot or a potteled,
The ou^^sight of many persons in bying of men.
but well tried with knockyng on it, orels by ye tyncklyng and soune thereof: in
bying a man they could be contented and satisfied with only lookyng on him
with their yie. Signifiyng that a man is by nothing in ye world better
known, then by his communicacio^. A ma^ne is by no thing better known then by
his co^municacion.
Therefore like as they that goo about to bye an yearthen pot, or vessel for
an orkyn, do knock upon it with their knuccle, and by the soune that it
gives do soon disterne whether it be whole, of such claye or metalle as
it should be, and seasoned in ye keil, or not: so before yt they bye a man
with pounds moo then one or two, meet it were to provoke the party to
speak, and to tell one tale or other, and by his talkyng to find out what
manner feloe he is. To ye selfsame purpose apperteineth ye saying next before. A
fyshe is dumme and cannot speak, neither makes it any force how the same lies
on the stalle, forasmuch as nomanne cane make thereof any thing but a fyshe.
Se^bleably it is no matter ne difference at all, of what habit pl^ight, or
complexion of body ye bye a ma^ne, if ye bye him, never hearing him speak.

Unto Xeniades by whom he was The master ought to be auised by his servant,
if he be wise.
or a physician, is of force driven to be rewled by the same, if he be
disposed to have any commoditee or profitable service of him.

The report goes, that in the Xeniades he continued and lived until he was a
veraye aged manne, and was there buiryed of his own scholares. And being
asked by Xeniades how his desire was to be buiryed, How Diogenes desired to
be buiried.
grouelyng quod he, with my face toward ye ground And to the same Xeniades
demau^dyng the cause why, he said: for, ere long time to an end, it will come
to pass, yt those things which now lain downward shall be turned upward.
Alludyng herunto, that at that present season, y^ Macedonians had gotten the
over hand upon the Atheniens, and had achiued to the empier of all Greece, and
of, in manner vilaines or slaves, they were become veraye haulte, and from veraye
basse, they were mounted to high domynion. The Macedonians conquered all Greece,
and held the domynion of the same, in y^ time of Diogenes.
That if all things should so be turned up side down, it should saunce faill
come to pass that his dedde carkesse also should ere many days after be
turned from lyyng grouuleyng, to liyng with the face upward. Percase his menyng
was this, to be no matter to be passed on, after what manner of liyng or facion
the dedde body be put in y^ grave, about which matter, great was the
supersticion of the most part of people, The manner of buiriyng i^ old time.
for they were carried to their buiriall with their feet liyng forth toward y^
town gate, they were burned in manner of sta^dyng upright, and at this day ye
Jews (as I hear say) are put in their graves as if it were standing on
their f^ete, at lest wise y^ Christians every one of them without excepcion
are laid in their graves with their faces upward. The Jews are buiryed, as it
were sta^dyng on their feet, and the Christians with their faces upward.


mercate place, he cried with a loud voice. Approach ye me^ne, approach ye me^,
as though he had had some earnest matter to say unto the people. And when they
had gathered veraye thick about him, and he for all yt, ceased not but still
cried: approach ye me^ne, certain of them taking great indignacion at the
matter, answered: lo, here we be, say thy mind. Then Diogenes dryuyng
them away with a staf, said: I bade men to approach, and not dounge hills
or draffesackes. He thought not the name of a man to be a congruente or a
right name for such persons, as lived not according to reason, but were leden
and rewled by sensual mocions, They that liuen not according to reason, but are
leden by sensual affectes and passions, are not worthy to be called men.
and pangues, after the manner of swyne and other brute beasts.

Alexander Magnus when he was at Corinthus, sometime a right noble and a rich
city in Achaia^ situate and lyyng between two seas, the one called Aegeum, and
the other Ionium, a mart town of great haunte. It was first builded by
Sisyphus the son of Aeolus and called Corcyra. After that it was called
Ephyre. Then was it destruied, and eftsons reedifyed by one Corinthus the son
of Orestes, and called Corinthus. Then was it yet again burned and clean
destruied by the Romans, and finally reedified by Augustus Emperor of Room.
Corinthus, went unto Diogenes sittyng in his tubbe, Alexander talked
familiarly many things with Diogenes sittyng in his tubbe.
and talked familiarely with him many things: from whom after that he was
departed, to his familiar^ fre^des taking high disdeigne and indignacion, that
being a king, he had dooen so much honor to such a doggue as Diogenes,
How highly Ale^a^der Magnus esteemed the philosophical mind of Diogenes.
who would not vouchesalue so much as ones to arise up from his taille to do
his duty of humble obeysaunce to so great a prince, he said: well, yet for all that, were I not Alexander, I would with all my heart be Diogenes. So
meruaillous highly did he esteem, Nothing more like to a kingdom, then a true
philophical mind.
that same the mind and heart of the same Diogenes constitute and being in
most perfect freedom, and far surmountyng the coumpace or reach of al
worldly, or tra^sitorie things: that he judged nothing to be more like to a
kingdom or empier^ The principal and chief felicitee of kings, The
pri^cipall and chief felicitee of kings.

What high co^moditees redoundeth of philosophy.


is, that they owgh service or homage to no yearthly creature, but whatsoever
thing stands with their will and pleasure, they do and beraye easyly bring
to effect: and secoundaryly, that they feel want of nothing yearthly: and
all this does philosophy more substancyally and more assuredly perform to
a man, then does any empier unto kings. Albeeit to be Alexander, To be
Alexander, Alexander thought to be more, then to be a king.
Alexander deemed in his opinion to be a somewhat higher and greater point,
then to be a king.

He avouched y^ such folks as What folks Diogenes thought worthy to be
called feeble and maimed persons.
but such as had no scryp hangyng by their side. He dalyed with the affinitee or
likeness of two greek vocables, the one, (...), (...),
and the other, (...). (...).
For (...), of the grecians is called, a maimed person, a creple, or one that
has lost the use of some membre or lymme of his body, and (...), he yt is
without a scryppe, such as ye poor that asken alms from door to door have
hangyng by their side. Notifiyng in mine opinion, A man void of phylosophie is
far unmeet for all good occupacions.
a man to be far unmeet for all good occupacions to be^ dooen in this
life, that is void of philosophy. The Cynikes had no provision of vitailles,
but in their scryppe.
For the scryppe was for all provision and store of vitailles that the Cynikes
had^

How Diogenes avenged hymselfe^ on certain you^gmenne, yt had whipped and
scourged him
he regestred in a piece of paper, and so walked up and down with his cope wide
open. The marks or scrattes of the stripes declared as plainly as if he had
spoken it with his tou^gue, how he had been handleed, and the white paper
vttreed them yt had dooen the deed. By this means he publyshed the vnge^tle
young feloes, to be chidden and rahated of all the world.

Because he was a Cynike, he Virtue is preased of many, but no ma^ne will foloe
it.
but yet no ma^ne would foloe the same. Whereupon he used often times to say, yt
he was the hounde of many that praised him, but yet that never a one of his
praisers had the heart to goo on huntyng with the hounde that was so much
praised.

A certain feloe making vaunte Pythia, were games and plays, yearly celebrated,
and holden in the honor of Apollo, for Python was a great serpent by the
co^mau^demente and beck of Juno (as ye poets do fable) set upon Apollo to
de^^r^ye him, when he was an infaunte, but Apollo even in his tender infancy,
with his bow and aroes slew the serpente Python, and thereof was su^named
Pythius, and thereof comes Pythia. Of these games is ^fore mentioned.
Pythia, No, it is I (quod Diogenes) that win the victory of men, and
thou, of slaves. Ones again he dalyed with the affinitee and likeness of the
greek words, that is between (...), men, and (...), bond slaves. And
bondeslaues did he call, whatsoever persons were as subject and given unto
sensual lusts, and desires. And these cupiditees by philosophy to overcome,
is a more honest and ioyly thing, then in the games called Pythia to overcome
men.

The less time that a man has to live, the more earnestly is ye study of
virtue to be proceeded in.
in consideracio^, that it were a foul shame in a man's later days to be
disco^forted, or to have a cold heart in prosecutyng an honest trade.

yesterdaye for my coming thither. The most part of men requires to have
thanks, A philosophier deserves high thanks, that being desired he will
vouchesalue to be a geast at an other man's table
as it were for some great benefit, if they have had a body at dinner or
supper with them. But Diogenes (although being a poor manne) demed great
thanks to be duly owyng unto him, yt he would vouchsalue and not refuse to
make one at a man's table, for yt he came nowhither without bearyng his
porcio^ of the shot for his repaste, A philosophier, wheresoever he comes
paieth well for his repast if he talk in philosophy.
but did with co^municacio^ of philosophy much more dentyly feed ye minds
as well of ye party yt made the feast, as also of ye other geastes, then
the same maker of the dinner fed the body with good viandrie.

He took on a time Demosthenes How Diogenes rebuked Demosthenes conueighyng
himself preuylye ferther into a tauern when he was found there at dinner in an
outer room.
and when the same Demosthenes having espied Diogenes conueighed himself away
into an inner room of the house, so much the ferther in (quod he) shall thou
be in the tavern. Signifiyng that he was like much ye more for that to be a
talkyng stoke to all the geastes in the coumpaignie, that not only he haunted
such a place, but also had conueighed himself privily out of sight, as though
he had been found in some matter or deed of myschief. For yt was a thing more
to be talked of, then that he was making good chere there. Other writers
tellen, that this was spoken to a certain young ma^ne, not namyng what he was,
but the same might be eue^ Demosthenes too. As for the sense is the more plain
and open, that we take or understand, The more se^^^te yt a man (...) ^an
civil (...) ye more v^rayly is he in it.
that ye young manne was put in remembreaunce that he should avoid not
ferther in to such a place, but clean out of doors. For the ferther in that
he hid himself secret out of sight with in the tavern, the more truly he
was in the tavern.

Demosthenes that had euerywhere so great a name, How Diogenes showed
Demosthenes unto certain strangers, being ^esirous to set him.
Diogenes stretchyng out his middle finger, and pointyng with it, said:
Thissame is that ioyly feloe Demosthenes the orator of the Atheniens. The fore
finger next unto the thumb is called in latin, index, Index.
as if ye should say in english, the pointyng finger, or the showing finger,
because yt stretchyng forth the same finger on length we use to show this, or
that. And the middlemust finger was among men of old time rekened
slau^dreous, for a cause at this present not to be rehearsed. And Demosthenes
had in every man's mouth an civil report, of mysliuyng and abusyng his
body. Which thing Diogenes notifiyng, had more fancy to point to wards
him with the middle finger, the^ with the fore finger, as other folks used to
do.

A piece of bread had fallen from Folish sham^ to no purp^se.
who left the same liyng on the ground, for that he was ashamed to take it up
again. Diogenes myndyng to refourme the folly of the party, put a cord about
the neck of a pot, and trailled it after him on the ground along the
Ceramicus, Ceramicus, was a place i^ Athenes, seruyng for the buiryall of them
yt ha^ been slain i^ battaill.
dooyng the same thing in a pot, which the other feloe was eiuill ashamed to
do in a piece of bread.

Where he seemed to many folks tootoo much and tooto earnest ^ philosophier,
he au^swered, How Diogenes answered them, to whom he seemed tooto earnest a
philosophier.
he yt the^ in foloed the manner of the master chauntres that set the kaye,
or take the first part of a song to begin it in a quiere, who of a custom
and usage, dooen somewhat excede ye right tune yt they should take to the end
that ye others may take ye due time, that they ought to do. For what
excedeth or passes the mean, although it be vicions, (For all virtues sayen
the moral philosophiers) dooen consiste in the mean between to vices, All
virtues do consiste in the mean, between two vices^
as, for exexaumple liberalitee between nygardship and prodigalitee, true
religion between supersticion and contempt.) Yet the same much auailleth to
stiere up, and to quicken the slouggardie of others. Sembleably the robe or
cope, and the tubbe of Diogenes, did not without their great reproach vpbraide
to the rich and welthie folks their nycytee and their delices.

Many are in a deeper kind of madness, then if they should point with one
finger instead of an other.
then the error of myspoyntyng with the finger extended unto. For if a body
should still stretche out the middlemust finger to point therw^ instead of
the forefynger, he should echewhere be accoumpted as one out of his wit if
one, put forth the forefynger to that use, he is thought sad and well
auised. But many a thousand folks there been, which do much more grievously
play the mad men in serious matters, then if they should put out one
finger instead of an other, and yet such persons are not among the people
commenly taken for mysauised. As even at this present day^, the parents do
in their children chastise for a grievous offe^se, The folly of some pare^tes in
chasticyng their children.
if they use the liefte hand instead of the right hand, but they do not
sembleably chastise them, when they choose and take things abhomynable, instead of honest.

He taunted ye folly and madness of The preposterous estymacion of ye people in
bying and sellyng of things.
they bought and sold for little or nothing, and things nothing worth at
very high prices, Images and porteratures of men we^ in old time bought at
high prices.
for he said: yt the porture of a man in brass or stone, should be bought up
with three thousand Tribus nummu^m millibus. The french interpreter
translateth thr^e hundred crowns, which after the rate of fowerteene gro^es a
croune, makes the full sum of three score and ten pounds of our english
coin:
pieces of coin, where as a pecke of mele was to be sold for two brass pe^s.
And yet there needs no such image or porture for any necessary use of man's
life, without meal there is no possibilitee of mainteinyng y^ life. It had
therefore been conueniente that meal should be set at a much higher price
then images of stone or brass. The philosophier esteemed the prices of things
by the natural use or necessary o^cupiyng of the same, Wise men ^^^^^en ye
prices of things, by the natural use of the same.
the peuyshe multitude of ye people estemeth it by their foolyshe persuasion.

Xeniades, certain writers tellen in this manner, where as it was Diogenes yt
was bought, yet as though himself had bought Xeniades, he said unto the same:
See yt thou be obediente to my commandments. And when the other said again
in greek, The master owght to be rewled by the seruau^te being a
philosophier.
(...), as ye would say, that were even the river to run up the hylle,
betokenyng the matter to goo clean arsee versee, if the servant should
command the master: why, quod Diogenes, if thou being in some great
sickness or malady had bought a physicia^, tranquillitee of man.
would you not be rewled by him prescribyng, thy diet? would you say to
him, (...), ye river renneth up ye hylle? If y^ master being eiuil diseased
in his body, be glad and feign to obey y^ servant having good sight and
practice in phisike, much more does it become one yt is sore sick in y^
mind or solle, to be obedie^te to his servant, being profoundly expert in
philosophy. Philosophy heals all the dis^ases of y^ mind.
For what y^ facultee or art of physike perfourmeth to the body, the same
does philosophy accoumplyshe to the mind or solle. The one heals the
feure, the other heals the corrupt and naughty appetites. And how much the
mind or solle is of more dignitee then the body, How much ye solle is better
then y^ body, so much the more grievous are the diseases of y^ solle then of
the body.
so much the more grievous and dedly are the diseases of the solle, then of the
body. Laertius says more over, that Diogenes, when he was asked of the
crier, by what title he would be set out in words, and he had answered
that he could skylle to rewle and to order men of freedom, Diogenes would
needs be sold to one that had need of a master.
As Soon as he had espied a certain ma^ne passing by, trymmely decked and
araied, he said to the same crier, sell me to thissame feloe here, for he has
need of a master.

Diogenes unto his sect and discipline of philosophy, after y^ admissio^ of
ye feloe, for to prove and try the same, Diogenes delivered unto him a
ga^mou^d of bako^ to carye i^ ye street, and commanded him to come after him
The party castyng away by reason of shame, ye thing yt he bare in his hand,
stole privily from him and conueighed him quyte away. Within few days after
Diogenes by chance meetyng with him, laughed and said, thy friendship and mine,
a poor gammou^de of bakon has set at twain. Dooyng to meet, yt he was no
meet or apt disciple for philosophy, yt could not contemn and shake of
folishe shame. Foly^h shame ^o no purpose
For it is not a thing dishonest for one to carrye a ga^mo^de of bako^ in his
hand, To shrynke away from virtue, is a foul shame.
but to shrynke away from honestee and virtue is a thing shameful and
abomynable. Diocles tells theselfsame matter, some what v^riyng from y^ words
above, mentioned. When a certain person making suite to be a disciple of
Diogenes, had said unto him, Master Diogenes command me to do some
service: To the same received into his service, he delivered a lu^pe of chese to
carrye, and when ye young man for shamefastness, refused to bear ye said
piece of chese. A little piece of chese (quod Diogenes) has clean dashed the
amitee and friendship of us two.

When he had espied on a time a Nature has provided for every body al
necessary furniture of household stuf.
This lad is in frugalitee a degree above me, yt do carry about me
superfluous furniture of household, and forthwith took out of his scryppe a
little tree^ ta^kard or dishe yt he used for his cup to drynk on, and yesame
cast away from him, saying: I knew not, yt nature had in this behalf also
made provision for us When he had seen an other boy, for as much as his tree^
saucer was broken, to take up Le^ticula, is a poultz, called chittes, which
(because we here in England have not in use to ^ate) I translate peasen.
peasen out of ye pot with a crust of bread made holowe for that purpose, he
cast away from him his treen potagedishe too, as a thing superfluo^s. The
frugalitee of Diogenes, may shame our superfluitees and excesses.
I can be veraye well contented that these things be thought worthy skorne
and derisio^, so that we grant this excedyng great exaumple of simplicitee
and plainness, to make veraye well to this purpose, that we may be ashamed
of our superfluitees, and excesses, that are used echewhere among us at these
days.

A syllogism, is a perfect argument of logike, in which, two things or
moo, first put, and the same granted, the conclusion does ineuitably foloe
of necessitee.
The Gods are lords of all things, and have all things in their
possession: the sapiente men and the Gods are mutual friends, either to ye
others, and all manner things that one friend has, is commen or ready for the
other also, Ergo the sapiente men are lords of all things, and have all
things in their possession. How Diogenes concluded that a man sapiente has
all things in his possession.
But by the selfsame syllogism he might have been shaken of, when he desired
any thing: why dooest thou crave, sens thou have all things already in thy
possession?

When he had espied a woman How Diogenes rebuked a woman lyyng uncomely
prostrate before the Gods.
her body so boughed down, that behind her, some parts of the same appeared
out, which is not comely, ne honest to be made bare to ye yies of me^: he
went unto her, saying, art you not a feared thou woman, lest y^ some God standing
behind thy back (for all places and things of the world are replenyshed with
the presence of God) thou demean thy self uncomely? He is reported to have
consecrated to Aesculapius a torme^tour, Diogenes consecrated to Aesculapius,
agyau^t with a clubbe in his hand.
who should come rennyng and all to trample, and crushe such persons as would
fall down prostrate upon their faces before Aescul^pius. By this color and
false pretense causyng folks utterly to renounce and abandon supersticion,
which have a belief that the Gods will not hear them, except they make
much doukyng, stoopyng, beckyng, and prostracio^s unto the same with uncomely
gesture of their body.

Tragical excecracio^s met with Dioge^es.
for that he was (according to the form of such manner execracio^s) (...),
destitute of an house to put his hedde in, (...), abandoned from dwelling in
any city, (...), as a man banyshed out of his country, (...), co^streigned
to beg his bread, (...), driven to wandre about from place to place as a
vagabounde, and (...), Ch^liades a noble and a right clerkely work, made by
Erasmus in which he has gathered certain thousa^des of greek and latin
proverbs.
not sure on the one day, where to have his dinner the next day foloyng. This
he said, alludyng to some place of one or other of the tragedies. Of the
execracions and curses of Oedipus (as the fables of poets maken relacion) was
the son of one Laus, king of Thebes: who perceiuyng his queen Iocasta to be
with child, sued to the oracle of Apollo, to have true knowelage, what child his
said wife Iocasta should bring forth. Answer was made by Apollo, yt she
should bring forth a son, by who^ he the said Laus should be slain. In
co^sideracion whereof, ymmediately: as soon as ever the child was bor^ Laus
delivered it unto his shephearde, to do the same to death. But the shephearde
moved with some compassion, would no^ out right kill the infant babe, but
bored through either of his feet an hole, and with a twyg put through the
holes, houng him up alive on a boughe of a tree. But one Phorbas being
shephearde unto Polybius, king of the Corinthians, fyndyng the said child,
bare the same to his queen: who (forasmuch a^ she had no children of her own)
kept and nourished the child, as if it had been of her own body born, and
of the swellyng o^ his feet, by reason of the holes he was by her named,
Oedipus (for (...) in greek is to swell, and (...), a foot.) When this Oedipus
was come to man's state, a strife and debate beginning among the Phocensians,
the said Oedipus unawares and unknowing, slew his own father Laus aforesaid:
Upon this, it fortuned that Sphinx the monstre, standing on an hyllocke, at the
city of Theb^^, would not suffer any body to pass by her, but to all such
persons as trauailled on the way, she propouned redles and doubtefull
questions, and as many as could not soil the same redles, she killed out of
hand. Then was made a decree, and upon the same a proclamacio^, that whosoever
could soil the redle which Sphinx propouned, should have the queen Iocasta to
wife, and should enjoy the kingdom of Thebes. The redle that Sphinx propouned
was this: what one and the same living creature it was, that went on two
feet, on three feet and on four feet: This redle Oedipus soyled, affermyng
it to be manne, who in his infancy crepyng upon his hands and feet was
four footed, afterward being grown to more full years of youth, went
upright on two feet, and in age decrepit^ vsyng a staff, went with three
feet. Sphinx this hearing, for anger and sorrow, tou^bleed hirselfe hedlo^g
down of a great rock and so perished. And Oedipus according to ye statute
aforemade had the queen Iocasta to wife, and with her the kingdom o^ Thebes.
On Iocasta he begotte two soonnes, ye one Polynices and the other named
Eteocles. At length Oedipus had knowelage, b^th that he had slain his own
father, and also that he had married his own mother. For sorrow whereof he
pulled out his own yies with his own hands. And then was leden about blind by
his daughter Antigone, who saved him ones or twys, when he would wilfully have
slain himself. Nerthelesse ye Thebanes having suer knowlage and due prouf of
all the premises, exiled and banyshed Oedipus out of their city and country
for ever. And he departing as a banyshed manne, accursed his sons Polynices
and Eteoc^es (because they did not in such an extremetee aid their father)
that neither of them might enjoy the enheritau^ce of his croune in the
kingdom of Thebes, but that they might slay either other in battaill, and
never have power to return safe into their city etc. with many other most
dire and bittur malediccio^^ which lighted on them, and on all the whole
family of them. For Polynices and Eteocles, fyghtyng hand to hand, for the
succession of their fathers croune, gave either other his deaths wound: so
that they both fell down and dyed even there, out of hand. Iocasta their
mother slew hirself. And Oedipus was with a flashe of lightenyng soodainly
stricken to death: And of this notable plague the malediccions of Oedipus are in
a prouerbiall speaking taken for notable great mysfortunes, and eiuill
chances, such as Diogenes here in this present his apophthegme does
mencio^: and Erasmus in the said Chiliades does more at large recite.
Oedipus I have spoken at large in my work of greek and latin proverbs which
is entitleed, Chiliades.

How Diogenes matched fortune, law and affeccions.
he set always the confidence or stoutnesse of courage: Whereby is purchaced
and maintained y^
against ye law, he set nature: against affeccions, mocio^s, or wilful
pangues of ye mind, reason. For yt by these three things is purchaced and
maintained the tranquillitee of men. Against the bloustreyng storms and
rages of fortune, a strong heart, being void of all manner fear, is to a
sapiente ma^ne a sure buckler and defense: instead of a law, the wise manne
foloeth nature, to the which nature if ye law be repugnau^te, he despises
ye law And with reason he caulmeth, asswageth, and keeps down, the troubleous
assaults of desires and affeccions inordinate.

When Alexander Magnus came to Diogenes, he chanced to find him in the place
that was called, Craneum, Craneu^^e long was a place of e^ercise in the City
of Corinthus.
sittyng in his tubbe, and patchyng together with glewe or paste ye toren
leaves of his books. And after that the king having familiarly talked many
things with him, addressed himself to depart, and said: Bethynke thyself
Diogenes, How Diogenes used the king, Alexander the great inuityng him to ask
of him what gift he would.
what thou would most feign ask of me, for what soever thou shall desire
or wyshe, you shall assuredly have, well (quod Diogenes) of other things we
shall talk anon at leisure, in the mean time stand aside from me a little out
of the way, when ye king had gone back from him, supposyng that ye other was
minded to consider with himself what he might best ask: to the same of a preaty
while speaking not a word, he repeted his former words and ones again said:
ask what thing thy mind and will is Diogenes. Marie eue^ this same was my
will and desire to have, quod he again, for before, thou did keep away
from me the son, being most requisite and necessary for this business or
occupacion that I am about now. Other writers tellen, that he sa^ed thus: Do
not make shadoe between the son and me. For that he was disposed to son him
self.

that Alexander spoke unto him after this sort: I am come hither Diogenes to
succor and to relieve thee, because I see thee to be in great penury and
need of many things. To whom Diogenes answered thus again. Diogenes avouched
him self to be richer then Alexander the great.
Whether of us two is in more penury, I, yt besides my scryp and my cope,
do mysse, ne desire nothing at all, orels thou, which not being contented
with the inheritance of thy fathers kingdom dooest put thyself in adventure,
The in^aciable mind of Alexander, to have empier.
and hasarde of so many perilles and dangers, to enlarge the limits of thyn
empier, in so much, that uneath all the whole world seems hable to satisfy
thy covetous desire?

On a certain time when Diogenes coumforte masters, quod he, I have espied
land. Making resembleaunce to a coumpaignie of me^ne being weried with long
saillyng, who are well refreshed in their hertes, when the port or haven
aferre of appears unto them.

Uain sophisticacions, are rather to be skorned, then to be soyled.
To one by sophistical insolubles concludyng and prouyng, that Diogenes had
horns, feelyng and handleyng his forehedde and his temples. In feith, quod
Diogenes, but I see, ne feel none. He thought better to laugh such a peuishe
trifleyng argument to skorne, then to soil it.

When Zenon readyng a lecture in the schools, labored with most subtle and
most crafty reasons to prove that neither was there, ne possibly might be,
any mouynge, (In which mouynge depends a great portion of the veritees,
concluded in natural phylosophie.) Diogenes arysyng up out of his place, How
Diogenes confuted zenon, labouryng to prove that mouyng is a thing impossible.
begoonne to walk up and down. Zeno maruaillynge thereat, said: why, what
dooest thou now, Diogenes? Marie (quod he) I falsify and confute thy blind
reasons. Rebukyng all under one, the vain braggue and ostentacion that zenon
made of his wit.

A certain sophiste, willing in the Diogenes, How Diogenes mocked a Sophiste,
arguyng him to be no ma^ne.
to show the quickenesse of his wit, made a sophistical argument unto him,
in manner and form as foloeth. That I am, thou art not: when Diogenes had
thereunto granted: And I am a ma^ne, quod the other, ergo, thou art not a man. Then said Diogenes: Every perfect syllogysme, has three parts or
me^bres as, that I am thou art not, the mayor: but I am a ma^ne, the minor:
ergo, thou art not a man, the conclusion.
Leat the first membre of thy syllogysme begin of me, and the conclusion of
thine argument shall assuredly be right and true. He would not vouchesalue to
discuss what defaulte and error was in the argument, but thought better to
give a mock to the feloe yt stood so highly in his own conceipte for the
respect of such trifleyng bagg^age. If his minor had been this, thou art a man, then after Diogene^ his sentence, the conclusion had been good, for it
had foloed that the Sophis^e was no man.

How Diogenes mocked a feloe yt made much pratleyng in astronomy.

Above in the xxiii. saying of Socrates.


buisyly pratleyng and making many gaye good morowes, of the sky, and the
ste^res: I pray you good sir, quod Diogenes, how long seus, came ye down from
heaven? In this he represented Socrates, whose saying was, such things as are
above our reach, to be no part of our play to meddle withal.

Ennuch, Ennuchus, is a ge^de^ man.
being in sore infamy and slaundre of vicious and unthrifty living, had
written upon the door of his house, no eiuill thing motte there enter here.
Diogenes the same inscripcion espiyng, said: ye owner of the house for his own
part, what way does he use to goo in? The Ennuch had set up ye title as a
poysee, or a word of good luck, that no mysaue^ture might light on the house,
and the same did Diogenes wrest and transfer to the vices of the mind, The
vices of y^ mind only, are in deed ^^uil things.
wiche only are in veraye deed eiuill things.

Diogenes having gotten perfume, Diogenes enoynted his feet with perfume,
where others, enoynten their heddes.
contrary to the common usage of al other folks. And to such persons as
made a great woondreyng thereat, he said: Thus I do because that perfume
being poured upon the hedde, reketh out into the aier: but from the feet it
ascends up to the nastrelles. Sembleably did an other person dissallow and
dispraise the commen usage, by which men set garlandes of sweet herbs
and flowers upon their heddes, Me^ne should wear sweet flowers in their
bosome^ rather then in their cappe.
whereas it is more conueniente to put the same benethe the nastrelles, forthat
the ^apour and aier of the redolente savor does not of his propretee so
much descend and soke downwarde^ as it does mount and ascend upward.

The priests, or mynisters (of Athenes,) would have persuaded Diogenes, and
have brought him in mind, to take ordres, and to be a mynistre of the temple
among them, How Diogenes replied to y^ Atheniens, auysyng him to be a priest
or a minister of their holy rites.
allegeyng, y^ such as in their life time had been within holy ordres, had
highest preemynence, among the dedde. To the which aduertiseme^te, Diogenes
thus replied. That is a mad rekenyng, says he, as ever I heard, if the
valiaunte Capitaines Agesilaus and Epaminondas, Agesila^s, a noble and a
victorious king of y^ Lacedaemonians, and Epaminondas a right valiaunte capitain
of the Thebanes.
because they were never prestes, be lyyng in y^ backehous diche, and Patetion
that thief, with all ye rabble of other like spittle vilaines, for this only
respect that they been within ordres, shall sit in God almighty his own
lap. It was a sore che^ke given to the facions of the prestes, who for their
emloumente, lucre, and auantage, did flater, and with fair promyses feed the
supersticion of the blind and ignoraunte people, bryngyng the same in full
belief that taking ordres, The bliss of heaven is not conferred for the
respect, of this order, or that, but for good living.
or professyng religion, should confer eternal bliss after this present
life, where as the same felicitee is ordained and prepaired only ^or those, y^
by godly and noble doings have deserved it, whether they be men of the
church and within holy ordres, or not.

At his first entreyng into his How Diogenes being more the^ hal^ minded to
give over the philosophical trade yt he had entreed into, was stayed.
to give over the trade of living, which he was entreed into. But when at last,
he saw myce come crepyng about his tubbe, and eating up the crummes of bread,
he said to himself, why art thou out of conceipte with thyself Diogenes? thou
art a great estate out right, and kepest a royal port, lo, thou kepest a
table for smelfeastes too, that are glad, to seek their dinner with the.

Plato for y^ respect of his slouenrie and beggerlynesse of living, calling
him curre and doggue: Yea marie (quod Diogenes) ye say soothe^ Diogenes took
in good part to be ^alled doggue.
for I am come rennyng home again to them that sold me away. For it is y^
guise and manner of doggues if they be sold, to run home again to their old
masters. He was nothing offended with the opprobrious word, but rather to
his own purpose interpreted the same. In sallyng toward Aegina he was before
his arriual, taken priesoner of certain pirates, and so brought into y^ Isle of
Crete, Crete, is the same Isle, yt we call Candi^, of which we have noted in
another place.
and there sold. Those pirates (I think,) were Corinthians, or Atheniens, or at
lestwyse Aeginetes.

And being eftsons asked whether there were at the said stewe much press of
folk, yea by ye rood is there, quod he. Notifiyng, that to be called a man,
is a fit name but for a few. The appellacion of a man is fit, but for few.


This also goes in a tale, albeit Plato had thus diffined a man: This
diffin^cion of a man Aristotle also in his logike does improve.
A man is a liuethyng with two feet, having no feathers. And when the
scholares of Plato had made signs and tokens of well allowyng the same
diffinicion, Diogenes brought forth into the schole, How Diogenes improued the
diffinicio^ of a man, which Plato gave.
a cock pulled naked out of al his feathers both great and small, saying: lo,
here is Plato his manne. Whereupon it was added to the diffinicion, having broad
nailles, for that no birds have any such.

To one demaundyng at what At what hour it is best for a man to dyne.
If he be rich, quod Diogenes when his pleasure is, if poor, when he may.

Being at Megara, when he saw the rams goo with their wulle on their backs
unshorn for taking harm of the bitturnesse of cold, Megara was ^ town in
the country of Attica, not far from the city of Athenes.
and their young children goo clean naked without any clothes at all, he said:
It is much better to be the ram, then to be the soonne of a Megarian. It
is written of the Megarians, that they were woondrefull rechelesse in nouryshyng
and keepyng ^p their children. The Megarians were rechelesse in keeping their
children.


Diogenes a good rappe with the one end of it, for lack of taking heed, and
incontine^te (as the guyse is in such case) said: Beware: why, (quod
Diogenes) dooest thou entend to give me an other rappe yet? Other writers do
thus tell it. When the feloe said: It is ouerlate to bid beware, when y^ hurt
is dooen already.
beeware, Diogenes rapped his staff on the pate of the other feloe, and after
the stroke already surely set on and past, said as the same had done before
to him, beware. Geuyng unto the same taunte pour taunte, or one for an other.
For, beware, should have been said before the harm dooyng, and not after.

Diogenes on a time, bearyng in A man is a rare thing to be found, though
he be sought with a candle.
And diverse persons askyng, what he did: Marie I seek a man, quod he.
Notyng the public manners of the city scace honest enough for any person,
bearyng the name of a man.

When he had on a time been so out of all good facion. To which persons, if
ye be wyllyng says Plato, (for he also among others was happyly at yesame
time present) to take piety and compassion upon Diogenes, depart hens and
get you from him. Notyng in him being a philosophier desirefuln^^^e of
glory. Prive ambicion and desire of glory in Diogenes.
Forasmuch as therefore to be unto y^ by standers such a woondreyng and
gazyng stock was to Diogenes great pleasure and delectacion: he was rather
happy and fortunate, the^ to be pietied, but if he had been wetted from top
to toe, no man standing by to see it, then had he been miserable in veraye
deed.

The patience and modera^acio^ of Diogenes.
in good south (quod he) I had no such knowelage ne warnyng to go with a
salette on my hedde. And that was all that ever he did to be avenged on the
party that had strieken him.

Midias, How Diogenes requited one Midias geuyng him a blow on y^ ear.
who after a good whistersnefet, truly paid on his ear, had said: There be
three thousand brass pens now ready assigned and laid out for thee in the
eschecquier: in the way of mockage, biddyng much good do it him, for that
he was assured to recover of Midias so much money for a forfaicte, The penaltee
or forfaicte^ for geuyng a blow in the old time a^ Athenes.
if he would take ye law for the blow geuyng. But Diogenes ye next day
foloyng took abroad thongue, such as ye champions used of neates leather
set with studdes and bosses, and the same well fauouredly bestowed about ye
ribs and pate of Midias, he said even in the veraye same wise, as the other
had dooen before to him: there be three thousand brass pens now ready
assigned and laid out for thee in y^ eschecquier. Aulus Gellius tells of a
feloe which had a goo^ sport to give men buffettes with his hand, and
ymmediately after, would command to be told out in ready money y^ sum of
y^ forfaicte, out of a purse, which he had co^tynually carried about with him
for that purpose. But Diogenes plainly declared, not all men to be of that
patience, that they can be satisfied, and hold them contented with the
penaltee of the set forfaicte.

Lysias half signifiyng, How Diogenes answered Lysias, demaundyng whether he
believed any gods to be.
asked Diogenes, whether he believed that there were any Gods. To whom
Diogenes, answered. How may it stand with reason that I should not believe,
Lysias was an orator in Athenes who^ for his exceadyng sweetness, Quintilian
praiseth^
yes: sens I am fully persuaded yt thyself art a feloe of the Gods abandoned
and accursed? This saying some writers dooen attribute to Theodorus. He made
none answer to y^ question, but reuersed the words to the parties self, that
had in the way of despite ^utte the question to him.

self with river water, (for by this rite did men of old time use to
purify and cleanse theimselfes, if they believed any offense on their party
against the Gods to have been committed) miserable creature, said Diogenes,
How Diogenes eluded a feloe spryncleyng water upon himself for pourgeyng his
sin
when thou have erred in any point of gra^mer, thou art not assoyled by
castyng water upon thyselfe: then much less shall sembleable spryncleyng of
water rid or deliver thee from sinfulness of living. He did veraye well note
the supersticion of folks, in that they believed the spots and staynyng of
the solle to be pourged and scoured away, The supersticion of folks in old
time.
with the sensible, gross or carnal elemente of bodyly water, except they
had also cut away the inordynate lusts and desires of the heart.

He did woonderous highly rebuke Diogenes r^buked those persons, who blamed
fortune, when their matters went awrye.
who, if any of their matters framed not, but went awrye, would blame and wit
fortune therefore (as in deed ye most part of men vsen to do, and
Diogenes avouched the parties selfs much more worthy to be shent, whose
guise and facion was, with all earnest request and instau^ce to crave at the
hands of lady fortune, not such things as in veraye deed were substanciall
good, but such as in their own fancy and opinion seemed good. For if men
would permit or leave to the arbitrimente, will and pleasure of the Gods,
to send such things, If god might be lea^ alone he would se^d to ma^ne that
were best for him.
as the same do judge to be best and most expediente, they would send it.
Now, forasmucheas men receiuen according to their own most agree and
ymportune suites they dooen like feloes having no shame in them, to lay unto
ye Gods y^ fault of quaillyng and mysprouyng.

things ye dream while ye are slepynge, ye do carefully search out. For to
the felicitee, or misery of a ma^ne, it makes not so great force what comes
to the same in his sleep, The superstition of many folks about their dreams
as what he does awakyng, while one is awakyng if he perpetrate any dishonest
or synneful act, it were requisite to fear the wrath of Godde, and ye woeful
end to ensue thereof, and not if men see this or that, in their sleep.

At the Olympia, the crier thus Doxippus has woonne the maisterie of men,
Diogenes corrected him, saying: no, Doxippus of slaves or vilaines, The
bo^deseruauntes of glory.

The philosophier only has victori^ of men.


and I of me^ne. Signifiyng, them that proved maisteries at the said olympia
and other like games, not to be men, but bondeseruauntes of glory, only
the philosophier and none else has the over hand of men: like unto this, is
one other of his sayings above mentioned.

When Philippus had an army in the country of Cherronea, This Philippus was
king of the Macedonians, and father of Alexa^d^r y^ great.
there to Diogenes, and being taken by ye soldyers, he was brought unto the
king, who, when he saw Diogenes a person unknown, cried out in a great
fury, A spy, a spy. To whom Diogenes replied, saying: yea, even a veraye
spy in deed. For hither am I come to vieue ye brainsiknesse of thee, How
Diogenes answered Philippus, chalengeynge him for a spy.
who, not being contented with ye kingdom of the Macedonians, for to geate
other men's kingdoms into thy hands, dooest cast thyself in great peril
and danger of leesyng both thyn own kingdom, and also thy life. The king
meruaillyng, at the frank plainness of the ma^ne, discharged the same, and
set him at large, biddyng him goo where he would at his free libertee.
Chertonea, the country where Plutarchus was borne, a region nigh to
Hellespontus. And in this place did Philippus co^qui^e and subdue all Greece. It
is called by another name Chersonesus, because it is in manner round about
environed with the sea, and is by reason thereof in manner a veraye Isle. And for
the excell^ncie, it is often times set for Hellespontus.


Alexander the king of the Macedonians had sent letters unto Antipater by a
certain person named Athlias, Diogenes at the same hour being happyly in
place. Who, according to his Cynicall guyse, said: Athlius from Athlius by
Athlias to Athlius. It was nothing but a toye, in daliyng, with the affinitee
and similitude of words. For the name of the messager was. (...), with (...),
and (...) in greek souneth one being in miserable state or condition, and sore
vexed or beaten with manyfolde trauailles, peines and troubles. For which
respect the fightyng men, or the champio^s and masters offense, had their
name derived out of yesame vocable, and were called both in greek and latin
Athletae. Athletae. Princes which for ambicio^ of honor rewle and dominion
are in contynuall strife, be in miserable state, and full of woo.
The menyng of the philosophier was, that princes for the ambicion of honor,
rewle and domynion, being in contynuall strife and hurlee burlee, are in
veraye deed persons full of misery and woo: and even in like miserable
state of wrechednesse to be all those that are ready, pressed, and willing
servants, aiders or furtheres of the appetites and desires of the same. So
then true it was, that Alexander for the careful and troubleous life that he
leed woorthyly called Athlius, that is miserable, wrote and sent lettres by
Athlias, being no less worthy the appellacion of Athlius then his master,
unto Antipater as much worthy to be called Athlius as any of the other
two, in that he was at all tyme^ bound to obey^ and serve Alexander.

Being spoken to, and invited Alexander, he refused so to do. Diogenes
refused to go to Alexander.
But to Perdicca the high Capitain, or graund Master under the same Alexander
thretenyng to take his life from him, Perdicca, ^rau^d master under Alexander.
except he would come. In feith, said Diogenes, then shall ye do a noble and
a valiaunte act. For as well the little wourme which (both in greek and latin)
is called Cantharis as also the black spyder called Phalangium, is hable at
all times to do as much. Cantharis, Cantharis.
is a little little vermyn, not much unlike in facion to the beetle or the
hornet, but having in it stark poison. Phalangium, Phalangiu^.
is the spyder of the most venomous sort, neither did he sti^ke or fear, on
his party again to threten Perdicca, that he should live happyly, though he
lived without his ^o^mpaignie, notifiyng them to be in a ^eraye wreched case
or state, that lived with Perdicca.

He affermed the Gods to be The life of man stands not in carnal
pleasures nor i^ sensualitee.
and their sweet perfumes or poumaundres, and other sembleable delices. For
those persons who have all the pleasure of the said things beleuen
theimselfes to live, where as only wisdom and perfect virtue does assure
ye veraye true life in deed replenyshed with tranquillitee and pleasant
sweetness. Only perfect virtue gives to manne veraye true life in deed.
Wherefore not the Gods are to be put in fault, but manne, who of his
own mere ^olye does earnestly crave of the said Gods, not life, but
sensual pleasures of the flesh. The prepo^^erous prayers of carnal persone^.


Espiyng a delicate and nyce feloe, in feith, quod he, thou lackest yet one
point or degree of perfect bliss, which is, that the same feloe there wype
thy taille too. And yt should soon be, if thy hand or fyngers were cut of.
It seemed to Diogenes a thing as much contrary to reason to abuse the page
his service in dooyng on his masters shoes, Diogenes thought it a ^hyng
unnatural, yt ye servant should ^ul on ye mai^^ers shoes.
in case the master be strong and lusty enough to help himself therein, as if
he should after coming from the ^akes put his seruau^te to the office of
wypyng his taille. Albeeit, ^t may be also understood of wypyng the nose.
To an ethnike philosophier, it seemed nycitee, beyond the course of nature, yt
an ethnike or gentile should have his shoes dooe^ on by his seruau^te. And yet
I knew a Christian manne, being a preeste, yea and a divine, who although he
had all his lymmes perfect, and none of his members maimed or lame, yet ever
when he should goo to the stool, would call servants, moo then one, for to
untie his points: and also, when he came from thens, to trusse the same again.
Which thing when I saw, thus did I think with myself. Now would Christ that
Diogenes were here present, to behold this gear.

When he saw a feloe gooyng In the old time there was of an ancient custom
in Greece at certain seasons a comme^ assemblee, of certain the most saige and
prudente persons, by eleccion appointed thereunto, out of all the chief citees,
after a much like sort, as now here in England are chosen knights for each
shier, and bourgeoisses for every town, and by a commen consent assigned at
times requisite, to repair unto the parliamente. And it was called in Greek
(...), of ye latins, Amphictyonicus co^sessus, the sittyng of the Amphictyons,
or, conuentus Amphictyonum, the assemblee of the Amphicctyons, or,
Amphictyonicum consilium, the counsel or parliamente of the Amphictyons,
orels, concilium Amphictyonum, the conuocacion of the Amphictyons. Some writers
holden opinion, that the name of Amphictyons was given unto it of coming or
resortyng ou^ from all citees and tounes of Greece to the said parliamente (for
the bordreers, or bounders, inhabityng round about any place are called in
greek (...),) And some authors deriu^ ye name from Amphictyon, ye soonne of
Deucalion, who in time of his reign here is chronicleed to have called
together a cou^sail or parliamente of the nations of Greece, and by a common
ordinance enacted to have instituted the said manner and form of
assembleyng. The people of Greece which repaired to the said counsel are
nou^breed twelve: the Ionianz, the Dorianz, the Perre^ianz, the Boetianz, the
Medonites, the Achaeanz, the Ph^hiotes, the Melianz, the Dolopianz, the
Aeneanz, the Delphianz, ^ the Phocensianz. And the bourgeoisses, that were by
public autoritee chosen, appointed, and sent from any of the countries above
named unto the said counsel, were called (...), and by an other name (...),
of, (...), the place where ye parliamente was holden.
(...):) See, see, quod Diogenes, the graunde thieves leden the petie thief to
ward. The graunde thieves lede^ ye petie thief to preison, saie^ Diogenes.
Would God thissame word might not be without a lie said of some public
officers of Christentee, by whom sometimes is tr^ssed up, and hanged on ye
galoes a poor sely solle, that has percase pielfed away ten grotes, where
theimselfes by great pielage, brybrie, or extorcio^, yea and for a fair touch,
by deceiuyng and beguylyng their prince, or the commen weal, do grow daily
and increase in welthe and richesse, nomanne saying black is their ^yen.

Diogenes, thou will surely hitte the mark: Signifiyng that a day would come
when the party should surely be hanged.

When a sort of young striepleynges Diogenes had cried upon him, doggue,
doggue, doggue, and ymmediatly being afraid, had begoonne to run away, and
being asked why they ran away, had said, lest thou should byte us, be
of good chere my soonnes, quod he, a doggue eats no Beetes is an herb called
in greek (...) in latin Beta, of whose excedyng weryshenesse and vnsauerynesse,
even of old antiquitee dawecockes, lowtes, cockescombes and blockehedded
fools, were in a prouerbiall speaking, said: betizare, to be as weerishe and
as unsavory as beetes. Plautus in his comedy entitleed Truculentus, says:
Blitea est meretrix, it is a pea^yshe whore, and as we say in english as
wise as a gooce, or as wise as her mothers apern streng. So a feloe that has
in him no wit, no quickenesse, but is even as one having neither life ne
solle, lab^rius calls bliteam belluam, a beast made of beetes. And in
Menandez also (as cites Erasmus in ye proverb, betizare,) the housbandes
revile their wives, calling them, bliteas, of so small shifte or help, that
they were as good to have wives of beetes, for which we say in our english
proverb, wives of cloutes. And because all effeminate persons dooe^ in fine
grow to sembleable sotyshenesse and dotage, as if they were not masters of
their own wit, but as persons rapt into an other world, Diogenes took
occasion of comparyng and resembleyng ye boys (in whom was no likelihood ne
spark of good towardness, but rather of al ungraciousness) to the weryshe
and unsavory beetes.
beetes. Covertly and by a prive nippe, vpraidyng the^m of manners effeminate,
wanton, and foolyshe.

Diogenes said. Thou feloe, How Diogenes skorned a feloe, yt being but a
sheep, ^ettyng up and down in a Lions skin.
will thou never leave puttyng the mantell or gaberdyne of manhood and prowess
to shame? He thought it a full uncomely thing, that a person effeminate (and
such a sheep yt durst not show his face among men, but was more like to
crepe in to a benche hole, then to do any manly act,) would usurp the
wearyng of the wede of Hercules was ye son of Iuppiter, gotten in the cit^e
of The^^s upon queen Alcumena the wife of Amphitruo, while he was from home in
battaill. Hercules was a man of singular manhood and prowess, and did in his
time.xii. notable valiau^te acts of which one was, that he slew a feerse
Lion in the forest of Nemea, and wor^ the skin of the same as a thing woonne
by strong hand and in that wede or habit he is set out in all imagerie or
pictures of hangynges or peinted clothes.
Hercules. The selfsame may be said to those persons yt with monstreous
disguysyng of their vesture professen holiness, their manner of living being
nothing au^swerable to the same.

Callisthenes ye philosphier, Diogenes thought not them most blissed that
li^ed in kings courts.
that he was happy, fortunate, and even in heaven, forthat he was in the
court of king Alexander with much high fare and preparacion entreteined, No
Marie, quod Diogenes, he is in wreched case, and in miserable condition,
forthat he must be fain to take his dinner and his supper when pleases
Alexander. Menyng, nothing to be in ye state of perfect bliss, if libertee
be away. Nothing i^ in the state of perfect bliss if libertee be away.
This is Callisthenes the disciple of Aristotle, whom Alexander at last did
cast in prieson, Callisthenes the disciple of Aristotle at length cast in
prieson by Alexander.
where he perished and dyed. Some writers for Callisthenes, do put
Aristotle him self, of whose singular good fortune and hap, when coumpaignie
made much talkyng, for that he lived familiarly with a kings soonne: yea, quod
Diogenes, Aristotle dineth at such hour as pleases Alexander, and Diogenes,
when pleases Diogenes.

If Diogenes, at any time stood in bayte him, for that contrary to the
dignitee and honestee of a philosophier, he would after y^ manner of beggars
ask and crave. No, quod he, (...). repetere,

A philosophier does not beg, but requires his own duty.


I do not ask their alms, but I require my duty. For the latin word,
repetere, is used in his propre significacion, when we demand or require to
have rendreed or redeliuered unto us any thing, which either by the way of
love, orels by leauyng it in the custody or keeping of an other person is out
of our own hands. And one friend geuyng to an other that is in necessitee,
does not give a free gift, but re^dreeth or paieth home again that he owghed
by true debte. For whosoever in such a case does keep or restreigne his
money, the same does wrongfully detein and withhold yt is none of his own
propre gooddes, Who so restreigneth and keeps from his friend in time of
necessitee, with holds that is none of his own.
but due to an other body.

When a certain young manne Diogenes: certes, quod he, I will make you no
answer to your question, till by taking up or dooyng abroad your clothes, ye
shall have showed, whether ye be a man, or a woman. By his apparel and
array nothing fit ne comely for a manne^ Ouercutious apparel, argues
wantonness and nycitee.
he noted y^ effeminate wantonness and nycitee of the party.

To an other young manne feactely and trickely representyng at the baines, a
certain lastiuious play, which to exhibit ye greeks callen, (...), was a
foolysh game y^ lovers had, and used to play at dyners, suppers and other
banquettes, by ye bobleyng that the drink made, which remained in the cup
after they had dronke^, for ye drink yt was left, they would cast up on high,
and by the clockyng, plashyng, or, soune that it gave in the fall, they would
take a significacio^ whether their lovers were true to them or not. And thereof
(...), to play that kind of play^.
(...): Sirrah, young manne, (quod Diogenes,) the better ye do, ye wurse it
is. Utterly dissallowyng and condemnyng the feacte which of it self was
dishonest and naught, of which sort is also playing at dyce, wherein the more
cunnyng werkemanne that every person is, the wurse manne is he and the less
honest.

As it fortuned Diogenes to be moo at a dinner, the coumpaigni^ calling him
doggue, How Diogenes served a certain coumpaignie that cast bones to him, as if
he had been a doggue.
cast bones to him in derision, in consideracion that the same is a thing
customably used to be dooen to doggues. But he in departing from ye
coumpaignie, pissed upon every of the geastes yt sat at the table behind at
their backs, signifiyng the same also to be, one other propretee belongyng to
doggues.

Diogenes called by a word that might be taken in a double sense, (...),
thris double men. (...),

Oratou^s and other persons dooyng al things for glory Diogenes called thris
double men.


For as the commen sort of people denies that person to be a man that is
neither learned nor yet of gentle conditions, so did the philosophier call him
a miser, that had no qualitee above the common rate of man. For according to
ye saying of Homere: No living creature is more miserable then manne. Manne of
all creatures mo^^e miser.
And therefore, thris double men, Diogenes called thris double misers, as the
which bestowed and applied al their studies upon a thing of most vanitee in
the world, and were as bond servants or pages to the multitude of the gross
people, being a beast of many heddes. The people, a beast of many heddes.


A certain rich manne having Rich persons void of learning Diogenes called
sheep with golden flyces.
a sheep with a golden flyce. For in the poets it is found written, that
Such a sheep was in Colchos whose flyce Jason by the help of Medea the
kings daughter fet away, sleayng the bulls and dragon, that kept it.
such manner sheep have been. And those persons, who were sely poor solles,
and had no more store of wit then they must needs occupy, were eue^ then
and yet still are in all toungues, and places by a commen proverb: called
sheep heddes, or sheep.

Passing by the house of a certain Diogenes, I espied veraye well, and prophesied
i^ my mind, Riot and prodigalitee, causes men to spue up whole houses.
that by reason of thine unmeasurable gourmau^dyng and surfaictyng, thou
would at last spue up some house. For he had already consumed and devoured
his house, before he offreed the same to sale, by setting that inscripcion upon
the door. So that it might more truly be called a spuyng, then a vendicion
or sale.

The best way to cease the molestacions of buisy medleyng feloes is to
dissemble that we be grieved with them.
by no yearthly thing better to be quieted or ended, then if the party that
is harmed or wro^ged dissemble his greef. For such persons as do haggue and
baye at a body, purposely to bring him clean out of quiet, and to vex him at
ye botome of y^ heart rote, will cease and leave of in case they see y^ party
to be nothing moved with their doing. Albeit I have half a geasse y^ greek
words co^prehe^d another prive or covered sense. For when the young feloe
complained, and found himself grieved, yt a sort of buisie medleers would not
leat him alone, ne suffer him to be in rest, Diogenes thus answered in
greek: (...). That is, yea and cease thou also to carrye about with thee, the
tokens of a person wanton and effeminate. For such persons never lack
trouble or vexacion, but every body will have a saying at them, according to
the latin proverb, Malu^ uel mus audet rodere. That is, an eiuill person eue^
ye veraye mous dares to snappe at. An eiuill person even the veraye mous
dares to snappe at.
And coumpaignie is both grievous and odious to those that are dishonest, or
malefactors, as witnesses Christ in the Gospel, saying. Men loved
derknesse more then light, because their deeds were eiuill. For every one that
eiuill does hates the light, Every one yt eiuill does hates ye light
Ioh. iii.
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

A mynstrell that was a player Why Diogenes commends an harper, whom all
others dispraised.
being of no cu^nyng in the world, and therewithal a great gorrebealyed
chuff, yea and besides that, dispraised of all persons that heard him, for ye
wurste that ever twanged, only Diogenes, did commend and praise. And to them
that woondreed wherefore he should so do: I allow him and began him thank,
said Diogenes, that being such an one, he has had more mind and will to
set himself on work, and to be occupied with his harp, then to take a
standing by the high ways side for a pourse or a bougette. Signifiyng that the
feloe being of body valiant and stourdye, and gross or rude of wit, was
by all similitude of outward tokens, more apt to have been a robber on the
high way, then to be an handleer of any musical instrumente. The grace of
the saying, depends of ye place of rhetorike, The place of rhetorike ab
inexpectato.
ab inexpectato, that is grounded upon a thing yt a body would lest think on.
For who would have looked for such an answer of Diogenes?

all his audience: Diogenes, How Diogenes saluted an harper y^ drove away his
audience as often as he played o^ soong.
when he met him in the street, saluted in this manner. God ye save and see
goodman cock. And where the feloe being offended with ye strau^genesse of
that salutacion, said: why goodman cock? Marie, quod he, because that with
thy crowyng thou reasest every body yt hears the. He devised to find a
iestyng toye of ye ambiguitee or indifferency of ye greek voice, (...). For he
is proprely said in greek, (...). (...)^
both that reaseth a body out of his sleep, as the cocks vsen to do, when
they crow with an eiuill grace, and also yt reaseth one sittyng on his taill,
to arise out of his place, as this harper evermore used to do.

When a great noumbre of people Diogenes stoopynge down veraye low, gathered
into his lap as fast as he could, the poultz called Lupines. This kind of
poultz, called lupinus, we have not in england groweyng.
And the yies of all the folks turned to behold that sight, he avouched, that
he meruailled: why they would leave the young ma^ne, to look on him. Notyng in
that by word, their intemperancie and wanton disposicion.

Diogenes, How Diogenes mocked a supersticious feloe, yt was afraid of
^prites, thretenyng ^o slay him.
saying unto him, I will at one stroke all to crushe thy hedde to powther: In
feith quod he again, if thou so do, I shall be ready at thyn elbowe to play
the part of hobgoblyn or collepixie, and make thee for fear to ween the
deiuill is at thy polle.

Signifiyng yt he was hable to make the ^other party afraid, even being
dedde, of whom he was so contemned and set at naught being alive. And yet
thissame foolyshe mind and fancy, even at this veraye present day possesses
no small nou^bre, who although they be fierce and full of cockyng against lives
men, yet are the same most fear full creatures yt possible may be of solles
walking (as they call it^) The supersticious fear and ymaginacion of many
folks, that solles walken.


Being desired and prayed, by one Hegesias was a philosophier Cyrenaique, yt
is to say, of Epicure his sect a man of so great eloquence (as Ualerius
Maximus writes) that he did so lively declare and set out all the eiuils of
this present life, that the pieteous and lamentable representacion of
thesa^^^e eiuils, through his words, depely engraued and enpriented in the
hertes of men, veraye many per^ones took occasion to hate ^his presen^^
life, and had a^ earn^st de^^refulnesse willyngl^ to rid theimselfes out of
the world. And therefore he was b^ ^he commandment of king Ptolomeus
forbidden any more to speak of any such matter.
Hegesias, to lend him the use of Hegesias, quod he, (yt where in choosyng
figgues thou will not take figgues peinted or countrefeacted, but veraye true
and right figgues in deed) thou can find in thy heart, (ye veraye true
actual exercise and practice of philosophy neglected), to run to the
philosophy scribleed or peinted in paper. In this saying he noted those
persons, who all their whole life through, do nothing but read the books
and works of philosophiers co^teinyng precepts or rewles of virtuous living,
whereas virtue is more effectually learned by practisyng or puttyng the same in
ure, then by readyng. The greek vocable (...), which Diogenes used, is a voice
indifferente to writing and to peintyng. And therefore virtue set forth in
books, is virtue much like, in manner as if it were peinted on a cloth or
table. And in deed against all reason it is, in choosyng figgues to be curious
and precise to take none but of the best and in virtue to be nothing so.

Why Diogenes first became to be a philosophier.
orels because he had purposely learned philosophy, to the end that he might
be hable with a paciente and contentefull mind, to endure banyshemente, and
other sembleable chances.

Sinopians have condemned thee with banyshyng the, How Diogenes answered one,
ye cast in his teeth yt the Sinopians had banyshed him.
never to come more in yt country, and I them, quod he, to abide and never to
come thens. Signifiyng himself, in yt he was bidde^ to goo seek him a
dwelling place in an other country, to be no point in wurse state or
co^dicio^, the^ those persons, which remained sti^^ wellyng in their own
country, not hable pacie^tly to suffer banyshme^t if it should chance. For
egual misery it is, to make abode in a place by enforcemente and compulsion,
To be exiled from a place by compulsion, and to abide in a place by compulsion
is eguall misery.
and to be banyshed or eriled from a place by enforcemente and compulsion. A
philosophier, who in differently takes every ground and every land under the
cope of heaven (which so ever it be) for his own native country, A
philosophier indifferently reputeth al places under ye cope of heaven, to be
his native country.
if he be commanded to depart any whe^s by bany^hement, is a man exiled
out of some one particulare city or nacio^ only. But he that cannot live in
another place besides his own country, where he was born and breden, is a man banyshed out of regions almost innumerable. As touching Diogenes, Why
Diogenes was banyshed out of his own country.
in deed he was banyshed his country for countrefeactyng or coynyng of money,
as men think. And born he was a Sinopian. This present history Plutarchus
in y^ his treactise, entitleed of banyshme^te, reports in manner and form
here ensuyng. The Sinopians have by their decree, banyshed the out of Pontus
and Euxinus, are taken all for one. And it is part of the sea from Bosphorus
of Thrace, unto y^ great Maryce of Scythia called Meotis. It is also abroad ^
wide region marchyng round about y^ ^oostes of the same sea, encoumpacyng many
pro^incies, as Colchos, Armenia, and Cappadocia. And in Cap^docia (being a
deserte and bare^) country stood Sinopa the City in which Diogenes was born.
Pontus for ever Yea, but I condemn them in this pein, quod he again, that
they remain still enclosed and pend up within Pontus, and the ferthermust
strandes of al Euxinus, never to come out from thens. Diogenes had changed his
country, but the same for the better. The Sinopians were more like folks
banyshed or exiled, in that they were remediless, appointed and assigned, to
co^tynue al their lives in such an incommodious, unfruitful, and baren
region, as Sinopa.

Olympia, were called in greek (...). Of which sort when Diogenes had by
chance found one keeping sheep. O Moun sire Capitain, said he, with how
great celeritee and speed have ye conueighed and gotten yourselfe from
Olympia to Nemea. Nemea, is a region of the country of arcadia, situate and
liyng between two citees the one Cleone, and the other Clitorium, in the
which Clitorium (as witnesses Ouidius) was a well or fountain of which
whosoever did drink could not afterward away with drynkyng wine. In the wodde
or foreste of this Nemea did Hercules kill the hougie great lyo^ whose skin
he woore on his back for his weed. And in the honor of the said Hercules,
did the people of Argo^ even there celebrate and keep solemn games, which were
named Nemea of the place in which they were holden and kept, in like manner as
is before said of Olympia.
Findyng a merry toye in the affinitee or similitude of y^ greek vocables. For
(...) in greek, are certain games of prouyng maisteries so called, of the place
where the same were celebrated and holden, even as olympia, before mentioned. And
the greek verb (...), souneth in latin, pasco, in english, to keep or feed
catalles in the pastures, and (...), is in latin, pascu^, in english, pastures
or leasues.

Being asked wherefore the Athletae, had no sense ne feelyng: Marie, quod he,
because they have been brought up altogether with porke and beef, and such
other gross feedyng. For that sort of men are fed up with the gross
kinds of meats, Gross meats maken y^ body strong, but the wit dulle.
which in deed conferren to y^ body hard brawne, and clean strength but as
for the wit, it makes as gross and dulle, as ca^ be thought. But to this
present merry saying, the ambiguitee or doubtefulnesse of the vocable, and
nothing else, gave place, and was occasion of it. For as with the greeks, (...),
and with the latin me^, sentire, so in english, to have a feelyng, belongs
as well to the mind as to the body. To have a feelyng in a matter.
But the demaunder of the question, asked what was the cause, wherefore the
said champions, lackyng (as ye would say) bodyly sense and feelyng, were
never offended ne grieved with strypes or strokes. And Diogenes had more phansy
to note the brutyshe grossness and dumpyng of the mind. For we say
commenly in english, that we feel a man's mind, when we understand his
intent or menyng, and contrary wise, when the same is to us veraye derke, and
hard to be perceived, we do commenly use to say, I cannot feel his
mind, or, I have nomaner feelyng in the matter. etc.

Use assuageth greefes.
quod he, not to be moved, ne to take in eiuill part, if at any time, I do
not obtein my requests and peticions that I ask of men.

After that Diogenes by extreme The form of beggyng y^ Diogenes used.
If thou have been a geuer of alms to any other person heretofore give to me
also, if to no body, begin now at me. He signified that he was no less
worthy to have the ^haritee of me^ne, then the residue of beggars, and
therefore to be mete, that who were liberal in geuyng to each body at
adventure, should e^tende his liberalitee unto Diogenes also: and who were such
a niggarde or hayn, that he could not find in his heart before that day to
depart with an halfepenie to any creature living, for such a feloe to be
high time ones in his life, to begin to depart with somewhat to the poor.

Being on a time asked the what sort of brass metalle it was most
co^ueniente yt images should be made: of the verayesame, quod he, in which
When the cit^e of Athenes was oppressed and holde^ in servitude by thirty
tyrannes^ Harmodius and Aristogiton, by such provision as they made did subdue
and destroy ye said tyrannes. Wherefore, the people of Athenes agnisyng their
inestimable benefit received at the hands of the said Hermodius and
Aristogiton, made and set up in their honor and perpetual memory, their
images and portures in coppre, which images were long time after, had in such
reverence and honor, that Xerxes, when he had woonne Athenes, took from then^
y^ said images, and the same carried in to his own kingdom. And after many
years Seleucus made proui^ion, and found the means to have the same images
con^eighed home again to Athenes, and to be set up in their old places.
Also the Rhodians did the same images (being arrived at their city in the way
homewarde) highly receive with procession, and honorably entreacte them at
the public charges of the city, and did place them in the tabernacles of
the Gods, as witnesses Valerius Maximus.
Harmodius and Aristogito^ were casten. Betokenyng, that the par^ie, if he were
well served, was worthy to be dispatched out of y^ way. For the said
Harmodius and Aristogiton, had been tyrann^quellers.

Dionysius did use, How Dionysius y^ tyra^ne used his familiare friends.
handle, and entreacte his friends that were familiare about him: like as if
they were bottles, said he, the fulle he hangs up, and the empty, he casts
aside in a corner. Signifiyng, that by the said Tyra^ne Dionysius the rich and
welthie of his subjects wen^ daily to the pot, and were chopped up, and such
beggary wretches as had nothing to leese, were nothing medleed withal, ne had
any thing said unto them.

Hercules was in old time, wurshypped How Hercules was wurshipped in old
time, and by what surnames.
that is: the depoulsour and driuer away of all eiuils: because of the
valiaunte sleayng of many soondrye monstres, Hercules (...).
by him extincted. He was also the soonne of Iuppiter, and by another name
called, Callinicus, Hercules Callinicus.
for respect of his manyfolde acts of prouesse, and noble victories that he
had gotten, in subduyng as well his enemies, and gyauntes, as also other hougie
monstres, as before said. And so it was, that a certain person had written upon
the door of his house, this high triumphaunte title or poysee: The soonne of
Iuppiter Callinicus Hercules, in this house has his habitacio^, no eiuill thing
therefore motte there enter into this place. Diogenes by this inscripcion
espiyng ye folly of the feloe, (...), id est, post bellum, auxiliu^.
said: when the stead is already stole^, shut ye stable door, or, when I am
dedde make me a caudle. Notyng y^ it was over late to say, God save y^ house
from all eiuils, now that such a lewd feloe was already entreed to dwell in
it. Aid, after y^ ^he fel^e is all ready fough^en.
For it had been necessary, that the said Hercules, (...), that might save the
house from all mysfortunes, or mysauentures, had taken up his habitacion in
the same, before the owner self of the house, had settleed him self to dwell
there, who on his own party and behalf was such a feloe as a man should
^ake hell for.

thy dinner with such meat as that, thou wouldeste not now suppe with the
meat that thou dooest. Meaning, it not to be for any point of frugalitee,
or sobre diete, that he had nothing to his supper besides a few olives, but
for that his stomach being ouercharged, with the excessive de^ty dinner which
he had made at noone, The best medicin to make one have a good appetite to his
supper, is a light dinner at noone.
had no appetite to take any thing at supper. For a light and a spare dinner, is
the best medicine or sauce in the world, to make one have a good appetite to
his supper.

Full often and many a time did Where couecousnesse of money is, the^ reigns
all myschief.
to be the hedde The greek word is (...). as if ye should say, the place
where all eiuils are conceived, or from whens all eiuils dooen issue. For it is
conmpouned not of (...), measuryng nor of (...), a mother, but of (...), a
matrice, that is to say, the place of concepcion, and of issuyng. And thereof
is metropolis, called the chief city where the archbishop of any province
has his see, and has all the other diocesses of that province subject to
him, as Canterburie^ and porke, here in England.
palaice, or the hedde city of all eiuilles or mischiefs. Not veraye much
variyng from the sentence of the wise manne Solomon, i. Timoth. vi.
who says, that covetousness of money is the root of all eiuils.

Diogenes avouched honest and virtuous men to be y^ true images of y^ Gods.
Forasmuch as the Gods, of their veraye nature been altogether full of all
goodness the propretee of the same is, to do good to all folks, and to hurt
no body. And this image is much better represented in sapiente and good
me^ne, then in dedde images of stone or metalle, sens that the Gods are
things mere ghostly or spiritual, and not material or bodily things.

Love, is the occupacion of idle persons.
that had nothing else to set them selfs on work withal. Because this pangue
or guierie of love does especially above al others, invade and possess such
persons as been altogether drouned in idleness. And so comes it to pass
that while they given theimselfes wholly to idleness, they stumble on a thing
y^ fills their hands as full of cou^breous business, as they are hable to
away withal, and yet in the mean time, the deiuill of the one chare of good
work they dooen.

To one demau^dyng, what was What thing Diogenes rekened y^ most miserable in
this life.
he made answer: An aged body in extreme pouertee. For when the sure stays
or ^eny^g posts of nature do faill a man, th^n must the feblenesse of age
be propped, bolstreed up, or vndersette with the succor and help of worldly
substance Albeeit, He is not to be accoumpted poor y^ has in youth
purchaced good disciplines, and honest friends.
that person is not to be rekened ^r accoumpted in the nou^bre of poor
folks, who has in his youth, purchaced unto himself good disciplines or other
crafts and honest friends, the most assured and trusty provision to live by
in a man's old days. That feloe is a beggar in most wretched condition,
that is endued with no good qualitee. He is in the most wreched state of
beggerie, that is endued with no good qualitee.


Being asked, what beast had What beast^ has the most p^rilous and hurtefull
styngue.
If thy question be of saluaige beasts, quod Diogenes, ye backebyter: if of
tame beasts, ye flaterer. For the backebyter hydeth not his hatered toward
any body, ne recketh who knows the same: the flaterer, under the visour or
cloak of a friend, hurts ten times more grievously then the other.

The Centaures were a people of the Country of Thessalia, not far from the
mou^te pelio^. They were the first that ever fought on horsbacke. Which they
were driven to, for to destruie a great heard of wild bulls, that did much
scathe in all ye country about. And of this (because to y^ sely people
beholding them a far of, they appeared after a monstreous facion and shape)
the poets do feign that they were gyauntes, in the upper part of the body
men, and in the nether part horses, and that Ixion begotte the first of
them on a cloud, they are called of the latins Centauri, of the greek
word, (...), that is to prick, or to spur, because they keeked and set
spurs thick to the horses sides, when they galopped in chacyng the wild
bulls, but their greek name, was a word compou^de hippocentauri, for (...)
is an horse.
Centaures fightyng in a peinted table, of woondreous eiuill werkemanship,
whether of these two, said he, is the wurse? Notyng the rudeness and
defaulte of cunnyng in the peint^r, as though he stood in doubt whether of the
both had been wurse drawn or set out in peintyng. But the pith of the
saying consists in that he used a word that may be taken in two soundry
senses: For the greek vocable (...), i^ english, wurse, is said as well of one
that is wurse in estymacion of value, or any other comparison, and also that
has the wurse or is put to the wurse in fightyng.

heart, but altogether framed to please the hearer, Fair and smoothe speaking
framed only to please the hearer, Diogenes called a trappe or snare of honey.
Diogenes customably used to call an honey brake, or a snare of honey. Because
the same under the pretense of love, embracyng a ma^ne as though ye speaker were
ready even to cr^pe into the bosom of the hearer, cutteth the throat of
the same.

The bealy of excessive gourmau^ders The bealyes of gluttons Diogenes called ye
charybdis of man's life.
he called the Charybdis of man's life, for that the same devoured all that
ever it might geatte, and yet was never saciate. Charybdis and Scylla, after
the feignyng of ye poets are two monstres of the sea, in the way between
Calabria and Sicilia, standing the one directly against ye other, and the same
so daungerously, that they destruie all the ships that come within the reach
of either of the^. F^r Charybdis they fable to be a monstre that swalloweth up
al things, and the same shortly after spouteth up ^gain: but in veraye deed,
it is a dangerous goulfe, making sore ouerfalles by reason of the meetyng of
soondry streams in one point. And Scylla in veraye deed, is a great at rock
in the same streighte standing so directly against Charybdis, that e^cepte the
ships cut and take course even justly between both, they hardely escape
drounyng. And because that Scylla aferre of, represents to the (...) figure
and shape of a christen body, and to the ear (by reas^n of roryng and beatyng
of the waves) it represents the ha^kyng of doggues, therefore the poets have
feigned, yt Scylla is a monstre of ye sea. having in ye upper part, the shape
of a maid^n and in the nether part the likeness of a fyshe, the bealy of a
woulf, and the taille of a dolphin fyshe, as witnesses Uirgilius in the third
volume of the Aeneidos. Albeeit, Homere write^^ that Scylla has six heddes,
and twelf feet, and ba^ket^ like a doggue.
Charybdis swalloweth up only such things, as are carried by sea, and after
a little time, casts up again whatsoever it goulped in before: but the bealyes
of gullyguttes (that can naught do, but eat and drink, and sleep) neither
ye aier, nor ye land, nor the flooddes and rivers, nor yet all the seaes are
hable to suffice. yea, and rather then faill, both whole mainour places, and
also whole lordeshippes, they make no bones, ne stick not, quite and clean to
swallowe down the narrow lane, and the same to spue up again.

Diogenes, how that one Didymo was attached for liyng with another man's wife:
If ye wretch were well served, quod Diogenes, he should be hanged up even by
the same thing, that he bears the name of. In deed, Didymi, Didymi.
is greek for a pa^re of man's stones, so yt the mind of Diogenes was, yt
such a synnefull Caitif, ought to be hanged up by that members of the which
he had his name, and by the which he had committed the offense and trespace.

One that labored the study of Diogenes with this question, for what cause
gold looked to the yie somewhat pale and wanne of color? For what cause
gold^ looks to the yie pale and wanne of c^lour.
Marie, quod he, because there be so many folks liyng in awayt for it. Such
persons, as know that they have awayte or watch laid for them, cannot but
be a feared. And ye propretee of any body being in great fear, is to look
with a pale and wanne color.

When he saw a woman sittyng

Notyng, that such froward creatures as many women are, ought rather to be
pended up in a caige of iron. Lectica was a certain manner of seat, for noble
women, which I do here call an horselittre, because we have no kind of
seat so nighe, or so like in facion to ^he Lectica. Albeeit, they were not in
old time drawn with horses, but carried upon six menne^ shoulders, and they
were made with preatie latesse wyndoores and cross bars or grates, and pains
to shut and to open, for lookyng out at pleasure So that it showed and
represented to the iye much what the facion or likeness of a caige for
birds, or of a pende, wherein to keep other beasts. And in such, did the
rich or welthie women: yea, and also the other nycibecetours or de^ty dames,
cus^omably use, both to ^ytte for their pleasure, and also to be carried
about the streets for their solace and recreacion.

Excidere, in english to geat a fall, or to have a fall. And he is proprely
said in greek (...), in latin excidere, in english to geat a fall, both
that falls down into a pit or a well, and also that is violently toumbleed
or taken out of his place. And mine opinion is, that wells in old time among
the gentiles, had the strength of sanctuary, and yt it was not leeful
violently or by force, to pluck any body from the same, no more then out of
the temples of the gods, or from the image and porterature of the prince.

When he had espied at the Alipte, were those to whose cure were committed
those persons to be ^noy^cted (yt they might have their ioynctes nymble and
lithye^ that should ^ight in the solemn games that were celebrate and holden in
the honor of any of the gods. He is also called alipta that enoyn^teth
wounds or sore places of the body to ^ouple them.
(...), whose office was to enoynct men, had their name. And of (...), is
fourmed a diminutiue (...): now, (...), are two soondry words, albeeit by
reason of ye figure called synalephe (which is, when two vouels concurryng
together, the former leeseth his power, and soune by collision) it seems in
manner no more but one diccion, for if one take away the synalephe, the whole
words been (...). That is, another little garmente, so that the veraye right
words yt Diogenes spoke to the feloe, were these: Are ye come to be
enoyncted, orels to steal another garment For in the baine or hot house,
folks were in old time enoyncted, and in y^ self same place the pikepurses
and stealers of apparel diligently applied, and went about their occupacion:
for it was the guise to wash naked, their clothes put of, and laid aside.
Diogenes therefore gave a quippe to the embesleer or bryber, that the same having
stolen some garment elsewhere before, was now come thither to purloyne and
conueigh away an other. And because a goune or a cote so rechelesly cast
aside, is a good bayte for one that seeks it: and to thentente y^ the saying
might have some what the more grace, I have thus translated it, to the bath, or
else to the bayte. That if it had not been more for dischargeyng y^ duty of a
translatour, then for any great delight or profecte to the unlearned reader, I
would have passed over this apophthegine and left it clean out.

he said in this manner: they yt wash in this place, where be they washed
after it? He signified that such persons as came in thither pure and clean,
were there embrued with durte and fylthynesse, and such as were at any time
washed there, to have veraye great need of a secounde rynsyng, wherewith
eftsons to be scoured, and made clean.

When he had on a time espied Diogenes was (...), that is one y^ hated women to
the deiuill of hell.
but hated them dedly, and for yt cause had a great zele and affection to see
them every one swyngyng and tottreyng in halters,

Diogenes yieyng a certain feloe, How Diogenes saluted one that had an eiuill
name for robbyng of dedde menne^ toum^^s.
that had a veraye eiuill name and report that he should be a spoyler and
robber of dedde men's toumbes and herses, salued, or, hailled him with this
verse of homere.

(...),
(...),
Moun sire, for what purpose has your good grace.
At this present now approached hither?
To spoil any of these, which in this place
Lie dedde, and buiryed here together?
Diogenes had neither ma^ne ne woman servant.
he answered, no in good feith, not one in the world. And when the demau^der
had ferther said, why, who shall then carrye thee to thy grave, in case it
fortune thee to dye? Marie, quod he, even whosoever shall have need of my
house, for to dwell in it. Many persons are veraye supersticiously careful,
how and by what persons the^ shall be brought to their graves, Diogenes took no
thought how or by what persons he should be buiryed.
and laid in ye ground: of all suchemaner thought or care was Diogenes clear
void, castyng no doubts, but that there should come one or other body, that
would conueigh his dedde carkesse out of doors, though it were for nothing else,
but to make the house void. Albeeit his chance was in fine, to be veraye
honestly buyried.

Beholding a certain young Homerus here foloyng.

(...),
(...). The danger of slepyng negligently in every corner.

Sus, lest some body while thou slepest here.
Come and gore ye through the back with a spear.
The grace of the saying consists in this point, that Diogenes feactely
applied the verse of Homere to his purpose, by saying (...), instead of (...)
for in Homere it is, (...). that is, Lest some manne, while thou rennest away
for fear.
Thrust the behind, quite through with a spear,
It been the words, of Diomedes, in the.viii. of the Ilias, unto ulysses:
whom, when he was ren^yng away, Diomedes, bids to turn again for shame,
and not to flee: lest some manne. etc.

To a feloe that was beyond all and whole given to good chere, and all kinds
of ryotte and excess, he applied yt piece of Homer his verse: (...). That is.
In feith my child your days are but short. Signifiyng that the part^^ would
with his ryottous facions kill him self ere he were half old.

Like as i^ material and sensible gross things, we see that the ho^y^rs
have hangyng by them in their shoppes purposely certain paternes, out of which
they take the facion of y^ clock of an hose when soever they must make any
such: and sembleably ye sh^oemakers have always ready hangyng on a na^lle
paternes of lether purposely reserved and kept whereby to shape the upper
leathers, and also other paternes for y^ heels of all the shoes yt they make:
so did Plato afferme, yt there be, and eternally have been, of each natural
thing certain general paternes to every of yesame kinds severally belo^gyng,
which paternes only the ymaginacion and understanding of man's reason, is
hable to co^prehende or to conceive. And that out of the exa^mple or copy of
those general paternes, nature from time to time has, still, does, and
contynually shall form and shape all singular or particu^are t^ynges of
every several kind: so that an Idee is the appropriate ^ourme, and peculiare
likeness of things in every kind, out of y^ which as being a substa^ciall
pattern e^ernally remanyng, are figured shaped and produced, al particular
things in this or that kind For exaumple and declaracion whereof, as when we
see in wa^e a thousand soondry emprientynges all of one likeness, we do
easily and promptely conceive, that all the same emprientynges were originally
made and empriented with one s^ale, so may we by our intelligence co^prehende
that all the particulare men in the world, have been fourmed of one general
pattern of mankind, which has in eternal substance remained ready for y^
purpose. And sembleably, must the ymaginacion or reason conceive of an horse,
of a table, of a cup, and of all other kinds of natural things. And this
the posicio^ and assercion of Plato does Saint Augustine allow and uphold
(as ye may read in his treactise of the lx^. questions) and also Eusebius in
his work de praeparatione euangelica, both which authors Ambrosius
Calepinus, does in his dictionarie cite for ^estimonie and d^claracion of the
said Idees.
Idees, that Plato devised, and much treacteth of, even Aristotle laughed to
skorne. And so it was, that at a certain season, when Plato made a great long
circumstau^ce, about the declaryng of the Idees, and took much peine with
vocables of his own forgeyng, to express and plainly to set out the same
Id^es, a thing feigned, and founded only in the conceipte of ymaginacio^,
having in his mouth at every secounde word the said forged vocables of the
Idees, as for exaumple, tableitees, for the facion of a table, by itself to be
conceived in ye imagenacio^ of ye mind for a comen pattern as it were laid up,
and kept in the mind, whereby all other like tables are to be devised and
shaped. And cuppytees, for the commen pattern whereby all drynkyng cups are
to be devised, facioned and wrought by the maker: Diogenes mockyng such
quidificall trifles, that were all in ye cherubyns, said: Sir Plato, your table
and your cup I see veraye w^ll, but as for your tableitee, and your cuppitee,
I see none such. Albeeit there be even at this present day too, that with
their sorteitees, and their ecceitees be in their own conceiptes even
doctors of the chair. Yet nevertheless Plato paid Diogenes home again well
enough, and gave as good as he brought. It is no meruaill, said Plato: for
thou have yies with the which cups and tables are seen, but wit and reason
thou have not with which are perceived and seen the tableitees and the
cuppytees.

When Diogenes thought most expediente for a ma^ne to wedde a wife.
for a young manne, quod he: it is to soon, and for an old manne over late.
Albeeit the greek words by reason of a certain vicinitee, have most grace,
(...) not yet, and (...), not at all. Geuyng a preatie watch word, that best
were utterly to abstein from matrimony. But the demaunder would very fain
have learned, at what years of a man's age, or in which part of the year,
it were expedient for a ma^ne to choose his make: As Aristotle does by
prescripcio^ appointe the convenient or ripe time of being maryable, to a
virgyn, ye age of eighten years, to a man, The ripe time of being marryable
for man and woman by ye prescrip^io^ of Aristotle.
the age of thirty and five years. And the Romans thought the months of
Aprile and June propice and good to wedde in, and the month of May unlucky.
The Romans thought April and June lucky months to marrye in^ and May
unlucky.


To a feloe demaundyng what A Merry answer unlooked for.
For the other party looked to hear what recompense or hyer, Diogenes would
require for a blow on the cheek.

When he saw a young ruffleer What Diogenes said to a young ma^ne, trymmyng
himself after the galaunt^ sort.
If that trymmyng be for me^ne, said he, it will not be: if for women, it
should not be. This saying souneth more pleasau^tly in greek, by reason of the
affinitee of the two voices, (...) thou fail^e^t of thy purpose, and (...)
thou dooest plain injury. For it is in vain for one ma^ne to trymme himself
for an other, sens that between them ca^ be no marriage: And a weked deed
does any young manne, if by setting forth of his beauty, he do lay
abayte to be guile ye frail sex of woma^kind, whereas a wife ought to be
woonne, not with the lure of wanto^nesse, but with honest manners and behaueour. A
wise ought to be woonne with honest manners and behau^our.


Blushyng in a young things chekes is of virtues d^yng.
or, does ye dyeuatte of virtue give.

What Diogenes said of two lawers contendyng, laiyng y^ one against the other.
about a matter of theft: he said, they were false knaves both of them, and
condemned as well the one as the other, allegeyng that the one had committed
theft, and that the other had lost nothing. Signifiyng that both of them
were well worthy to be hanged. The subtilitee of this present saying
consists in this point only, whosoever pieketh or privily steals away any
thing, has some auau^ntage and gain thereby: and the party, from whom any
such thing is piel^ed and brybed away, has by the same, disauauntage and
loss. But in this present case, there had a mad or fond knacke befallen.
The one party had pielfed, or embesleed away a thing of the others, and yet
the parti^ from whom the thing was pieked, sustained no loss ne damage, for
himself had stolen yesame thing before, which his feloe brybed away afterward
from him again.

To one demau^dyng what wine The best wine is, yt a body drynketh of an other
man's cost.
Here al so the ready aunsweryng much contrary to the expectacion of the
demaunder gives to ye saying all his grace. The other party looked for
another manner answer, as the which in his question askyng, mened of the kind
of wine.

To one that said unto him: all again: I am not mocked. And this a man would
think to be a thing impossible, that one should strike you, and yet ye not
be stricken. But Diogenes denied that he was had in derision, either for that
he was no man worthy why, orels for that he thought the skornyng of the
fond people, nothing to touch him, Diogenes thought the skornyng of the fond
people, nothing to touch him.
nor himself to be in any point the wurse for the same.

Diogenes, to live is no miserable, ne wretched thing, but to lead an eiuil or
a vicious life is a thing wretched and miserable. To live is no miserable
thing, but to lead a vicious life.
The most part of folks calls it a miserable life, or a doggues life, yt
is subject or in prese^te danger of trauailles, of bodyly greef or peines, of
sickness or diseases, of loss of goods, of exilinges and banyshementes, and
many sembleable incommoditees. But the philosophier rekened nothing to be
^iuill or miserable, saving that was lynked or coupleed with vice and
dishonestee. Nothing is eiuil, but that is coupleed with dishonestee and with
vice.


Diogenes had a servant, that was called Manes, Manes the servant of
Diogenes.
and when this Manes had taken his heels and run away from his master, the
friends of Diogenes, auised him to seek out the renneawaye: Marie sir, quod
Diogenes, The answer of Diogenes to his friends auisyng him to pursue after
his bondemanne, that was run away from him.
that were a mad thing of all things, if Manes do already willyngly live
without Diogenes, and Diogenes could by no means live without the coumpaignie
of Manes. yet many men pursue after their servants in mind and purpose, to
be avenged on the same: but Diogenes had regard to the need of vsyng or
occupiyng a servant. That if any one philosophier be of righter sort then
another, it is he, yt needs fewest things. The best philosophier is he that
feels need of fewest things.
And in consideracion thereof, Diogenes would not in any wise seem wurse then
his bondmanne. For Manes had run away from him, because he could live
without his master well enough.

On a time Diogenes made al his verse, out of some old tragedy. (...).
Stand utter ye geast unbidden, pick you hen^
Abacke, out of our sight and regal presence.
And also this piece of Homere his verse. (...).
Somewhiles with scourges, he chaced away.
Calling himself a king, a contemner of all sensual delices, Diogenes a
contemner of all sensual delices.
which delices, his will ^ mind was, to have clean out of all menne^
presence and occupiyng abandoned.

Diogenes was commenly abroad called doggue. And of doggues there been diverse
^ortes moo then one: For there be haryers, or buckehoundes, there be spanyels
made to ye hawke, or for taking of foul, there be shepeheardes curres, there
are tie doggues or mastifes for keepyng of houses, What manner a doggue Diogenes
was.
there been little mynxes, or puppees that ladies keep in their chau^bers for
especial iewelles to play withall^ And so, to one demaundyng what manner a
doggue he, for his part was, he feactely answered, and said: when I am
houngry I am a little mynxe full of play, and when my bealy is full, a mastife.
For that, when he had good lust or appetite to eat, he would fawn upon
folks, and speak them fair, and when his bealy was well filled, he
wouldeuermore buff, and bark, and byte agood.

Being asked, whether philosophiers Philosophiers eat allmaner meats as
others y^ are men.
yea, of all things (said Diogenes) eue^ like other christian bodies. In this
also, he made an vndirecte answer, to the question that was asked of him. The
demaunders question was, whether it were convenient for philosophiers (who
professen frugalitee or temperaunce) to feed of tartes and marzepaines, the
meats of de^ty mouthed persons. Diogenes sembl^yng to have no great wit ne
knowlage, (...),
but to be more then half a fool, so shaped his answer, as though
philosophiers were no men in deed, and yet did eat meats to the diete of man belongyng. For every kind of ye brute beasts do not eat allmaner
things at adventure without excepcion. The ox eats heigh, the lion woll none
of it: the sheep love the leffes and tops of wieloe twigs, the horses
would have otes. Some birds are fed with the beries of Juniper, some fowls
are deuourers of flesh, some do feed altogether on fyshe. And to this
alluded Diogenes.

Diogenes on a time at the table among coumpaignie, was eating of a tarte, and
one that sat in yesame cou^paignie, said: what art thou eating now Diogenes?
(demyng that ye cynike philosophier had no knowelage what manner thing a tarte
should be:) he answered bread, of a veraye good making, or bread veraye
well handleed in the bakyng. Pretending, that he knew not, what it was. To
others it was sweet tarte, to Diogenes it was no better then bread, who did
not eat it for sensualitee, or for to sweet his lips, but for his
necessary food and susteinaunce.

Why men give alms m^re bounteously to other beggars then to philosophiers.
and to philosophiers nothing so, Marie, quod he, because they have hope to see
it sooner come to pass, that they shall be lame or blind, then that they
shall be philosophiers. Such folks as taken pietee and compassion upon
persons visited with affliccion, (of which sort are all beggars for the
most part) dooen the same in consideracion of the state, condition, or
chance of this world, being indifferente and commen to al mortal men in
this present life. So they releue a blind body, castyng thus in their mind:
this veraye self same thing, may in time to come, chance unto myself: but of
a philosophier, they have no such cogitacion. The saying has somewhat the
more grace, by reason of the impropre vsyng of the latin word, sperant, in
english, they have hope or affiaunce: for a man in process, to become a
philosophier, may be hoped for, b^t for ye loss of the yiesight, or for
haltyng like acreple, no man uses to hope.

Diogenes asked, whatsoever it dynyng, not for a dyyng. To express as nere as
may be, the affinitee of the greek vocables, (...), and (...), of the which
(...), is in latin cibus, in english meat and (...), in latin sepultura, in
english, a grave. As if he should have said: what nedest thou to make so
much stickyng at the matter: I do not require the to go hang thyselfe, but
only to give me as much money as may suffice to pay for my poor dinner.
Which he spoke, because the feloe made as much stickyng, and showed himself
as loathe to depart with any money, as if Diogenes had said unto him: goo thy
ways at ones, and hang thyselfe. All the matter is in dalyyng with the greek
dictions.

In the.cii. apophthegme of Diogenes.
as is above mentioned:) I confess, says he, the time to have been, when I
was such an one, as thou art now, but such an one as I am at this present,
thou art never like to be, while you shall live. It was a check to those
persons, Many do rebuke in ot^^rs the trespaces of youth and yet emende not
their own in their old age neither.
who do in others find great fault at the errors and folyes of youth,
whereas the same do emende and correct their own misdeeds, no not in their
old age neither.

To another feloe castyng him in the nose with theself same matter Many menn^
do many points of folly in youth^ which they will not doo^ in age.
which does easyly, and at the first assaye make water, whereas old folks
be much coumbreed with a spiece of the ^trangurie, that they cannot pysse,
but with great peine, one drop after another. So m^ned Diogenes, that in his
old age he could not possibly by any persuasion or means have been brought to
coin false money, whereunto the folly of youth had before brought him, through
default of mature discrecion.

Taking a journey on a time to Myndus, Myndus a town in Asia.
when he saw great wide gates and of gorgeous or royal buildyng, where as
the town was but a little preaty pyle: he said, ye town dwellers, or ye
enhabitauntes of Myndus, shut fast your town gates, that your city goo not
out at them. Notyng tee town to be so little, that it were possible for
the same to goo forth at the gates.

Homere. (...).
That is, The death of purple, has thee by the back
Purple, death and princely desten^.
And by princely destiney, thu go to wrack.
It cannot have y^ full grace in english. But (...), in greek, and purpureus,
a, um, purpureus, a um, an epithe ^on of more.
is a denominatiue of purpura: and the poets dooen often join it for an
epitheton with the substantive mors, death. Because that when a body is slain,
the gore blood that issues out of the wound is of purple color. And he
called it princely destiney to dye in rich array, or for preciou^ and gaye
things.

Craterus the lieutenaunte or high Captain with Alexander the great being a man of great wealth and richesse, Craterus lieu tenau^te with Alexander the
great.
had of his own mere mocion invited and hertyly prayed Diogenes to come and
dwell with him: To whom, Diogenes made this answer. What Diogenes answered to
Craterus inuityng him to come and dwell with him.
I can better be contented to live in Athenes with bread and chese, the^ with
Craterus at mine own will, to have all the deyntyes in ye world. Menyng that
libertee (be it never so poor) is rather to be chosen, Libertee, be it
never so poor, is to be preferred to al delices, where libertee is restreigned.
then all the delices and iunkerie, or sumptuous fare of the rich cobbes, to
be restreigned and kept short of libertee.

Anaximenes a philosophier, the scholare and successor of Anaximander, and ye
master and next p^decessour of Anaxagoras.
Anaximenes the rhetorician had a Diogenes came, What Diogenes said to
Anaximenes the rhetoricia^ having a great bealy.
and spoke in this manner: I pray you give to us lene craggues some bealy too:
for both yourself thereby shall be well lighted and eased of your burden, and ye
shall do to us a good turn and a pleasure.

Anaximenes was on a time in making an oracion to the people, Diogenes bearyng
in his hand, and holdyng out a pestle or ga^mounde of bakon, made all the
audience full and whole to turn away from Anaximenes to gaze upon him.
Anaximenes fumyng and taking high indignacio^ at ye matter, held his peace, as a
man destitute and forsaken of his auditorie. Then said Diogenes, lo, one
poor halfpenie matter has clean dashed all this earnest and solemn talk of
Anaximenes. Signifiyng that all his bableyng was of light and friuelous matters,
which made not the audience veraye attente, or willing to give ear unto him.

Certain persons obiectyng unto Why Diogenes would eat as he went in the
open street.
what meruaill, quod he? hou^gre comes on me in the street. He made a reason,
of that the logicians callen, relative opposita. Relative opposita, or,
relatiues, in logike, are two things so connexed, and mutually dependyng the
one of the other, yt the same do eu^rmore eit^er the other ymporte and notify,
as to being a father, belongs having a child, and to being a soonne or
daughter, belongs having a father. And sembleably of hou^gre and ^a^yng.
If houngre were not hasty on a man in the open street, it might percase, be
a matter of ^hame to eat in ye open ^trete. But by the selfsame color he
might have defended himself if he did his easemente orels made water in the
open street.

There be writers that do father Diogenes, How Diogenes taunted Plato
secretly, reprouyng him for his course fare.
Plato happyly fyndyng him washyng a sort of salade herbs, said unto him
roundyng in his ear. If thou would have been rewled by Dionysius, iwys thou
should not after this manner wash these herbs. Diogenes rou^ded Plato in
the ear again, saying: iwys If thou would have washed herbs for thine own
dinner, thou should not in this manner have been a Ihon hold mystaf to
Dionysius. Before in the first saying of Aristippus.
But this appears to be a tale forged after the likeness or exaumple of the
saying before reported on Aristippus, As thissame in like manner, which I will
put now next of all.

^^ogenes no^^yng passed on them that had him in derision.
many a man has the in derision (o Diogenes) and them perauenture, many an
ass, quod he, again. The other feloe saying moreover, and thus replyyng, yea,
but they care nothing for the asses, he answered, and I as much and not a jot
more for them that ye speak of. He attributed unto asses the propretee of
mockyng or skornyng, because they do every other while, by showing their
teeth bare, as ye would say, countrefeacte grennyng and making mowes with
their lyppes. And besides that, when men do mock any body they wagge
their hands up and down by their ears at the sides of their hedde, and do
coutrefeacte the facion of an asses ears. So then the ass also appears by
waggyng his ears up and down, to mock and skorne folks, yet is there no body
therewith displeased, or grieved.

carnal beauty, thou call away to ye beauty and goodlynesse of the mind
and solle. Menyng, that the party, in yt he labored to garnyshe and adourne
his mind with virtues or good qualitees, Who labors to adourne ^he mind with
good qualitees, and honest disciplin^s, shall be assured of much y^ better
friends.
and with honest disciplines, should finally, atteigne, to be assured of
better fre^des, by a great way. For there is nothing more goodly or beautyful
then sapience, nothing then virtue more amiable.

The custom and usage of men Donaries, that is to say: gifts, presents,
or oblacions, as agnisyng to be the only benefyte of the Gods, yt they had
been preserved and saved harmless. Therefore, when to Diogenes, having taken a
journey into ye country of Samos is an Isle in the sea called Mare Aegeum
adiacente, marchyng, ^ bordreyng upon the country of Thracia, which afterward
by reason of the commirtio^ of both peoples was named Samothracia as
witnesses Uergilius, saying: Threiciam quae Samum, quae nun^ Samothraci^
fertur. This Isle was consecra^e to Iun^, who was in the same Isle born, breden,
and brought up, and finally mareyed to Jupiter. There was also another Isle in
the same sea of the same name foreayenst Ephesus
Samothracia, were showed the iewelles or oblacions, that soondrie persons
having been from perishyng in battaill, from dyyng by sickness, from being
drouned and lost on the sea, or from any other great hasarde preserved, had
offreed up, yea, quod Diogenes, but these would be a much greater noumbre, if
all those persons, which in like case have not been saved, had offreed up
such gifts as these. He mened (mine opinion is,) those persons that were
saved from mysauentures, to be saved by veraye chance, and not by the
benefyte or grace of y^ Gods. Diogenes supposed men to be saved from
mysauetures by mere chance, and no^ by ye grace or gift of god.
That in case it be to be ymputed to ye Gods, if a ma^ne be preserved, to
the same is it also to be imputed, that mo in noumbre do peryshe, then are
escaped. There been writers yt dooen attribute this present saying to Diagoras
Melius, Diagoras a philosophier surnamed (...), that is^ a mys^reaunt not
beleuyng that there, were any gods, ne the same to be of any power.
a myscreaunte and a wieked despyser of the Gods. And as for the
Samothracians were sore blinded and infected with great supers^icion in such
manner things.

To a welfauoured young spryngall Diogenes, I have been at ye feast, and yet
am returned nothing the wurse manne therefore. Yes, quod Diogenes, (...).
and so much the wurse, even for that word. Notifiyng to be impossible, but
yt such a young strepleyng must remedy^esse from excessive and vnsobre
reuellyng, A young ma^ne from excessive reuellyng returns wurse manne, the^
he went thither.
come home less honest, then he went thither. And that he had of the pottes
and cups taken such stomach and ympudencie, as without ferther prouocacion
to chatte, and choppelogike with an auncye^te philosophier, was a manifest
argument and an evident declaracion, that his conditions, were rather appaired
then emended, besides that it was a token of small grace, to be so blinded in
folly, yt he would not see ne knowlage his fault.

Diogenes asked of one Euritius some when the same (as is the guyse) sa^ed nay
to his request with these words: I will do it: if you can persuade me
thereunto: If I were hable, quod Diogenes, to persuade the to do al things
after mine advise I had long ere this day, given ye cou^saill to hang thyself.
In this saying, out take Cynical plainness and boldness of speaking, The
Cynicall plainness of Diogenes, in speaking his mind.
and there is no great poincte to be maruailled at. Except percase he thought
requisite, to reprove the fastholdyng of such niggardes, as will depart with
nothing to ye poor, but with more suite and praiyng then the thing

He had been to see the city of Lacedemon, and being from thens returned to
the city of Athenes, one asked of him (as the manner is) whither he would, The
corrupt and effemynate manners of ye Atheniens.
and fromwhens he was came. Forsouth, quod he, from veraye men to veraye
women. Notyng, ye manners of the Atheniens with sensual pleasures and delices
effemynate, where as ye Lacedemonia^s were hardely brought up.

homeward from the Olympia, whether he had not seen there a great coumpaignie,
yes truly, quod he, a veraye great coumpaignie, but woondreous few men.
Much coumpaignie and few men.
This also appears to be countrefeacted and forged by the other saying, Before
in the lviii. saying of thissame Diogenes.
that is before rehearsed of the hot house.

Those persons, who of a ryottousnesse Wastefull ^ ryottous lauessers of their
gooddes to what thing Diogenes likened.
on reuellers, or ruffyans, or harlottes, and upon flaterers: he avouched to
be like unto trees, growyng on ye edges or brynkes of clieffes and rocks of a
down right pitche, or a stiepe down fall: y^ fruits of which trees no ma^ne
could ever geatte a taste of, but the same were from time to time, devoured by
the crows and the ravens. Menyng on that one part, such persons as seruen
only the throat and the bealye, not to be worthy the name of men. They y^
serue^ only y^ throat and y^ bealye, are not worthy the name of men.
and on the other side, gooddes so wastfully spent, to be wurse then cast
away.

Diogenes a^ouched to ^^ more dangerous to fall in the hands of flaterers,
the^ of wild beasts.
or shameful death, they do (by a prouerbiall speaking, in their toungue
used) bid them goo pieke them to ye crows, in greek, (...). But Diogenes
of a customable woonte avouched to be a thing much more dangerous to fall
in the hands of (...). To light among crows then among flaterers. Diogenes
alluded to the greek proverb (...), hens to ye crows, and (as we say in
english) to ye d^iuil^ of hell. Erasmus in his Chiliades cites zenodotus for
his autour, that there was a certain place of execucion in Thessalia, called,
the Crows, in to ye which, persons found guilty of any cause or crime of
death, and thereupon condemned, were carried, and cast hedlong, so to peryshe
there. The original cause why the said place was so named, whosoever is desirous
to know, if he be learned, may at large read in Erasmus upon the proverb
above cited.
flaterers that will hold up a man's yea and nay (be it true or false) then
to light among crows. For the crows do not pe^ke but the carkesses of
dedde men, the flaterers devour men even while they are alive, ^^e they
never so honest, and good. The pleasauntenesse of this saying (which in ye
greek by reason of the affinitee of the vocables has an excedyng great grace)
both in latin and in english utterly quailleth or dies. For crows ye greeks
callen (...), and one little sole letter changed, the same called flaterers
(...). This saying is ascribed to Antis^henes also.

Of Phryne it is noted before in the xli. saying of Aristippus. As touching this
psente apophthegme, the most lik^ly hood is, that upon the Image yt Phryne had
consecrated, was thus written: This golden Venus has Phrynae offreed and given
unto Apollo, when Diogenes read this scripture, he wrote hard at the taille of
it this addicion of the inordinate living of the Greeks.
Phryne a naughtypacke, or a Apollo at the town of Delphi an image of Venus
made of clean gold. Diogenes espyynge the same image, wrote and set this
posee or testymoniall upon it: Of the inordynate and uicious l^uyng of the
Greeks. For it was a plain conuincyng of the greeks, yt they were tootoo much
drowned in the vice of the body that a commen ^troumpette had gathered together
so much gold, of money gotten by such abhomynacion.

There been that ascryben to Diogenes, Alexander ye great had come unto him,
and saluted him, Diogenes demanded who he was: And when the other had in this
manner answered, I am that noble Alexander ye king: Marie, quod Diogenes again:
Diogenes gloried as much in his libert^e, as did Alexander of his kingdom.
And I am yt ioyly feloe Diogenes, ye doggue. Taking no less pride and glory
of his libertee, that he was at no man's beck ne commandment, then
Alexander did of his kingdom, and croune Imperial.

How it came to Diogenes his lotte to be called doggue.
Marie, quod he, because that, on such as give me aught, I make much faunyng:
at such as will nothing depart withal, I am ever barkyng: and such as be
naught, I byte, yt they smart again.

Diogenes pluckyng fruit of a certain figtree, when the keeper of the
orcheyeard had spoken in this manner: upon the same tree, yt thou gatherest of, a
feloe not many days agon hanged himself. Marie (quod Diogenes) and I will
purify and cleanse it again. The other party supposed, that Diogenes being so
advertised would have forborne ye tree inquinate or polluted, in that it had
borne a dedde carkesse. But Diogenes being free and clear from all spiece of
supersticion, Dioge^es clear void of all spiece of supersticion.
esteemed the fruit to be no poyncte the more polluted, or ympure for that
respect.

Markyng one that was a great Olympia, What Diogenes said when he saw a
chalenger of Olympia set an earnest yie on a wenche.
to set an earnest yie on a comme^ stroumpette, in so much that he turned
his hedde back, and beheld her, after that she was gone past him, he said:
lo, how a principal ram, for the touthe of Mars himself, is leed away in a
band (his neck set clean awrye) by a damisel, that is as commen as the
cartewaye. He thought it a matter of laughter for the feloe to be a prouer of
maisteries with picked or chosen men of price, and the same to be haled or
drawn away as a priesoner without any chordes at all, by a shiten arsed gerle.

Beautyfull stroumppetes Diogenes likened to sweet wine tempered with dedly
poison.
he avouched to be like unto bastard or muscadyne, te^pered and mixte with
dedly poison. For that the same caused in deed at the beginning, delicious
pleasure and voluptee, but eue^ at ye heels of which pleasures, ymmediately
ensued endless doloure and woefulness.

Diogenes, ye be doggues rather, in that ye stand round about a ma^ne being
at his dinner. Diogenes called them doggues, y^ stood round about him while he
dyned.
For that is one of the commen propretees that doggues have.

Diogenes being asked what countreeman the boy was: Made answer, by daliyng
with a word that might be two manner ways taken, and said: he is a Tegeate.
For Tegea, is a city of Arcadia. Tegea, a city of Arcadie.
And thereof is derived a noune gentile Tegeates, Tegeates.
a Tegeate, or a person of Tegea born. And the greek vocable (...), is
otherwhyle in one significacion, Lupanar, a brothel house, or a place where
bawderie is kept. And thereof the philosophier usurped a word of his own
deuysyng or forgeyng, and called ye boy a Tegeate, of (...), for respect of
the most abomynable vice, with which he had been defoyled.

when he saw a feloe now taking upon him to practice and ministre How Diogenes
mocked one that from a wrasteleer fell to be a physician.
who had before been a commen dooer in the games of wrastleyng, but in deed,
was a veraye slouche, and a veraye dastard he said unto the same: will thou now
by course overthrow them again, that have heretofore overthrown thee? A
wrastleer is proprely said, to cast or to overthrow any parti^ whom he
ouercometh and puts to the wurse. And the physicia^ also overthrows those
persons, Two kinds of castyng, ouerhrooweyng, or, geuyng a fall.
who^ he coucheth in bed, or brings to their long home. As for ye menyng of
Diogenes was, yt the party was now as eiuill a physician, as he had before
been a false herted wrastleer. A merry ieste much like to thissame there is in
the poet Martialis, of a feloe which from a physicia^, having become a fighter
in harness, did none other being Hoplomachus then what he had done being a
physicia^.



Certain persons highly-magnifiyng and praisyng the bounteous Diogenes a thing
what ever it was: And why do ye not praise me to, said he, yt have deserved
to have it given me? For to be worthy a benefit, is more the^ to have given
a benefit, according to yt the sentence of Publius Mimus: To be worthy a
benefit is more then to have given a benefit.
Beneficiu^ dando accepit, qui digno dedit.
Himself, by geuyng receives a benefit
Who gives to a person worthy to have it


To one that required of Diogenes The answer of Diogenes to one yt had given
him a mantell, and would needs have had it from him again.
he thus made a woondreous feacte and pleasant answer. If thou gave it me
freely, I have it: if thou did lend it me, I do still occupy it.
Signifiyng, yt he was nothing minded to restore it home again, whether it was
of free gift, orels by the way of lone for a time that he had received it. It
is shame for a body to require again that he has freely given. And it is a
point of inhumanitee hastyly to snatche away, that ye occupier has need of,
and cannot well forbear.

Supposititii partus, are in latin called children should bring forth a wenche
and the same conueighed away, should have a man child of an other woman's
bearyng, laid by her instead of her own, or if a woman should countrefacte
trauaillyng and labouryng of child, and have an other woman's child laid by
her, and used as though she had been delivered of it her self in very deed,)
that child so impropreed to a wrong mother may proprely in latin be called
partus supposititius, as ye would say in english a child mothered on a woman
that never bear it, or, a chaungelyng, and such persons are ever after
called supposititii, or, suppositi. Suppositus, is also a participle of
supponor and sou^eth in english laid under as a piloe is laid under ones
hedde in the night.
There is also an other latin word, indormire, in english, to sleep upon, or
to lie upon while we sleep. And it may be taken in two diverse, and in manner
contrary senses. For we are said in latin, indormire, to lie upon, or, to
sleep upon our gooddes or treasure for safe keeping of the same, and we are also
said in latin, indormire, to sleep upon, or to lie slepyng on a thing that we
set no great store by, nor do any thing pass on, as a matte, or a couche.
How Diogenes taun^ed a change lyng who in skorne and derisio^ said that
Diogenes had gold sowed in the patches of his cope.
And in deed Diogenes used his mantell in y^ night season instead of a
mattresse. And so it was, that when such a chaungelyng as is above mentioned,
had said to Diogenes in skorne, Lo, he has gold in his mantell, Diogenes
laid the reproach veraye well in the feloes own neck saying, yea, and
therefore supposito indormio. Menyng ye party to be a chau^gelyng, and
therefore despiceable or worthy to be co^te^ned: where as the words might in
the gross ear of the feloe, soune also to this sense, that Diogenes laid the
mantell nightly under him when he slept, for safe keeping of such a precious
jewel.

To one demaundyng, what advantage What auau^tage and foredele is gotten by
philosophy.
though nothing else, said he, yet at lestwyse this foredele I have, yt I am
ready prepaired to almaner fortune good or badde. This saying has scacely any
smelle or savor of Diogenes, although he bears the name of it.

Being asked of a feloe what What country man Diogenes affermed himself to
be.
he answered (...), that is, a citize^ of the world. Signifiyng that a
philosophier in whatsoever place of the world he is resyaunte or makes his
abode, lives in his own native country. And all the world to be but as one
city for manne to inhabit.

When Diogenes on a time asked After what form Diogenes asked an alms of ye
common almener of ye city.
and in speaking to the public almener of the city (who is in greek called
(...),) he used none other style but this verse of Homere. (...)
(...).
That is. As for other persons, despoyle of their gear
But thy hands from Hector, see thou forbear.
The festiuitee or myrthe and pleasant grace of the saying, in this point
consists, that where he should have said (...), give me your alms, or, give
me your charitee, he used a word of contrary significacion, saying: (...),
despoyle out of harness, or turn naked out of the cloutes. By the name of
Hector, notyng his owneself. And that person commits plain robbery or
spoil, who denies an alms to any poor creature being in extreme need. And
in deed, men of this order been most commenly full of brybyng embesleyng,
and purloynyng.

Stroumpet^es and paramour^s, Diog^nes affermed to be the queens of kings.
because the same might crave of the said kings, whatsoever their fancy
lusted, and be assured to obtein their askyng. For upon this he gave to them
the name of queens, not for that the same were pieres, mates, or feloes like,
with the wives of the kings: but for that they abused the kings selfs as
subjects unto them at each beck and co^maundeme^te. The kings selfs do
not at al seasons impetrate of the people that they would have by exaccio^, but
to a paramour nothing is denied. To paramo^res nothing is denied.
Of this sort and trade, mine opinion is, that the barbarous or saluaige
kings were in old time.

The Atheniens of mere adulacion Alexander, made a decree, that the same
Alexander should be taken and wurshipped for Bacchus (who by another name was
called Liber pater. How Diogenes mocked y^ decree made, by the Athenie^s, that
Alexander the great should be taken and wurshipped for liber pater that is to
say for Bacchus.
) Liber pater, Was one of the names of Bacchus, or Dionysius the Godde of
wynes, for Bacchus first invented the use and the making of wine: and because
wine delivers the heart from all care and thought, when a body is pipe
merye, Dionysius was among the latins called liber, of ye verb libero, ras,
to deliver, to rid, to dispeche, or to discharge.
This honor Diogenes laughyng to skorne, said: And I pray you my masters,
make me Serapis or Apis the highest and ye chief God of the Egyptians, whom
they wurshipped in the likeness of a live ox. For so it was, that Osiris ye
soonne of Jupiter, and of Nio^e ye daughter of Phoroneus, being the king of
the Argiues, first succeeded the same Phoroneus in the kingdom of the said
Argiues, and when he had there reigned certain years, he left his brother
A^gia^us protector and governor of the kingdom of all Achaia, and to win
wictorie, honor and co^queste, made a voyage into Egypt, and the Egyptians
subdued, he took to wife Isis, by an other name called Io, the daughter of
Inachus first king of the said Argiues, and reigned over the Egyptians. Among
who^ as well Isis for inuentyng the form of letters, and the feacte of
writing, as also Osiris for many other royal arts and feact^s which he to
them taught, were both honored and wurshipped as Gods. At last Osiris was
privily by his brother Typhon slain, and long sought by Isis, and at length
found hewed and mangl^ed all to gobbettes or pieces, not far from the city
of Syene, which Syene (as Plinius in the secounde book testifies) is situate
in zona torr^^a, so directely under the tropike of Cancer. that, when the
soonne being at the highest, does entret into the said sign of Cancer at
midsoomer (about fifteen dares before the feast of the natiuitee, of Saint Ihon
Baptiste) it ^yeth ^ust over the top of the citee^ and causes in the same
nomaner shadoe of any thing at all to be seen or to appear. Isis c^used her
housba^de with much mournyng and lamentacio^ to be buiryed in a little Isle
then called Abatos^ in the Marice nigh to the city of Memphi^ (being the
chief or principal city of all Egypt next after Alexandria, wiche Marice was
from thensforth named Styr, that is the place of mournyng and waillyng) But
when in the same Marice had soodainly appeared to the Egyptians a certain ore,
they estemyng the ox to be Osiris, fell prostrate, and kneled to it, and
took the ox aliue^ and brought him to a temple (which afterward was called
Serapion) where they did to him, all honor and homage, and wurshipped the same
as their god, seruyng him daily with gold and all precious ve^selles, and with
all delicates mete for a king or a god to be served withal. And called him
Apis, which in that language is an ox. And ever after a certain time, they
would cast him alive as he was into a floodde, where he should be drouned.
This dooe^ they would goo with mournyng and lamentacion, and never cease
seeking until they had found a new ox as like in color and all proporcion
of feacture unto the first Apis, as might possibly be. And thus from time to
time wurshipped the Egiptians a live ox as their god, and gave to the same
first of all the, name of Apis, and afterward that the first was dedde or the
secounde in process Serapis by a word coumpouned of Apis and (...), a
cophin, (such as y^ carkesses of noble persons are cheisted in, ere they be
laid in their grave.) And so was it first Sorapis, and in conclusion by
chaungeyng, the letter, o, in to, e, Serapis, so yt Osiris, Apis, and Serapis
is all one.
Serapis too. For in the same degree that Bacchus was among those that were
called Satyri, (as the poetical fables tellen, and Plynius in the fifth book
does testify) were four beasts in the mountains of Ethiopia, and of the
Indes, of excedyng lightenesse of foot, and swiftenesse in rennyng, of the
figure, shape, and likeness of a man, saving yt they had horns, and had the
feet and legs of a got, cloven and full of rough hear. And these manner
monstres the old antiquitee believed to be the gods of the forestes, of
wilderness, and of all rusticall places of housbandrie. Whereof Saint Hierome
says in this manner, speaking of Saint Antonie. He saw an e^fishe manne, with
a long crooked hawks nose, ^ a forehedde or brough with horns stickyng out,
whose nether parts of the body grew out into feet such as gotes have. And
when Antonie, (the sign of the holy cross premised) had in the name of god
demanded, what he was, it is reported that the other thus made answer. I am a
mortal manne of the world, one of the bordreers on the edge of wilderness,
who, by the gentilitee with vain error deluded, are called Fauni, Saty^y, and
Incubi.
Satyri, was Serapis, wurshipped of the Egyptians, in the similitude or
likeness of an ox. And Diogenes thought himself as truly to be the one, as
Alexander was the other.

Being chidden, for yt he was a gooer into places full of stynke and all
vnclenelynesse, he said: why, the soonne also does crepe under houses of
office, and yet is not therewith defoyled nor embrew^ed, or made durtie. His
menyng was yt the honestee of a perfect virtuous man, is nothing empe^hed,
^tayned or made wurse for ye infamy of any place yt he resorteth unto. An
honest man is not y^ wurse for y^ infamy of any place that he resor^eh unto.


When it fortuned him to be at None ympure thing ought to enter ye temple of
God.


Diogenes, ^ens he had nomaner learning ne knowelage, professed and openly
took upon him the name of a philosophier: he said: If I countrefaicte a
philosophier, or if I show any near towardness, of a philosophier, even
that veraye point is to be a phisophier outright. To show nigh towardness
of a philosophier, is a great portion of being a philosophier out right.
Half notyng, philosophy to be a thing of so high difficultee, yt even to
countrefeacte the same, and to show any towardness of it, is no small portion
of philosophy. As yt person has an high point, and a great fordeale,
toward being a king, that ca^ expertely and cunnyngly, in gesture and
countenance represente ye state of a king. So in deed, whosoever cou^trefeacteth
or makes show or countenance of a thing, does as much as in him lies,
imitate and foloe all the facions to the same belongyng. And by imitacion to
draw nigh to all the facions or points of a philosophier is a great part of
being a right philosophier in deed, that is to say, of being a studious and
peinfull labourer to atteigne philosophy or perfect sapience.

A certain person brought a Diogenes, to the end that the same child, might
take some part of his doctrine. And so, to commend him, that he might be the
more welcome and the better accepted of the philosophier, the party avouched
the ladde to be already both with excellent wit, and with singular good
manners and behaueour highly endued. At these words Diogenes said: why, what
need has he then of my help, if he be already such an one? He gave a
shrewd ch^cke to ye unmeasurable praiser, Unmeasurable laud and praise
Diogenes improueed.
who attributed to the ladde that thing, for the sole atteignyng and g^attyng
whereof, children are at all times set and committed unto the handleyng and
trainyng of philosophiers. It had been enough to praise and exalte in the
child an honest towardness, disposicion or aptitude, Honest towardness or
aptitude and good hope is a sufficient praise in a child.
and good hope of well prouyng in such things as should be taught him.

Such persons, as talked of virtue and lived not virtuously, Diogenes likened
to an harp.
and yet did not led a virtuous life, he affermed to be like unto ye harp,
which with the soune or melody did pleasure and good to other, but itself
neither perceived, ne heard any thing at all. This saying varieth not veraye
much from the saying of Saint Paul, 1. Corin. xiii.
of a tynkleyng cymballe.

On a certain day, as the people The better philosophier the more earnestly
bent to discord from the people.
is, in all accions or things to be dooen, all yt ever may be to discord
and to be of contrary ways from the multitude or commen rabble of the people,
for because the most part of folks are led with carnal lusts and
appetites, The most part of me^ne are led with carnal appetites.
and not by reason or good discrecion.

Beholding a young man, both of How Diogenes took up a young ma^ne yt
apparelled and demeaned himself vnmannely.
Art thou not ashamed, quod he, to be more back friend to thyself then the
mind or will of nature self has been? For she created and made the a man
and thou dooest diguyse and reforge thyn owneself into a woman. The self same
words may be well spoken of many an one, whom, where as nature has created
and made men, theimselfes of their own voluntary inclinacion, fallen from
their propre nature and kind, to the abusions of swyne, and other brute
beasts.

How Diogenes rebuked a mynstrell of inordynate manners and behaueour.
where himself on his own behalf, was a lewd and vicious feloe, and of
demeanure clean out of all good order and frame, he said: Thou feloe, art thou
not ashamed of thy self, that thou know the way how to set tunes in
true cord upon a piece of woodde, and can no skylle to frame thy life by the
rewle of right discrecion and reason? This apophthegme too, appears to have
been devised and drawn out of some others above written.

time Diogenes moved and auised him to the study of sapience, found and
alleged many excuses, saying, I am nothing apt to learn philosophy: why
dooest thou live in this world then (said he again) if thou have no regard
to lead a virtuous life? Diogenes thought that person not worthy to live y^
would not, study to live ^teously.
For a man does not live here to this end, that he may go ^p and down
loytreyng, and nothing els^ but that he may learn to live in a right trade of
virtue and honestee. Philosophy gives ye gift to live verteou^ly.
To live, is the gift of nature, ^ut philosophy gives the gift to live
virtuously Nature produces us into this world apt to learn, Nature
produces us ^pt to learn, but not all ready learned.
and to take virtue, but no man is already endued with cunny^g at the first
day that he is born into this world.

To a feloe yt despised and would How Diogenes rebuked one that despised his
own father.
he said: have thou no shame to despise that person, to whom only and
nomanne else thou art bound to thank even for this veraye point, that thou
setteste so much by thy peinted sheathe? The grace of the saying rests in
the collacion or comparyng of two contraries. For these two things will in
no wise accord, to despise an other, and to stand well in ones own conceipte.

To draw a sweorde of lead out of an ieuorie sheath.
Ieuorie was taken for a precious thing in old time, and much set by. And
the mind or solle of man is covered, and (as ye would say) housed or hidden
within the tabernacle or skryne of the body, and does in a man's
co^municacion clearly appear and evidently show itself. The mind does
clearly appear i^ ones communicacion.


When a feloe had in the way How Diogenes avoided a check given to him for
drynkyng in a tavern.
So am I shoren at the barbers shop too, quod he again. Signifiyng, that it
is no more dishonestee to drink, then to be rounded, or to be shaven. And as
nomanne fyndeth fault at being shaven in a barbers shop, because it is a
place for that thing purposely ordained, so it ought not to be thought a thing
unhonest, if a body drink in a commen tavern, so^ yt he drink with measure
and with reasone: To take e^cesse of drink is euerywher abhomynable.
for to take excess of drink, in what place soever it be, is a thing
shameful and abominable.

To one reprochefully castyng The answer of Diogenes to one obiectyng yt he
had taken a cope of Philippus
of Philippus the king, he answered with a verse of Homere in this manner.
(...).
Gifts of honor, are not to be refused,
With y^ which men, are by y^ Gods endued.
That Homerus wrote of the beauty and favor of the body, The defense of
Erasmus for taking geiftes and rewards of noble men or of bishops.
(which is the benefit and gift of god,) that did Diogenes wrest to a mantel
given him by a king. The Same verse might even I myself also ryng in the ears
of such persons, as do by a wrongful querele obiecte unto me, that I do
now and then take of noble men or of bishops such things as be given me
for to do me honestee. There is not one of them, of whom I have at any time
in all my life craved any thing, either by plain words, or by other means,
but in deed such things as the same of their own voluntary wills and mere
mocions, do lay in my lap, I receive gladly with all my heart, not so
greatly for rewards to thenrichyng of my purse, as for testimonies of their
benevolence and favor toward me, especially sens their habilitees are of
more welthie enduemente, then to wring at the abatemente of so small a portion
as comes to my snapshare.

In the third book of Homere his Ilias Hector, rebukyng his brother Paris,
among other words of reproach, says unto him in skorne and derision after
this manner. Your harp, and syngyng melodious
With the other gifts of Venus
As, your goodly hear, and angels face,
So amiable, and full of grace,
Will not you save, ne help, this is just,
When ye must lie toppleyng in the dust.
To which point, among other things, Pari^ makes answer after this sort.

Thou dooest naught, to entwyte me thus,
And with such words opprobrious
To upbraid the gifts amorous
Of the glittreyng Goddess Venus.
Neither ought a man in any wise
Proudely to refuse orels despise
Any gifts of grace and honor,
Which, the Gods of their mere favor
Conferren, after their best likyng,
And nomanne has of his own taking.
Diogenes curiously and with earnest Diogenes took coldely and wisely, The
pacyenc^ of Diogenes
saying, In deed I am not angry hitherto, but yet by saint Marie, I begin to
doubt whether I ought now of congruence to be angry, or not. He mened that
sharply to punyshe such a saucy pranke of a lewd boy had been a deed of
alms, and of charitee.

Yiyng a certain person humbly body, forto impetrate yt he desired, he said:
what menest, thou wretched creature that thou art? It were much better for the
not to obtein that thou suest for. To be rejected and to have a nay of a
stroumpet, To be rejected of a strou^pet, is a more happy thing then to be
taken to favor.
is a more happy thing, then to be taken to grace and favor. And yet many
one makes instaunt suite, to purchase their own harm, and byen the same full
dear.

Sweet sauoures of the body, do cause a man's life to stynke.
Beware syrrha, quod he, lest y^ sweet smellyng of thy hedde, cause thy life
to stynke. The greek vocables that given all the grace to the saying, ar^ (...),
fragraunt odor, and (...), rank stenche. For sweet oils or powthers, in one
that should be a ma^ne, plainly argues womanly tendrenesse and nycitee of the
life. And ye fame of every person, A man's fame is the chief odor y^ he
smells of.

Contynually to smelle of sweet odours is an eiuill savor in a man.


is (as ye would say) the odor yt he smells of. A much like saying has
the poet Martialis.

Neuole, non been olet, qui been semper olet.
O Neuolus, that manne smells ill,
That smells of sweet odours ever still.
Between bondeseruauntes, and Masters being vicious persons and void of
grace, do live in wurse servitude then their boundeseruauntes.
and the masters unto naughty appetites. Signifiyng, both parties to be
bondeseruauntes, and yet of both, the masters to live in more miserable state
of bondage, then the slaves: in case ye masters be vicious persons and
eiuill disposed, or, void of grace. For whosoever is led by the direccion of the
corrupt mocions or appetites of the mind, Whosoever is led with every pangue of
natural mocions, has many masters to serve, and the same detestable and
mercylesse masters.
has many masters to serve, and the same both detestable, and also
merciless, and void of all pietee.

Bondeseruauntes, namely such as as the heddes of the servants. So when a
feloe, full of ungraciousness and of lewd disposicion had demanded of
Diogenes, upon what original cause, bonedseruu^ates that would run away from
their masters, were called by ye name of (...), Why fugitive bondemen are
called (...), in greek.
Marie, quod he, because they have the feet of men, and a mind or heart of
such disposicio^ as thy self have at this present which mouest the question.
Menyng that ye party had the mind or stomach, not of a man, but of a veraye
brute and saluage beast.

Diogenes: where as thy use and custom is, of other men to desire an alms of
an halfpenie, upon what occasion dooest thou ask of me ye su^me of awhole
pound or two? Marie, said he again, because y^ of others, I am in good hope
after one alms to have an other again at another season: but whether I shall
ever have any more alms of thee, Why Diog^nes of a prodigal wast^^ of his
gooddes, asked an alms of xl.^. at ones.
after this one time, or not, (...), y^ is, lies in gods hand only, or
must be as pleases God. For that half verse of Homere, he lynked to his
saying, to make it perfect, because it made so directely, and was so fit for
his purpose. And i^ deed a good plain manner of knowelag^ geuyng it was and a
shrewd likelihood, to be toward and even at hand, to light on the neck of
such a wastefull consumer of his gooddes within few days to be brought to
such extreme penury, yt he should not have so much as one poor halfpenie
leaft to coumfort or help himself withal.

Certain persons laiyng to him Plato being a philosophier (as he was) did not
so, he said: well, Plato is a crauer as well as I, Diogenes said yt Plato was a
prive crauer and he and open asker.
But laiyng his hedde, to on other man's ear,
That no strange persons may it hear.
For that is ye english of this greek verse of Homerus.

Odysseae. (...).
(...),
Which verse Diogenes abused in an other sense then Homerus did, to signify
yt Plato was eue^ as great a beggar and proller as he was, saving that Plato
did crave privily whispreyng in men's ears, and he apertely, making no
counsel of it.

Meryly spoken,
lest he should by some chance hitte me. Signifiyng, that the feloe was like
to hitte what soever other thing it were, sooner then the mark: yet other
lookers on, conueighen theimselfes aside as far as possible is, wide from ye
mark, for fear of catchyng a clappe.

cast wide of their mark, or other wise mysse to hitte it, are said proprely
in greek (...), to lose their shot or cast, or to shoot or cast awrye. What
persons shoot or cast al awry.
But Diogenes avouched plainly, not those persons to mysse to lose their
shot, or to hitte awrye, that were wide or short of their mark, but them
that directed and leuelled their cares and studies toward sensual pleasures as
toward their mark or butte. For by such pleasures, Through sensualitee me^ne
fall in to the deep pit of misery and wrechednesse.
they seek and desire to have perfect beatitude, whereas by means of
the same, they fall or tumble down into the most deep pit of misery and
woefulness.

Being asked the question, whether How Diogenes argued death not to be an
eiuill thing.
sens yt we feel it not at ye veraye hour when it is come? And when it is
away, it is eiuill or harm to no body. As long as a man has perfect sense
and feelyng, he is alive, so then death is not yet in place, that if the same
be present, then sense and feelyng is away. And eiuill is it not, that is
not felt. This manner of argumentacion or reasonyng, certain writers ascriben to
Epicurus. And in deed death it self is not eiuil, but the journey or passage
to death is pieteous and full of misery. Of the same journey if we stand in
fear, all ye whole life of man what other thing is it, but a passage or
journey toward death?

Alexander the great, standing at the elbowe of Diogenes, demanded of
the same, whether he were in any dread or fear of him. Then said the other
again, The au^swer o^ ^iogenes to Ale^ander demaundyng wh^^^er ^e stood in
dread of him.
why, what art thou, a good thing, or an eiuill thing? Alexander au^swered: a
good thing. And who stands in dread of a good thing, quod Diogenes? He
plainly co^uinced that a king was not to be feared, except he would to all
the world denounce himself to be an eiuill or a myschieuous person. But if
that were a sufficient good argument, he might thereby have gathered and
concluded yt God were not to be feared.

Erudicion or learning, Diogenes How Diogenes commended erudicion to all men.
allegeyng that the same unto young folks gives sobrenesse, to aged persons
coumforte and solace, to the poor richesse, to rich men orname^t or
beautifiyng. For because that the tender youth, being of the own propre
inclinacion ready to fall, it brydleeth and restreigneth from all inordinate
demeanure, the incommoditees or displeasures of a man's later days, it eases
with honest passetemps and recreacion, unto poor folks it is sure costage to
live by (for they that are learned, be never destitute of necessaries.) And
the substance of welthie persons it does gayly vernyshe and adourne.

The greek vocable (...), does Didymo, Of the selfsame Didymo before in ye
cviii saying of this Diogenes.
(who was in great slaundre or infamy, and had in every bodies mouth a veraye
eiuil name of being a muttonmoungre) had in cure the yie of a certain young
damisell. To this Didymon Diogenes said, see yt ye bruise not your cure. For
that way, the saying may have some grace in english, by reason that the
word, cure, may be taken in a double sense, like as Diogenes dalyed with the
ambiguitee of ye greek woorde^ (...).

It is small pleasure to live, if a ma^ne may not trust his friends.
That if we shall have need, to be as well ware of the one as of ye other,
small pleasure or coumforte it is, to live in the world.

Being asked what was the The best thing in thi^ present life, is libertee
said Diogenes.
But that person is not in veraye true libertee or freedom, who is utterly
subject to vices: neither may he possibly be a man of perfect freedom,
The covetous person, y^ ambicious, or other wise given to vic^, cannot be
free.
that stands in great need of many soondrie things: and veraye many
things wants the covetous person, the ambicious person, and whosoever is
drouned in delices or sensualitee.

In scholehouses, there were come^ly And sometimes ye preposicion, (...)^ ^he
preposicion of greek.
(...), with signifies a thing joined with an other cou^paignion, as in this
manner of speaking, that here foloeth with many persons I took thy part. That
is to say: I and many persons moo besides me, took thy part, or held on thy
side.

Whatsoever thing were not of it felf ^iuill, Diogenes affe^med not to be
eiuill in the open ^trete neither.
Whatsoever thing were not of it self dishonest, he affermed not to be unhonest
in open presence, or, in the face of all the world neither. Whereupon he made a
reason or argume^te in this manner and form. If to dyne be not a naughtye or
eiuill thing, then to dyne abroad in the open street is not eiuill neither, but
to dyne is no point of naughtynesse, e^go, to dyne in the mids of ye street
is no eiuil thing neither. Thus far y^ Cynicall syllogism might be
re^sonably born withal, but who could abide him that after like form of
arguyng would conclude, to ease the body by gooyng to stool, or to make
water, or one to coumpaignie with his wife, or a body to turn himself naked
out of all his clothes, is no eiuill thing, ergo, to do the same in the open
street is no point of naughtynesse neither? Uertuous and weldisposed persons
love honestee and shamefastness euerywhere. Uertuous and well deposed persons
love honestee and ^^amefastnes in all places.


He avouched use and exercitacion, Use i^ all things makes maisteries.
right so, even in the accion of virtue and of the mind, to engendre both a
certain celeritee or spedynesse of dooyng things, and also facilitee or
easynesse to the same.

It was also a saying of his, yt Neither is there any law without a ci^tee ne
city without a law.


Nobleness of birth, or dignitee Diogenes affermed to be none other thing else
but y^ clokes or couertes of myschief and ungraciousness. Nobleness of birth
or dignitee with other high gifts of fortune Diogenes called the clokes of
ungraciousness.
For richemenne, where as they be not one jot better then others, yet they
dooen amysse and perpetrate much unhappiness, with less restreint of
correccion or punyshemente, according to that, ye saying of the poet Flaccus
of a rich person: Et quicquid uolet, hoc ueluti uirtute peractu^
Sperauit magnae laudi fo^e.
Whatsoever thing, shall stand w^ his will,
He has assured trust and affiaunce
To turn to his laud, be it never so ill,
As a thing dooen by uertues governance.
And in deed the most part of the galaunt ruffleers, even at this present
day, think all that ever theimselfes do, Great gen^le^e^ne thy^^^^ ^ll well
yt the^mselfes do.
to be lawfully and well dooen.

Xeniades, his friends were together in communicacion for to bye his fredome,
and to rid him out of servitude. No, not so, quod Diogenes, Diogenes willed
his fre^des not to redeem him out of servitude.
is it not to you known, that not the Lions are as bondeseruauntes to those
persons by whom they are kept up, but rather ye keepers as bondeseruau^tes to
attend upon the Lions? For a Lion wheresoever he is, contynueth always a
Lion. And a philosophier is not by his condition of servitude any thing the
less a philosoph^er.

When he was awaked out of Homere who feigneth (...), death and (...) sleep to
be brothers germain. Homere fe^gneth death and sleep to be brothers ge^main.
For that sleep is a certain image and representacion of death.

Being asked, how he would Diogenes again, not so in no wise, but lay me a
little ruttocke hard beside me, where with to beat them away. The other
eftsons replied, saying: How shall it be possible for ye to do so? for thou
shall feel nothing. Why then, quod Diogenes, Diogenes neglected all
curiousness of sepulture.
what harm shall the teryng, mangleyng, or dismembryng of the wild beasts
do unto me, being void of all sense and feelyng?

Plato gave a great laud and praise to a certain person for this point and
behalf, Ouermuche humanitee in a philosopier Diogenes r^proued.
that he was excedyng gentle and courteous toward all folks: What laud or
thank is he worthy, said Diogenes, that having been so many years a
studente contynually occupied in philosophy, has yet hitherto given no body
a corrosif? Menyng to be the propre office of a philosophier, The propre
office of a philosophi^r is to cure the vices of men.
to cure the eiuill conditions or vices of men, and to be utterly ympossible
the same to take effect, but by the only means of fear and of greef: fear
of reproach, and greef of the open shame and slaundre prese^te.

Diogenes, yiyng a certain feloe of a strange country, in the city of
Lacedaemon, curiously trymmyng and deckyng himself against the solemnitee of an
high feastefull day, said: What dooest thou? is not every day without
excepcion high and holy to an honest manne? To a virtuous and well disposed
person every day is high and holy.
He mened all this vniueruersall world to be a temple for God conueniente, All
this universal world is the temple of god.
in the which manne being constitute and set, ought of his bounden duty,
to behave himself and to live perpetually after an honest sort, as in the
sight and face of the deitee, who presently beholds all things, God psentely
beholds all things.
and from whose yie nothing is or may be hidden. And to this matter he wrested
ye proverb ^n which it is said: that with the slothful and idle lubbers
that love not to do any work, every day is holydaye. With idle persons it
is evermore holydaye.


It was his common saying unto What goodness may be gotten by the
consideracion of harlottes facions.
that thou may thoroughly see, what vile and filthy things, how derely they
are bought. To this matter alluded Terence, saying: all this gear to know, is
health and safegarde unto youth.

Unto the safegarde of me^ne it is needful to have either feithfull friends
orels eagre enemies.
he said that it was needful to have, either feithfull friends, orels eagre
enemies. In consideracion, that the one given a body gentle warnyng of his
fault, and the others done openly reprove and check. So both parteis (in
deed after contrary sorts) but yet egually, dooe^ to us benefit and
profit, while by the same we learn our faults. This saying does Laertius
appoynte to Antisthenes, and Plutarchus to Diogenes.

How one may best be avenged on his enemy.
he answered: if thou shall from time to time approve and try thy self a
virtuous and an honest ma^ne. This point whosoever does accomplish, both
does to himself most high benefit, and in the best wise possible vexes
and tormenteth his enemies. For if a man's eiuill willer beholding his ground
well tilled and housbanded, is therewith grieved at the veraye heart root, how
shall it be with him, if he see thine owneself beautified, and adourned with
the substaunciall and undoubted Jewels of excellent virtue?

When he came to visit Antisthenes Me^ne should in afflicion most of all be
bold on their friends.
most of all be bold on their feithfull and trusty friends, which may
either help them in veraye deed, orels by geuyng good words of coumforte,
ease some portion of their greef and woe.

Unto the same Antisthenes, at another Antisthenes, for love and desire that he
had to live, did take his sickness somewhat ympaciently) he entreed with a
woodknife by his side. And when Antisthenes bemonyng himself had said unto
him: Alas, who will dispetche and rid me out of these my peines? Death
riddeth a body out of peines.
Diogenes (the hanger showed forth), said: even thissame feloe here. Nay
quod Antisthenes (replyyng again) I said, Anthistenes was loath to dye.
out of my peines, not out of my life.

Corinthus, he entreed ye school which There reigned in Sicilia Dionysius the
father, and next after him Dionysius the soonne, who for his most horrible
tyranny was expulsed out of his kingdom, and afterward received again, but
at last, by fynall extermynion banyshed for ever. And being expulsed from
Siracuse, he went to Corinthus, ^ there after that he had a certain space lived
a bare life, at length for veraye extreme need, he was drieuen to excogitate
some way and means whereby to get his living. Whereupon he set up a school
and teaching of children, and so continued until his diyng day.
Dionysius being expulsed and driven out of his kingdom, had there set up.
And heard his boys say their lessons veraye naughtyly. Dionysius in the mean
while coming in, because he thought verayly, that Diogenes had come to
coumforte him, said: It is gently dooen of you Diogenes, to come and see me.
And lo, such is the multabilitee and change of fortune. Yea, quod Diogenes
again, What Diogenes entreyng ye school of Dionysius said unto him.
but I meruaill, that thou art suffreed still to live, that did perpetrate
so much myschief in the time of thy reign. And I see, that thou art in all
behalfes, even as lewd a schoolemaister now, Dionysius as lewd a
scholemaister, as he had been a king before.
as thou were an eiuill king before.

Another of the sayings of the same Diogenes was this: Among the other sorts
of men, to such as live in welthe and prosperitee, life is sweet, and death
hateful: and contrary wise, to such as are with calamitee and mysfortune
oppressed, life is grievous, and death to be wished for: but unto tyrannes
both life and death are peinfull and coumbreous. Unto Tyrannes both life and
death are coumbreous.
For like as they liuen more vnpleasau^tely, then those persons who dooen
every day with all their hertes wyshe to dye, even so dooen they none
otherwise stand in contynuall dred and fear of death then if they ledden the
most sweet and pleasant life in all the world.

Diogenes disallow^d geometry with the other scie^cies Mathematical.
In feith, quod he: A gaye instrumente, to save us from being deceived of our
supper. Menyng the art of geometry, with all other the sciencies The arts or
sciencies Mathematical are, Geometry, Music, Arithmetike, ^ Astrology.
Mathematical, to be to veraye little use or purpose.

(...),
(...)^
Householdyng is not maintained with syngyng and pypyng.
By the prudente auise, of men uerayly
The states of citees are well preserved
With the glye of carolles, and mynstrelsie,
Private householdyng, is not well maintained.


Speusippus being ympotente by reason of shaking with ye palsy, was carried
in a wagen toward the school called Academia, was a place full of groves, one
mile from the city of Athenes. And it was called Academia of one Academus a
noble manne that had there inhabited. In the same ground was a mainour place in
which Plato was born, and in thesam^ afterward taught philosophy, of whom for
that cause the philosophiers of his sect have been from thens hitherto named
Academici.
Academia, and to Diogenes meetyng him on the way by chance, had said,
(...), well art thou: So art not thou, quod Diogenes again, that whereas thou
art in such taking, can find in thyn heart to live. Menyng to be a poyncte
of a true or right philosophier, of his own mind to preuente the time of
death, after yt he were ones no longer hable to ^^iere about and to help
himself, as other men did in this present life. And that thing Spuesippus
was a philosophier of Plato his sect, brought up under him, and in teaching
his school ^ucceded him, and continued eight years master of that school. He
was Platoes sisturs daughters soonne. At length he killed himself for pei^^ and
sorrow being a veraye aged manne, albeeit Plutarchus and some others written
that he dyed of lyce contynually growlyng out of his flesh as Scylla and
Herod did.
Speusippus did afterward in deed.

When he saw a little boy unmannerly same child, a good rappe with his staff,
saying: why dooest thou thus teach thy pupille? Notifiyng, y^ it is
principally to be ymputed unto the breakers and instructours of tender
childhood at the beginning, It is to be ymputed unto y^ bryngers up, if youth
prove well manered or otherwise.
if youth prove well manered, or otherwise. The reporters of the tale are
Aphthonius and Prisc^an.

How Diogenes answered a flagicious feloe, obiectyng pouertee unto him in
reproach.
whereas himself was a feloe full of naughtynesse and mischief, he said: I
never yet saw any manne put to open punyshemente for his pouertee, but for
knavery many one.

Prouertee a ve^tue learned without a teacher.
calling it, (...) a virtue that is learned by it self without a teacher. Rich
folks have need of many rewles, precepts, and lessons, Rich folks have
need of many lessons to do well.
that is to weete, to live a frugall or sobre life, to exercise their bodies
with labors, not to set their delight or felicitee in pompeous or stately
apparellyng and deckyng of the body, and others mo out of noumbre, all which
things pouertee teaches her own self without any other schoolemaister.

Next after these three philosophiers, but the same in this kind, most
excellyng, we shall add like noumbre of kings and no mo, which for their
saiyngees with ciuilitee and good facion replenyshed, have a name of honor
above all other kings. That we may not with to many things pestre and cloye
the reader.

THE II. BOOK.
THE SAYINGS OF PHILIPPUS KING OF MACEDONIE.
Philippus, king of the Macedonia^s, and father of Alexander the great first
conquered Athenes and brought all Grace under his subiec^ion. A man of all
writers much praised for his great humanitee, courtesy and most princely
gentleness.
OF all the kings, that among the Greeks in ancient time have reigned, in my
sentence and mind has not been one, whom we may with Philippus king of the
Macedonians, and father of Alexander the great, woorthyly compare, either in
dexteritee and good conueighaunce of wit, orels in disporte of sayings
consistyng within the bounds of honestee and good manner.

Philippus used many a time and often to say, that him thought y^ Atheniens to
be much happy, who could every year find the full noumbre of ten soondry
persons, whom to create their Capitains for bataill: where he for his part in
many years had found one sole Capitain for warrefare only, that is to weete,
Parmenio. Parmenio y^ only Capitain of Philippus his wars.
Signifiyng, to be a thing little to the benefit of a commen weal, Often to
change Capitaines to be unprofitable to a co^me^ weal.
every other while to change the Capitaines, but to be much better, whom ye
have ones found a fit or meet manne for the purpose and trusty with all, in
no wise to change the same for a new. Ferther and besides that, to make no
force how many Capitaines there be in noumbre but how apt and meet for
conueighyng a batta^ll, and for warrekepyng. It forces not how many Capitaines
there be, but how meet for keepyng war.


When tidings was brought unto him, y^ many soondry things Tethrippo had
gotten the price and chief maisterie at Olympia, and Parmenio had in battle
discoumfeicted or vanquyshed the Dardanians, and his queen Olympias had been
brought a bed of a soonne,) liftyng up his hands on high to heaven, he cried
with a loud voice, and said: And thou lady fortune, for so many and the same so
great good chances, The prayer of Philippus when he had soondry good chances
all in one day^.
do me no more but some light and small shrewd turn again at an other
season. This manne being of passing high prudence, and most profounde
experience or knowlage in the course of the world, did not insolently skippe
and leap, or show tokens of joyful gladness for his well spedyng, or for
the success of things, but rather did suspecte and mystrust the cockeryng of
fortune, The cockeryng of fortune is to be suspected and mystrusted.
whose nature he knew to be, that to whom she werketh utter confusion and
exterminion, the same persons she does first laugh upon and flatre with some
vnquod prosperitee of things. To this matter apperteineth, that Plynius
reports of Valerius Maximus, and the other Historiographiers written, that
Polycrates the Tyranne of the Samians, had lived many years in such
incomparable prosperitee, that in all his affairs either public or private,
never any thing went against him, nor any myschau^ce fell unto him, in so much
that being (as ye would say) werye of such contynuall success of things,
even in despite of good fortune, (to the end that it might not be said of
him, that he never had in all his life any loss, or myschaunce,) as he rowed on
the sea for his pleasure and solace, he willyngly and of purpose cast away
into the sea a gold ryng with a precious stone in it, of valor uneath
estymable. And yet in such wise did fortune flatre him, that within a day
after, his cook found the same ryng in the bealy of a fish, which he
garbaiged to dress for his lords dinner, and restored to the same his own ryng
again. Yet this notwithstanding, in his later days fortune changed her copy,
and Polycrates taken presoner by Orontes the high Capitain or leuetenau^t of
Darius king of the Persians, was after most peinfull and most grievous
torments, hanged up on a iebette upon the top of an high hill. The words
of Plynius, which Erasmus here speaks of, are in the first chapitour of
the.xxxvii. volume of his natu^all history, in manner and form as foloeth. Of
this original begoonne auctoritee and dignitee in precious stones, auau^ced in
process and hoysed to so high love, desirefulnesse and fancy of men, that
unto Polycrates of Sames the rigorous tyranne of all the Isle^ and sea coasts
of ye country, in the voluntary loss and damage of one precious stone, seemed
a sufficient and large emendes for his felicitee and prosperous fortune (which
felicitee, even himself would often times plainly confess and grant of veraye
conscience to be over great) if he might be even with the rol^yng and
mutabilitee of fortune, and touch touch like, mock her as well again: and
that he plainly thought himself to be largely ^aunsoned, and bought out of the
envy of the same continual prosperitee, if he had had no more but this one sole
grefe or hertefore, to byte him by the stomach. Being therefore clean weried
with contynuall joy and gladdenesse. He rowed in a ves^ell for his pleasure, a
great way into the channel of the streme, and wilfully cast one of his rings
into the sea. But a fish of excedyng bigness, (even by destiney appointed to
be a present for a king) even purposely to show a miracle, with a tryce
snapped up the same instead of feedyng, and by the hands of fortune awaytyn^g
him an eiuill turn, restored it again into the k^chyn of the owner the said
Polycrates.
Polycrates the Tyranne of the Samians.

After that he had subdued all moved him and would have had him to keep the
citees with garysons, that they might not forsake him, or fall from him again,
he said, I have more will and desire, long time to be called good, and easy
or gentle to away withal, then for a few days and no longer, to be called
souerain. Menyng a reign or empier, A reign or empier with benefits and
hertie love holden, is perpetual.
that were with benefits and with hertie love holden, to be for ever
perpetual, that by power and dred only, to be of no long contynuaunce.

eiuill of me among mo persons. That he did not hang the railler upon the
galoes, was either a point of clemency and mercifullnesse that he forgave
him, orels of magnanimitee and princely courage that he contemned him:
Philippus contemned a feloe yt used daily to speak raillyng words, against
him.
that he would in no wise drive him out of ye country, came of prudence. For
the feloe being in strange places should have been hable to do to him the
more vilanie.

Smicythus co^playned to the king Nicanor, that he still without end spoke
eiuill of the king. And when the friends of Philippus advised him, that he
should command the feloe to be fette, and so to punyshe him, The cleme^cie
and moderacion of Philippus.
Philippus au^swered in this manner. Nicanor is not the wurst of all the
Macedonians It is therefore our part to see, lest we do not our duty, but
be slack in some thing that we should do hereupon, after that he had
knowelage ye same Nicanor to be grievously oppressed with pouertee, and yet to
be neglected and nothing looked on by the king, he commanded some gift or
reward to be borne to him. This dooen, when Smicythus eftsons enfourmed ye
king, yt Nicanor didi^al cou^paignies without end report much praise and
goodness of him: Now then, ye see, quod Philippus, yt it lies in our selfs,
It lies in our selfs, to be w^ll or eiuill spoken of.
to have a good report, or eiuil. An excedyng thing it is, how far odd those
persons are from the nature of this prince, which never thynken them selfs
to be praised enough whereas they do nothing worthy laud or praise, neither
do they study with benefits to win or allure benevolence and hearty good
will of men, but have more appetite and fancy to be dreded, then to be
loved. And whereas they do often times perpetrate things to beedetested and
that in the open face of all the world, yet farewell his life for an halfpenie
that presumes or dares so hardy in his hedde, as ones to open his lips
against them.

weal of the Atheniens were y^ chief ryng leders he was much bound to ough
most hertie thanks, Philippu^ oughed most hearty thanks to y^ rewlers of
the Atheniense, for their raillyng at him.
for that by reason of their reprochefull raillyng at him, they caused him
as well in vsyng his tongue, as also in his manners and behaueour to prove much
the more honest manne, while I endeavor myself, quod he, as well by my words
as by my doings to make and prove them liars. O the right philosophical
heart of this prince, The right philosophical heart of Philippus.
who had ye way, even of his enemies also to take vtilitee and profit,
neither, (as the commen sort of men are wont) to this sole thing to have an
yie how to do scathe, and to work some mischief to such as railled on him,
but that him self might be emended and made less eiuill, How to tak^
vtilitee and profit of a man's enemy.
being well admonyshed and put in remembreaunce of himself by their
slaundreous reportyng.

When he had freely perdoned Atheniens, Of Cheronea it is aforesaid and at this
Chero^ea did Philippus co^quere and subdue al Greece.
as many as ever had been taken priesoners in batail at Cheronaea, and they,
not thynkyng that to be enough, required also to have restitucion of their
apparel and all their bagguage, and did for the same enter accions of detinue,
and co^mense suite against the Macedonians, Philippus laughed, saying: what?
does it not appear, the Atheniense to deem and judge that they have been
ouercomed by us, at the hucclebones? So myldely did he being the conqueror
take the vnthankefullnesse of persons by him conquered and subdued, The
ciuilitee of Philippus
who did not only, not render thanks ne say remercies for that they had been
leat both safe and sound, The ingratitude of ye Atheniens toward Philippus.
and also without any penny of ransom paiyng to escape, but also with naughty
language sued the Macedonians, and laid to their charges because the same did
not also restore unto them both their apparel and also all their other
rags and bagguage. As though they knew not of what nature the law of arms
was, and as though, to try yt matter with dynte of swearde were nothing else, but
to try it at the (...), is in Latin, talus, and it is the little square
hucclebone, in the ancle place of the hyndre leg in all beasts saving manne,
and such beasts as have fyng^rs, as for example Apes and Mounkeyes, except
also beasts that have y^ houfe of y^ foot not cloven, but whole. With these
hucclebones they had a game in old time, as children have at this day also,
which game was in this manner. If the caster chanced to cast that side
upward, which is plain, it was called, canis or canicula, and it ^^oode instead of blanke or of an ace, and that was the lest and wurst that might be
cast, and y^ caster should thereby win no part of the stakes, but was of
force cons^raigned in the way of repele to lay down to the stake one piece of
coin, or one point, or one cou^ter, or one whatsoever things were played for,
and to take up none at all. The contrary to this (which was the holowe side)
was called, venus or Cous, and yt was cock, the best that might be cast. For
it stood for a sice, by which castyng, the caster should win and take up
from the stakes, six pieces of coin, or six points, or six counters. etc.
and besides that, all the repeles by reason of canis found ^leepyng. The other
two sides of the hucclebone were called, the one chius, by which the cas^er
woonne and took up three, and the other, senio, by which the caster got and
took up four. In the hucclebones, there was no dewce, nor cinque. This was
the commen game, but there were other games, as there been varietee of games in
dice playyng, which dice they called, tesseras, of their squarenesse. Albeit,
tali are sometimes used for tesserae, and taken to signify dice-plaiyng, as
even here also it may be taken.
hucclebones, which is a game for boys and children.

When the canell bone of his broken in battaille, and the surgeon yt had him in
cure, was from day to day ever crauyng this and that, he said: Take even
until you wilt say hoe, for you have ye keye thyselfe. Dalyyng with a word
that might be in double sense taken. For ye greek voice (...) signifies both
a keye, such as a cupborde, or a door is opened withal, and also the canell
bone, or chestbone, that knitteth together a man's shoulder with the breast.
And what thing could there be of more ciuilitee, The ciuilitee of Philippus.
then this ye heart of Philippus, who had a pleasure to use testyng words and
to be merye both in his dolourous greef, and also toward his covetous
surgeon, neither to be for his most peinfull smarte any thing the more
waywarde or testye, nor with the importunitee of the incessaunte crauer any
thing displeased or offended.

Amphoteros, which vocable sou^eth in english, both: the name of the other
Hecateros which by interpretacio^ souneth in english, the one and the other.
Philippus therefore espyyng and markyng the said Hecateros to be a prudente
feloe, and a fit manne to have doings in things, and co^trariewise
Amphoteros to be, a loutyshe person unmeet to have doings, and a very
beast: clean turned, and countreframed their names, affermyng, yt Hecateros was
Amphoteros, and Amphoteros, was to be named Vdeteros, which souneth in
english neither of both. Signifiyng the one of the brethren, that is to
weete, Hecateros, in himself to comprise the virtues and good qualitees of
both twain, and the other brother to have in him not so much as one good
point or propretee. Therefore the name of him, that was called Amphoteros, he
changed to the contrary that he should be named Udeteros, in token yt he was
for ye respect of his qualitees not to be esteemed worth a blew point or a good
lous.

To certain persons, geuyng with the Atheniens and handle them after a more
sharp and rigorous sort then he did, he answered that they did against
all reason in that they advised him, both doing and suffreyng althynges only
for mere glory and renoume to cast away the staige of the same his glory and
renoume, Philippus called y^ city of A^henes, the ^taige of his glory and
ren^^me, that (...) to say, the ^l^c^ ^n whi^^^ al y^ world (...) ^ene and
^^^old his (...).
which he studied and labored to achiue. Signefyyng that he studied and went
about, not how to destroy the city of Athenes, A^henes in ye t^me of
Philippus flouryshed with the abundance of many excellent high clerks.
but how to approve and to commend his virtues or good qualitees, unto that
right famous city being in most floura^t state by reason of the great
aboundau^ce and multitude of many excellent high clerks and me^ne of learning
in ye same city reciaunte.

The judgment of Philippus upon two flagi^ious feloes accusyng either other
before him.
and neither barell better hearing, accused either other, the king Philippus in
his own person sittyng in judgment upon them. The cause all heard, he gave
sentence and judgment, that ye one should with all speed and celeritee avoid
or flee the royalme or country of Macedonia, and the other should pursue after
him. Thus Philippus acquitted neither of them both, but condemned both the
one and the other with banyshememte.

When he addressed to pitche his tents in a fair goodly ground and was put in
remembrance, yt there was in yt place no feedyng for the horses and other
catalles, The miserable condition of warrefare.
he said: what manner of life is this yt we have, if we must of force so live,
as may be for yt co^moditee of asses?

When he had prefixed and appointed and dificultee, that it were not possible
for an ass being heavy laden with gold to have access and entreaunce or
passage unto it. Signifiyng, that there is nothing so strongly fensed, but yt
it may with gold be woonne. There is no^thyng but yt with gold it may be
over comed and woonne.
Which veraye self same thing the poets have signified by the fable of Ahas
the xii. king of the Argiues, had a son called Acrisius, which Acrisius
succeeded his father in the kingdom of the said Argiues, and had only one
daughter called Danae, a goodly and a passing beautiful lady. And so it was,
that Acrisius had knowelage given to him, by an oracle, or voice coming from
heaven, that he should be slain of his daughters soonne. Wherefore he enclosed
and shut up the said Dana^ his daughter in a veraye strong toure, and there
kept her, to thentente that she might never have soonne. At length Jupiter in
form of a shoure raynyng drops of gold got Danae with child. So by
Jupiter she had a soonne called Perseus^ Which thing being come to light, and
being known, her father set both her and her infant child en^losed in a
troughe or trounke of wood in the wild sea. So was she carried by auentures on
the sea, until she arrived in Italy, and there Pilumnus the king, and
grau^dfather of Turnus, took her to wife. And afterward Perseus being ones
come to man's stature killed Medusa, and delivered Andromeda. And at last
returnyng to Argos, he slew y^ king Acrisius his graundfather (according to
the prophecy) and reigned in his stead.
Danae by Jupiter defloured, but not until the same god Jupiter had first
transfourmed himself in to gold, whereof ye poet Horatius speaks in this
manner.

Aurum per medios ire satellites, et perrumpere pere a mat castra potentius
ferro.
Gold has a fancy, and great delight,
Through harnessed me^, passage to ieperde,
And to make way through tents of might
More forceably, then deynte of sweorde^
When those persons that were Lasthenes found theimselfes grieved, and took
highly or fumyshly, that certain of the train of Philippus called them
traitors, Philippus au^swered, yt the Macedonians were feloes of no fine wit
in their terms, The Macedonians were plain feloes ^^ calling each thing by it
right name.
but altogether gross, clubbyshe, and rusticall, as the which had not the
wit to call a spade by any other name then a spade. Alludyng to that the
commenused proverb of the greeks, calling figgues, figgues: and a boat a boat.
(...).
As for his menyng was, that they were traitors in veraye deed. And the fair
flat truth, that the vplandyshe, or homely and plain clubbes of ye country
dooen use, names each thing by the right names.

Alexander after a courteous and familiare gentle sort to use himself and to
live with the Macedonians, A good lesson to all young princes.
and through benevolence and hertie love in the mean time purchaced abroad
emonge the co^menaltie, to gather unto him might and puissaunce, while during
ye time of an other man's reign it lay in him without any his harm or
hindreaunce to show humanitee and gentleness. Like a prudent and an expert
manne right well perceiuyng and understanding, like as an empier by no yearthly
thing better or more fermely to be establyshed, A king may not to all
persons without excepcion show favor.
then by the hertie love and good will of the subjects toward their prince,
even so, to be a thing of most high difficultee and hardness for any person
that has ones taken upon him the office of a king, and has now already in
hand the governance and ordreyng of a royalme or empier, toward all parties
without excepcion, to show gentleness and favor, not only because the
office and power of a king, lies in the open way to be envied, but also for
that a commenweale may not possibly be preserved and kept in perfect good
state, unless heinous transgressions be restreigned and suppressed by due
punyshemente and correccion. Heinous transgressio^s must of necessitee be
suppressed by due correccio^ and punishment.
For kings must so far extend humanitee and favor toward their
subjects, as they may in the mean time accordyngly uphold and maintein
their autoritee and estate royal. Kings must so far exte^de favor, yt they
may in the mean time not empeche their autoritee and estate royal.
For goodness and favor, without end or measure showed is many a time and
often the mother of contempt.

The Same Alexander, he auised and Kings must use honest persons, and abuse
the unhonest.
as bear any rewle, stroke or autoritee in the commenweale, and that the good
men he should use, and the eiuill persons he should abuse, yt is to say,
apply to some good use, that of them selfs they are not apt nor inclined
unto. The chief and highe^t feacte of kings is, to reiecte no person, The
chief ^ea^te of kings, is to reiecte no person, but to make all persons
profitable to the commen weal.
but rather to apply the labor and service of all men, to the public
vt^litee and profit. As almighty god being the only Monarche and prince of
the whole universal world abuses the eiuill sprites, and the weeked men,
to the vtilitee and profit of the church, so, princes of high wisdom and
policy have the feacte to make instruments as well of the honest persons as
of the unhonest, not that theimselfes been werkers of any eiuill thing, by the
help of the eiuill persons, Wise ^rinces have ye feacte to make profitable
instruments, as well of y^ ^iuill persons, as of the good.
but that by the eiuill, they do punyshe the eiuill. Nerethelesse, many
princes there be, which contrary to the right course, dooen abuse the good
men and use the eiuill. In executyng matiers of cruel tyranny, they
associate and join unto them such persons as for the opinion of holiness
are famous and of great name, to thentent that the people should esteem all
thing that they do, to be good and godly.

Philippus when he lay for hostage and pledge in the city of Thebes^
soiourned and was lodged in the house of one Philo a Thebane, and besides his
high entretainmente in that behalf, he received at ye hands of the same Philo
many high beneficial pleasures. And when the said Philo would in no wise take
any reward or gift of Philippus again. Never ma^ne did any thing for
Philippus but that Philippus did as much for him again.
Nay, (quod Philippus) rob me not now (by leauyng me behynd hand in
bountifulness,) of that laud and praise which hitherto I have ever had, yt,
yet unto this prese^te day no ma^ne has passed me, or gone beyond me, in doing
mutual plesures and benefits. Oh an heart and stomakeworthie a croune
imperial. He demed it a more high and ioly thing to have ye ouerhande in
dooyng deeds of bou^tie, then in ye prerogatif of power.

When a great mayny having Philippus sat at the portesale his garment or robe
short tucked up about him, much uncomely. And so it was, yt one of the
captives yt was to be sold, cried loud voice: Be good and gracious lord
unto me o Philippus, and grant me perdone, for I am your friend, and my
father was an old friend of yours. And Philippus demaundyng in this manner, how
so good feloe, and by what means is this frendshippe beetwene us two come
about? If I may approach nerer to your grace, quod the party, I shall show
you. And being herupon licenced and bidden so to do, as though he should
have told him some secret matter in his ear, the feloe said: Sir, leat down
your cape a little more about you, for after this cutted facion as it shows
now, ye sit woondreous eiuil fauouredly and unseemly for a king. Ymmediatly
said Philippus, leat this feloe depart free. For I knew not til now, that he
was to me in veraye deed a welwiller, and a friend. Being so great a king,
Philippus being a great king, was no thing displeased to have fault found at
him
he was nothing grieved ne displeased, neither with the coulourable pretense,
nor with the fault fyndyng or admonicio^ of a feloe that was to him a
stranger of none acquaintance: but did all under one, both with mutual
simulacion on his party cover and keep secret the colorable dooyng of the
said feloe, The beneficence of Philippus.
and also recompense that veraye sie^dre point of kyndenesse with the great
and high reward of free charter and dimission when he stood to be sold as a
bondeman.

Being on a time, by an especial present, and bid them to keep a corner
of their stomakes for the tartes, wafrie, and iou^kettes, that were to be
served and to come in after the meat. They being brought in full belief
thereof, while they gaped for tarte and other like confeccio^s, fed little or
nothing on the other cates, so came it to pass, that the supper was sufficient
to serve all the coumpaignie. With this pleasant merry toye, he both made his
fre^des believe ye moon to be made of a grene cheese, and also found a way to
save the honestee of him that made the supper.

Hipparchus of Euboia being deceassed, Philippus by manifest tokens declared
how heauyly he took his death. Whereupon, to a certain person being desirous
to mitigate and assuage his doloure, Why Philippus so grievously and so heauyly
took the death of Hipparchus an Euboian.
and allegeyng in this manier: well, he is at a conueniente age and time
departed, being now allreadie well strike^ in years, yea, quod Philippus, for
his own part in deed, he is at a conuenie^te age departed, The liberal
heart of Philippus.
but to meward, long before his day. For death has by preuencion taken him
away before yt he has received at my hand any benefit worthy and meet
for the friendship that was between him and me. It is a veraye rare thing in
princes to feel the mocions and pangues of the graces but many noble men
vsen their friends none other wise, but eue^ as they dooen their horses. As
long as they be hable to do them service they set by them and keep them
when they be past occupiyng and dooyng any more seruise, they rid and
dispetche their hands of the same, and shift them away. Yea and rather spoil
them of that they have, then do them good or help them with condign
benefits or preferremente.

When he had secret knowlage Alexander his son found himself grieved for
that his father was a getter of children by soondrie women, he gave unto
Alexander an exhortacio^ in this manier. The exhortacion of Philippus to his
soon Alexander.
Well then, sens it is so yt thou have mo feloes beside thyself to stand in
eleccion for to have this empier and to wear the croune after my deceasse, so
apply thyselfe that thou may at length prove an honest or virtuous and a
weldisposed manne, that thou may appear to have achiued the croune not by
me, but by thyn owneselfe. This manne with right princely wisdom and
experience endeued, did not with sweet words put his soonne in any cumforte,
but put the same ferther in fear, to the end that he might the more prick
him foortheward unto virtue, geuyng notice and intymacion that there was none
other way for him to conceive any hope to be king after him, except he
showed himself a man worthy to succeed in ye croune, neither to be of so
great mome^te to attein and geat an empier, It is not of so great mome^te, to
have an empier, as to be worthy to be a king.
as woorthyly to have deserved to be a king of a royalme.

Alexander that he should give good ear and attend well to Aristotle, How
Philippus exhorted his soonne Alexander to y^ study of Philosophy.
to whom he had been committed to be broken and brought up, and that he should
diligently apply himself to ye study of philosophy, lest that thou do
commit and perpetrate, quod he, many things, which things in time past to
have done, it does now repent me. Right well perceived this excelle^te wise
prince that no man being vntraded in philosophy is an apt and mete person
to be a king. A learned king an inestimable treasure.
Neither was he ashamed to confess that he had through error dooen amysse in
many things, by reason that he had not even from his tender babeship been
nousleed in the precepts of philosophy. For those persons, who by their
ownemere practice assaiyng and experyme^tes, do learn to order and govern a
royalme and to execute y^ office of a king, although they have even from their
mothers womb, been of never so excellent high wit, yet both over late, and
also to the great scathe and ympechemente of the comme^weal, after long
process of years they grow to be good kings. But Who comes to ye office
of a king armed aforehande with y^ precepts of philosophy, cannot lightly
swerue from y^ right trade of virtue.
who comes to the administracion of a royalme, armed aforehande with the
wholesome precepts and rewles of philosophy, if there be in him a mind and
heart with no spice of corrupcion entangleed, it shall uneath lie in his power
to swerue from the perfect right trade of honestee and virtue. Where been they
now, which yalle and rore, that learning, and the study of philosophy is
utterly nothing auailable to the governance and administracion of a
commenweale? They are in a wrong opinion that suppose^ learning to be nothing
auailable to y^ governance of a comme^ weal


Antipater to be of the nou^bre of ye judges. Of antipater read in his
sayings.
But afterward, when it was come to his knowlage yt the party used to dye his
bearde and his hear, he deposed the same again and discharged him of that
office, allegeyng that who in the hear of his hedde was not feithfull and
upright, Who uses deceipte and guile in small things, is eiuill worthy to
be trusted in higher and more weighty matters.
the same in public doings seemed full eiuill worthy to be put in trust.
He used deceipte, and falsehood in dyyng his hear, whereby was no great
auau^tage no gain to be gotten, much more was it like that he would use
deceipte and falsehood in public affairs, where guile does at a time
advantage to a man a good pot of wine. And this ought to be the chief care
of kings, that they put in authoritee persons upright and void of all
corrupcion to be hedde officers in hearing and iudgeyng of causes. And how
may that possibly be, where the offices of sittyng in judgment be sold for
money, and that person appointed and made judge, not that passes others in
honestee and goodness, but that comes first to enoyncte or grease the hands,
of him that gives the office, or bids most money for it? But with
Philippus, no not the autoritee of his dear beloved friend Antipater might
weigh and do so much, but that he deposed the suspected person from the
benche and order of the judges.

Sittyng in justice on ye benche Machaetes, but he was so heavy of sleep yt he
could in no wise hold up his yies, ne give his mind, as he should have dooen,
to the equitee of the law. The equitee of ye law is, that ye lawers callen
the epicai, which they take for y^ moderacion of all s^uerite and rigor of ye
law, when justice and law is ministered with favor.
Whereupon he gave sentence and judgment against Machaetes. And when the same
cryyng with a loud voice, had said, that he appealed from the same sentence,
the king being angrye said again, to who^ dooest thou appeal? for the word
of appealyng (which is evermore from the inferior judge and power to an
higher) unto kings very odious. The^, quod Machaetes, eue^ to your ownself
sir king, do I appeal, if your grace will awake, and with more earnest and
te^dre attencio^ of mind, hear my cause. Immediately here upon, the king
arose and stood him up. And when he had better weighed the matter with himself,
and well perceived, that the said Machaetes had had wrong, How Philippus used
one Machaetes by his sentence wrongfully condemned.
in deed the sentence of iudgeme^te ones given and already pronounced, he
would not revoke ne break, but the sum of money, in which Machaetes had
bee^ cast and condemned, himself paid out of his own purse every ferthyng.
Lo, in one fact, how many soondrye arguments and tokens of pryncely virtue.
He continued not to be angry^ with the feloe both appealynge from his
sentence, and also openly in the face of the court layenge slepynes to his
charge: but leasurely with better dyligence he considered the matter in his
own mind, being now clear void of all wrath and indyngnacyon. Be this a
point of civility and of pryncely moderacyon: but that now ensues, was a
point of high prudence and wisdom, that by a wyttie and polytique deuyse,
the party condemned, he did in such wise deliver and despetche of all loss and
damage, that yet nevertheless he did not stayne ne put to lack or rebuke
his royal authority in geuyng sentence of indgement, the penalty and fine
that Machaetea was cast in, he privately satysfied and paid as if him self
had been therein condemned.

Philippus fumyng and taking high indignacion, for that the The Peloponnesians
were the inhabitauntes of Peloponesus which was a region of Greece, in old time
called Achaia and now Mor^a, liyng between two seas, the one called Ioniu^ and
the other Aegeau^: and with the same seas so enclosed, that it is in mani^r a
veraye Is^e. It was named of Pe^lops ye son of Tantalus king of the
Phrygians. And Pelops was housba^d to Hippodamia the daughter of Oenomaus, king
of the said region, on whom went a Prophecy, that wh^nsoeuer his daughter
married, he should leese his life. Wherefore with all such princes and knights
as came to sue for the marriage of Hippodamia, he (the said Oenomaus) appointed
tornamentes for life and death with this condition, that who so could that way
win his daughter should have her, who so were ouercomed should suffer death.
After many wooers thus slain and put to death came Pelops, and corrupted
Myrtilus the master of ye chairettes with Oenomaus promisyng to the same
Myrtilus that in case he would be his trende that he might have victo^ie, he
should lie with Hippodamia the first night. Then did Myrtilus set in the
chairette of Oe^omaus, an a^eltree of wear by reason whereof at the first
ioynyng it brake, and Pelo^s woonne the victory. Whereupon Oenomaus killed
himself. And Pelops not only obtained and enjoyed the lady Hippodamia, but
also succeeded Oenomaus in the kingdom of Achaia. And when Myrtilus required
his promysse, Pelops caused him to be cast into the sea, which sea of his
name was called Myrtoum. In the region of Pelopennesus were these noble and
florente citees, Argos, Micenae, Corinthus, Lacedaemon, Patrae, the mountain of
Malea lyyng on the sea cost Epidanrus, and these countrees, Arcadia, and
Sicyona.
Peloponnesians did with hissyng mock and skorne him at ye games of Olimpia,
especially having received many benefits at the kings hand, and with that
tale prickyng and stieryng Philippus to avenge himself on them: why quod he,
how will the matier then go if we do unto them any eiuill? Graciously and
with woondreous ciuilitee turned he the argument of his friends to the
contrary, thus: If they be of such froward nature and disposicion, that
they mock and skorne those persons, who have dooen them benefit, they will
do much more annoyaunce and harm, if a body thereunto provoke them with
shrewd turns or deeds of myschief. A manifest token and prouf it was not
only of moderacion or paciente suffreaunce and of mercifulness, but also of a
certain excellent high magnanimitee, a king to neglecte and set light by
the hissyngs, of ingrate persons.

Harpalus in the favor and behalf Crates being both his familiare friend
and of alyaunce and sued at the law upon an accion of trespace for wrongs and
extorcion by him dooen, made instaunte request and peticion unto Philippus, yt
the same defendaunte might pay the damage and fine but yet might for saving
his honestee be quieted and dispetched of the suite and accion, The vprightnes
and in^egritee of Phil^ppus, in ministreyng the l^wes and in doing justice.
lest that being in the face of the court condemned, he should have all ye
world to raill and speak eiuill on him. At these words, better it is (quod
Philippus) that he be eiuill spoken of, then me to have an eiuil name for his
cause. He was tender and favorable to his friends, and bear with them
albeeit no ferther then he lawfully might without empechemente of the
existimacion and credence of a judge.

Philippus being in the camp with his army had slept a great long while
together, Antipater the de^utie and high ^^pitain under Philippus.
being at last awaked, I have slept in safegarde says he, for Antipater has
in my stead watched and for borne sleep. Declaryng by ye watch word, not to
be the part of a prince, Not to be y^ part of a prince to t^ke his full
rest and sleep, especially in time of war.
to lie in bed, all day, or to take his full rest and sleep, especially in
time of war, and yet nerethelesse, that the same may at a time without perell
or daungier be dooen, if a king have a tru^tie and a peinfull deputy. A
prince may be in securitee that has a trusty and a vigi^aunte deputy.
Thus with the laud and praise of his friend, he made a good excuse in that he
had over slept him self.

At an other season eftsons it fortuned, that while Philippus in the How
parmenio excused Philippus slepyng in the day time.
and spoke many words of reproach by the king, for that by reason of his
sluggyng they might not at ye first choppe be brought to his speech: then
Parmenio being in presence, Parmenio was one of Philippus ge^tlemenne and a
capitain and in veraye high favor and trust with him, and after his days,
with Alexander Magnus.
in this manier defended the king, and made excuse in his behalf, saying:
Meruaill ye not if Philippus do now repose himself and take a nappe, for
when all ye were in your ded sleep, he watched. Signifiyng, that the greeks
rechelessely conueighyng their affairs, Philippus broke many a sleep to
provide for their defense and safegarde.

Eu^ry body is best judge of his own art and faculty.
God forfende sir king, quod the mynstrelle, that ye should have more sight and
knowlage in this gear, the^ I. Pleasauntely and as might stand with good
manier, did the feloe take upon him to judge in his own art and facultee, and
yet nothing offended or displeased the king, whom he judged to be of more
dignitee and high estaste, then for to contend or strive with a mynstrelle
about ye twangyng of harpestrienges and lutestrienges.

Yea and ye right sharp or poynaunte were spoken in time and place oportune,
and not toto far out of course he could take in good part. The human^tee
and paceinc^ of Pilippus.
For when he was foul out, both with The debate and displeasure of Philippus
with Olympias and Alexander, does Plutarchus in the life of Alexander show,
in this manner: When by reason of the love and soondrie marriages of Philippus,
much troubleous murmuryng and frayyng arose and begoonne within the court of
Philippus, among his own folks, in so much that the kings wife and the other
women could sca^ely abide one an other, much querelyng, brallyng and discord
grew and daily came in ure, even under the nose of Philippus. Which grudges,
quereles, debate and variaunce, the sharpenes or curstnes, the zelousie, and
the eagre feersenes of Olympias did augmente and set on Alexander against
Philippus. Also of debate and enmitee one Attalus ministreed a wondreous good
cause at y^ marriage of Cleopatra, whom where Philippu^ had fallen i^ love
withal, being yet a young damysell vnmariable, anon after he took to wife.
For Attalus being uncle to the mayde^ being through drunken, even in the
feast time of the marriage, exhorted and encouraged the Macedonians to make
prayer unto the Gods, that a lawful and right born heir for the succession
of the croune and empier might be begotten between Philippus and Cleopatra.
with which thing Alexander being highly moved, said: why thou naughty
vilain, what thynkest thou of us that we are bastardes, or mysbegotten? and
even with that word he caught a goblet in his hand, and cast it at the hedde
of Attalus. Philippus ymmediately thereupon arisyng ran at Alexander with a
naked sweorde to have slain him, but (fortune being them both^ good to lady)
what by reason of fury, and what of wine the stripe did no harm all. Then
Alexander beginning to rail on his father said: This is the ioyly feloe and
gaye manne, which making preparacion to pass out of Europa into Asia, and
about to go but out of one chaumbre into an other stumbleed and had a great
fall. After this high woorde^ and reasonyng had in cups, when the said
Alexander had conueighed away with him his mother Olympias, and had left her
in the region of Epirus, himself abode and lived in the country of Illyris.
And at the same season, it fortuned that one Demaratus a Corinthian a veraye
familiar acquaintance and friend of Philippus, pretending to be one yt would
himself in all causes frankely, freely and boldly say his mind, was come unto
Philippus. Of whom after they had shaked hands, and had with pleasant and
freendly words salued either the other the said Philippus enquiered, how
the Greeks agreed and accorded within theimselfes. To whom Demaratus thus
au^swered: O Philippus, of all men lest of all it behooves you to have care
and charge of Greece, that have thus heaped your own court and palaice with so
many kinds of discord and with so many troubles and aduersitees. Whereupon
Philippus repentyng his folly, sent the said Demaratus, to desir^ and pray
Alexander to return home again, and so he did.
Olympias his wife, and also with Alexander his soonne, he demanded of
Demaratus a Corinthian even at that prese^te time happyly coming unto him in
ambassade, Demaratus ambassador from Cori^the with Philippus.
what concord, peace and unity the greeks had among theimselfes one with
another. Immediately said Demaratus to him again. Iwys iwys, ye do of
likelihood take great thought and care for the co^corde and tranquillitee of
the greeks, when those that are nighest and most dear unto you, bear such
heart and mind toward you. What would a man in this case have looked for,
but that the king being highly displeased with ye bold and plain speaking of
Demaratus, should have commanded the same to be had away out of his sight?
Yet for all that, because ye words of Demaratus meaned to revoke him from ire
and wrath, to taking better ways: the king pacified and reconciled himself
at the correpcion of the stranger, and all indignacio^ and wrath laid a
part, fell to a fulle atonemente with all his folks.

To an old wife being a poor Philippus to have the hearing of her cause
before him, nor ceassyng with this ymportune and earnest prayer in manier daily
to ryng in his ear, The office of kings is to hear the complaints and
causes of all persons with out excepcion
he at last made answer, that he had no leisure. And when the old wife had
eftsons cried out upon him, saying why, then be no longer king neither:
Philppus greatly meruaillyng at her bold and frank speaking did
fromthensfoorthe give ear not only unto her, but also to all others like.
This selfsame thing the latins dooen attribute unto Adrian Emperor of Room.

Philippus, when it was come to his ear that his soonne Alexander had in a
certain place showed him self to be a cunnyng musician, Not every art is
meet for a king.
graciously and courtisely chidde him for it, saying: Art thou not ashamed of
thyself to have so good sight in music? Signifiyng that other arts then
music were more meet and seemyng for a king.

Philippus having on a time gotten a fall in the wrastleyng place, Philippus
reproved the ambicion of man in des^ryng empier
when in the arisyng again he had espied the priente and measure of his wholle
body in the doust, he said: Oh the folly of man, how we to who^ of nature a
veraye small portion of the earth is due, desire to have in our hands all the
universal world. Would god this saying had been well enpriented in ye heart
of his soonne, to whose ambicion and covetous desire all the wholle world
seemed but a little angle. The ambicio^ of Alexander.


Philippus chidyng his soonne Alexander Macedonians, did thus frame and set
his words: what (the deiuill) consideracion or means has put such a vain
hope in thy hedde, and brought the into this fools paradise, to suppose that
they will in time to come be feithfull and true unto the, Benevolence ought to
be purchaced by virtue and not by gifts.
whom thou shalt have corrupted and bought with money? what? dooest thou goo
about to bring to pass, that the Macedonians shall esteem y^ to be, not their
king, but their almoyner, or pursebearer?

Atheniens had sent an ambassade unto Philippus. The Same graciously received
and heard, to the end that he would with all possible courtesy and humanitee
dimisse the Ambssadours, he willed them to speak, in what thing he might do
to ye Atheniens any good pleasure. Anon, Demochares taking the tale in hand,
said: forsouth sir, if ye goo and put your neck in an halter and hang
yourselfe. This Demochares was one of ye Ambassadors, and for his malaparte
toungne called at home in his conntree in their language, Demochares
parrhesiastes, one of ye ambassadors sent in Legacy from the Atheniens unto
Philippus.

The boldness yt some persons have, plainly and with out respect, fear,
acception or sparyng of any body whatsoever he be, to utter and to speak
that lies in their stomach yea, whether it be to give a check and a rebuke
to ones face, orels any otherwise howsoever it be, is called in greek (...),
and thereof whatsoever person has that propretee without fear or sparyng to
say his mind in all things as he thinks, is called Parrhesiastes. And such
an one was this Demochares. (...), is in a man the qualitee contrary to
assentacion, which assentacio^ is the southyng of each bodies tale and
sayings, and holdyng up their yea and nay.


Parrhesiastes, (as ye would say in english) Thom truth, or plain
Sarisbuirie, The kings friends at such a carlishe answer fumyng and taking
high indignacion Philippus appeased them, and commanded them safe and sound
to leat goo that same Thersites, was one of ye Greeks, and came among the moo
out of the country of Aetolia unto the battaill of Troy: a great gentleman
born, but the wurst of feacture, of shape and of favor, that possible might
be, and a veraye cowarde: Whom Homerus in his secounde volume of his work,
entitleed Ilias (that is, of the battaill of Troy) describes both in words
and sense, much like as foloeth: Among all others, to Troy there came,
An eiuill favored geaste, called by name
Thersites, a pratleer be ye sure,
Without all facion, end or measure.
What soever came, in his foolish brain,
Out it should, were it never so vain.
In each man's bote, would he have an ore,
But no word, to good purpose, less or more:
And without all manner, would he presume
With kings and princes, to cock and fume.
In feactes of arms, naught could he do,
Nor had no more heart, then a gooce thereunto.
All the Greeks did him, deride and mock,
And had him, as their commen laughyng stock.
Squyn^yied he was, and looked nine ways.
Lame of one leg, and hympyng all his days.
Croump shouldreed, and shrunken so ungoodly,
As though he had had but half a body.
An hedde he had (at which to ieste and scoff)
Copped like a tankarde or a sugar lofe.
With a bushe pendente, underneath his hatte,
Three hears on a side, like a drouned ratte.
And not long after his arrival to Troy, for that he was so buisie of his
toungue, so full of chattyng and pra^leyng with every king and noble manne of
the Greeks, Achilles being moved with his saucynes and ymportunitee, up and
gave him such a cuff on the ear, that he slew him out of hand, with a ^lowe
of his fist.


Thersites. Then turnyng himself to the residue of the Ambassadors, he said
Goo bear word again home to the Atheniens, much more pride and stately
presumpcion to rest in the speakers of such ungoodly words as these, then in
them, which hear the same spoken unto them, and suffer it to pass
unpunished. When all is dooen, these are the stomakes and hertes worthy to
have empier.

THE SAYINGS OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT.
IN the sayings of Philippus there was nothyng^ but which besides the
vrbanitee and pleasant grace might not also auayll to good manners and honest
behaueour. Nether do I see, whom more conue^iently to join unto Philippus,
the^ his own soonne Alexander.

Alexander being yet but a little boy, when his father Philippus executed
many right high entreprises, and many right puissaunte and noble acts of
prowess achiued with veraye prosperous hap and success: was therwithall
nothing well apaied, but to his plaifeeres, and such as were brought up at
nourice with him, he used thus to say: my father will leave nothing at all for
me. They saying again: yes iwys, it is you and none other for whom he
purchaceth and procures all thissame. And what good may it do me, quod
Alexander, if being a lord of great possessions, I shall have none affairs
wherabout to be dooyng, and to be set on work? Alexander even of o child
was of an ambicious ^ stieryng nature.
Even at that age might a body right well espy and know in him a spark of
an ambicious and actif or stieryng nature toward.

The Same Alexander whereas he body and veraye swifte of foot to run,
Alexander veraye nymble of body and swifte to run.
to his father willing him at the games of Olympia to run the race among ye
others, I would sir with all my heart, says he, if I should have kings to
run for the price or maisterie with me. In this point also may ye evidently
espy and know a man of haulte courage and one yt would not to any person
living give place, The haulte courage and stomach of Alexander.
or yield an ynche, in the trial of laud and dominacion. Himself was not yet
come to be a king, and for all that would he not vouchesalue in prouyng
maisteries to be matched with any persons being under the estate of kings.
Alexander in prouyng maisteries wou^d not be matched but with kings.


When a certain young woman Alexander to be his bedfeloe, the king demanded,
where she had been so long: the woman making answer, that she had tarried and
awayted, until her housbande might first be gone to bed: he called his
servants, that had brought her and gave them an high and a sore rebuke,
saying conueigh this woman home again, for I was not far from ye point, nor
failled but veraye little thorough your defaulte, to be made an auoutreer. A
passing gaye exaumple of chastitee, A notable example of chastitee in Alexander.
on the oneside in a young manne, and on the other side in a king (and mo^te of
all in an ethnike.) For among them, simple fornicacio^ was reputed for no
crime ne sin at all. And by this history it seems lik^ly, that the manner
and usage at those days was, (as in Italy yet still at this present day it
is) that men's wives lay aparte in a soondrie chaumbre and bed from their
housbandes, In old time ye wives lay a part in a soo^drie chau^bre and bed
from their husbands.
unless they were at this or that season called.

To Alexander in his childehood Paedag^gus is he yt has y^ tuicio^,
governance, nourturyng, breakyng and bryngyng up of a child as well in maniers
as in learning, which was in old time as well among the Romans as the Greeks
an honorable both name and funccio^. Neither was there any noble man's son,
but that he had a peculiar tu^our and governor. But Alexander because he was
soonne to so noble a king, and also was of singular courage, stomach and
towardnes had many p^edagogues, nour^urers and schoolemaisters, among whom the
chief preemine^ce had Leonides, and to him by especial commission apperteined
the principal, cure, charge, autoritee and rewle over Alexander, partly for
that he was a man of singular grauitee, wisdom, and seueritee of maniers,
and partly because he was of nere kynred and friendship ^owardes Olympias the
mother of Alexander. Nerethelesse because Leonides thought the name of
Paedagogue over basse and vile for a man of such dignitee as himself was,
Lysymachus had the name of Paedagogue, and in veraye deed was he that
contynually attended and took daily peines in nourturyng, teaching, and
breaking Alexander, and Leonides was called his tutour, governor, directour,
and (as ye might say) lord Maistee.
Leonides who was his governor and had chief cure and charge of his body and
of his bryngyng up, and at that time was there present, said: Sirrah, my
child, the^ shall it be meet for you with thus great largess to make
ince^se unto the gods, when ye shall have subdued the country where this
incense grows. After long process of time, when Alexander had in deed
conquered the same country, having fresh in his remembrance the saying of
Leonides above especified, he wrote letters unto him with this clause: I send
unto ye The country where odours grown, that is here meaned, was Gaza, which
was a town of the country of Palestina or Iewrie in Pheni^ia being a part
of Arabia, which Alexander (as Plutarchus writes) did subdue and conquer. And
when he sent from then^ to his mother Olympias and to Cleopatra, and to his
other fre^des, cote armours and spoils there woonne, he sent also at the same
time (as the same Plutarchus makes mention) to Leonides his old master, five
hundred talentes of frankinsense, that is of our Troy weight or poyse fowertie
six thousand and five hundred pounds of weight or thereabout, and of Myrthe,
one hundred talentes, that is of english poyse, nine thousand three hundred
pounds of weight or thereabout. For I take here a talente for the commen
talente Attique which contained of english poyse three score two pounds and
one half pound or thereabout.
certain talentes of frankinsense and of casia, to thentente yt thou may not
fromhensfoorth be a niggarde toward the gods, sens thou art not unknowing,
that we are now co^querours and lords of ye country yt produces frankince^se
and sweet odours.

When he was ready and would Darius at the floudde Alexander making a v^age
and gooynge with an army royal of thirty four thousand footemenne, and
five thousa^d^ horseme^ne against Darius king of the Persians, co^ueighed his
host and passed ou^r Hellespontus (which is a narowe and veraye dangerous
sea, reachyng from the Isle of Tenedus, unto Propontis) and so came to Granicus
a floudde in the country of Phrygia, which Phrygia is a region of Asia the
less. At Granicus because it was (as ye would say) the gates of Asia, and for
that there was none other entreaunce nee passage into Asia to come to ye
Persia^s: y^ Capitains of Darius had so set there souldyers in array to
resist Alexander, that there might be no way made but with dynte of sweorde.
Wherefore, Parmenio the dear friend, the most feithfull herted counsaillour
and the most trusty Capitain of Alexander auised him for many consideracions
in no wise to enterprise so hard and so dangerous an adventure. Why, quod
Alexander again, Hellespontus would blushe for veraye shame, now that I have
already passed over it, if I should be afeard to wade over so little a floudde
as Granicus, and then after that he had encouraged his souldyers to have
cherefull hertes, taking with him thirteen rays of horsemen, himself flounced
me into the floudde, and at length in despyte and maugre the heddes of all his
enemies, he got to the other side of the same.
Granicus, he badde the Macedonians to feed lustyly at their dinner, not
sparing to fille their bealyes with such vitailles as they had, for they should
be assured ye morrow next following to suppe of the provision of their enemies.
A lustye courage, and an heart yt could not faint ne be dismayed and as
touching the end of the battaill being in nomaner doubt, mystruste, ne fear
but that the victory should go on his side.

Parillus one of the noumbre of Alexanders familiare friends, Parillus one of
Alexanders familiare fre^des.
desired of Alexander some dourie of money toward the marriage of his
daughters. The king badde him take fifty talentes of money. And when ye other
had answered ten talentes to be sufficient, yea, (quod Alexander) so much
is enough for y^ to take, The bountee and munificence of Alexander.
but the same is not enough for me to give. Gayly and royally spoken, had not
his towardnes unto virtue been vitiated and corrupted with ambicio^.

Alexander had commanded his treasourer to deliver unto the philosophier
Anexarchus how much money so ever he would ask, And when ye said treasourer
had herd the request, and being therewith more the^ half astonned, had made
relacion unto Alexander that the philosophier asked no less then an hundred
talentes: The bountee and munificence of Alexander.
he does well (quod the king) knowing himself to have a friend, which is
both hable and willing to give so great a sum. Here may a man doubt
whether of these two things he ought rather to maruaill at, the kings
liberalitee in geuyng, orels the unreasonableness of the philosophier, in askyng
except we lust rather to call the same assured trust and confidence that he
had in the

When he had seen in the city of Miletus many and the same right great, and
bowerly images and porturatures of such persons as had tofore times woonne
the victories or chief prices in the games of Olympia and of Pythia, Apollo by
one other name was called Pythius of the great dragon Python, which dragon to
his great honor glory and reno^ne, ^e slew with his bow and aro^s. And for a
memorial of y^ act there were holden and kept in y^ honor of Apollo Pithius,
certain games of iustyng, rennyn^, wra^tleyng, and shoo^yng, and of the name of
Apollo they were called Pythia.
he said: And where were these so great gyauntlike bodies, when the barbarous
did besiege your city? Nippyngly did he taunte and checkyng the foolish
ambicion of them, who glory and braggued of such persons as being in
greatness and strength of body perelesse, had gotten victory in turnamentes,
^ustes, wra^tleyng, rennyng and other sembleable games made for p^easure and
disporte, whereas in so great pere^les and dangers of ye city, there had been
none at all, that could try and show theimselfes to be such ioyly valiau^te
feloes.

Adas queen of the Carians had a great delight and fantasy still day by day,
This Ades Alexander for favor yt he had to her, of his own mind took for
his mother, and so called her, and made her queen of the Carians.
ordynarily to send unto Alexander presents of cates and of iunquettes or
confeccions dressed and wrought with great cunning, by the fynest deuisers
pastlers and artificers of such things, that could be gotten: Alexander
said, that himself had of his own much better cooks and dressers of his
viandrie, The cooks yt Alexander had to dress his meat.
yt is to weete, for dinner, his iourneyeng ye night before, and for supper, a
spare and light repaste at noone. Caria is a province in the country of Asia
the less, lyyng between Lycia and Ionia, the inhabitauntes whereof were called
Caria^s, a vile people and veraye abiecte, in so much y^ diverse proverbs ye
Greeks invented, in reproach of their vilanie. As, Ite for as Cares no^ amplius
Anthisteria, and In Care periculu^ Of which proverbs read in the chiliades
of Erasmus.


On a certain season, all things Nothing (quod he) but ye beardes of the
Macedonians to be shaven of. Parmenio woonderynge what this saying should
mean: why, dooest thou not know, said Alexander, yt there is in battayll
nothing better or more apt to take hold on then a bearde? Beardes are in
bat^^^ll a great^ l^tte and hindreaunce.
He sygnyfyed that fyghtyng in war ought to be within handye grypes, in
which kind of strife and tryyng beardes are a great hynderaunce, for that the
souldyers or men of war may very easily be caught by the beardes and be
holden fast.

Darius offreed unto Alexander these conditions, The conditions offered by
Darius unto Alexander.
that he should have ten thousand talentes of money, and besides that the
empier of the whole country of Asia to be egually divided between them
twain. When Alexander this offer refused: I would surely have taken it, quod
Parmenio, if I were Alexander. And so would I, quod Alexander, if I were
Parmenio. But unto Darius he made answer in this manner, The answer of
Alexander concerning ye condicio^s offreed to him by Darius.
that neither the earth might endure or abide two soones, nor ye country of
Asia two kings Here also might one allow and commend his haultenesse of
courage or stomach: if the saying did not savor of a certain inordynate
wylfull heddynes to be lord alone, Alexander would needs be lord of all
the world alone.
and to have all under his own subiecion.

When Alexander was like at a The battaill between Alexander and Darius,
foughten at ye town of Arbeles.
Arbeles to be put to the plounge of making or marryng and of habbe or
nhabbe to win al, or to lose al (for he had to fight with a million of men
of arms well appointed, and prepaired to try it by strokes) there came unto
him certain of his souldyers that bare toward him veraye good and true
feithfull hertes, and complained on their feloes, that in the camp they made a
muttreyng among theimselfes, and co^spired together, of all the preade and
booty that they should geat, not to bring a jot into ye kings pauilion, but
to convert it full and whole to their own peculiare profit and advantage.
These things heard, Alexander smyled, How Alexander took, that his souldyers
had co^spired among theimselfes to convert all the booties that they should
geat, to their own private use.
and said: Sers, ye have brought me good tidings. For I hear the words of
feloes minded to win the victory, and not to flee. Neither was he deceived
in his geasse. For unto him came right many an one of the souldyers, saying: Be
of good chere sir king, and have good heart, neither fear ye the great
noumbre and multitude of your enemies, they shall not be hable to abide, no
not so much as the veraye smelle of us. Plutarchus in ye life of Alexander
says in manner and fourm^ here foloyng. Immediately hereupon was there a great
field foughten with Darius, not (as some autours written) in the town of
Arbeli, but at Gaugameli. Which word Gangamel^ is as much to say, as the
Cameles house. Which it is said, that a certain king in forne years, when he
had on a D^omedarie Camele escaped the hands of his enemies, builded there,
and appointed to the oversight and the charges of the same, the revenues of
certain towns and villages.


Alexander, his army now already set in a raye, and appointed even out of
hand to fight the field, when he espied one of the soldiers even at the same
present hour trymmyng a strop or loope to set on his darte, A stroppe is y^
streng that is fastened in y^ mids of a darte, wherein to put ones finger
when he picketh it.
he put out of wages, and discharged of his room, as one like to do no good
service at all, which then and not before begoonne to make ready his weapens
when it was already high time to occupy the same. It is an eiuill man of war
that will have his weape^ unready when he should occupy it.
This was to be put rather among stratagemes then among apophthegmes, eue^
as is also thissame, whereof I shall now ne^te after make rehersall.

Alexander was readyng a lettre Antipater These lettres did Hephastion after
his accustomed manner read together with the king. Heph^estion was so highly in
favor with Alexander, yt he called him, after se, the second Alexander, and
used him as familiarly as his own self hydyng from him none of all his
secrets.
Neither did the king forbid him to read, but after reading of the epistle,
he pulled his signet ring from his finger, and set it hard to ye mouth of
the said Hephaestion, warnyng the same by thus dooyng, to keep his counsel
secret. An example of notable trust and affiaunce having in his friend, yea
and also of passing great humanitee, in that he would these false accusacio^s
and co^plaintes to be spread abroad, although in deed he loved At the first
beginning, who so high in price, estymacion or trust with Alexander, as was
Antipater? in so much that Plutarchus in the life of Phocion reherseth for a
thing notable and worthy memory, that the same Alexander never would
vouchesalue to show to any persons so much honor, as in his Epistles or
lettres to write unto them this familiare clause in the beginning of his
lettres, we great you well, saving only to Phocion of Athenes, and to
Antipater, which two persons he had in espeall high regard and honor. And
Iolas one of the soonnes of Antipater was unto Alexander chief butler and cup
bearer But in the later days Antipater lost utterly all the favor of
Alexander, and was of the same suspected, mystrusted and dedly hated.
Antipater at that time no better then a doggue.

Ammon, was Iuppiter wurshipped in the form and likeness of a ram. For
when Bacchus otherwise called Liber pater (all the whole country of Asia now
subdued) was conueighyng his army through the wilderness of Lybia (which
Lybia is a region or cost of the country of Afrike, boundyng upon Aegypte,
and sometime set for all Afrike,) being almost lost for drought both he
and all his army, he besought his father Iuppiter of help and succor.
Whereupon ymmediatly appeared unto him a ram, which ram while he pursued, he
came by chance to a right pleasant and a plenteous well. Bacchus therefore
thynkyng this ram to be Iuppiter, anon builded there a temple, and set in
it the image and porture of a ram to be wurshipped for Iuppiter. And it was
called Ammon (as ye would say in English Iuppiter of the sand, because the
temple was edified and builded in a sandy place) for the Greek vocable (...),
souneth in english the sand. Albeeit, some there be that affermen Iuppiter
in the language of the Egyptians to be called Ammon, and thereof this temple
to have taken the name of Ammo^. But Pansa^ias holds opinion, that it was so
named of one Ammon a shepehearde, who first builded the same temple.
Ammon, when he was by the presidente or chief priest there, called the soon
of Jupiter: it is no meruail (says he) for Jupiter in deed of nature is
father unto al men, but of them he takes for his veraye own children in
deed, especially al such as are good and honest. He did after a veraye humble
sort expoune the Oraculum an oracle, is proprely the mind and answer of God
by some divine interpreter declared, as by some Prophet, priest, or otherwise
by manne.
oracle. For the mynistre of the temple, called him the soonne of Jupiter in
the way of flattery, as if Alexander had been likewise begotten of Jupiter,
as Hercules was reputed and believed to be the soonne of Jupiter. But Alexander
confessed that Jupiter was of nature the autour and parente of all mortal
men, but yet that the same did agnise and knowelage peculiarly or proprely
for his soonnes, such persons and none other, as by virtue and noble acts
drew nighest, and were most aunswerable to the nature of god. And that is,
unto all persons without excepcion to be beneficial.

What Alexander said, when he was wounded with an ^roe.
and many came rennyng about him, which had of a custom often times used to
call him a God, he with a bold and a merry countenance alludyng to a verse of
the Poet Homere, said: Alexander being wounded knowlaged himself to be a man
mortal.
This that ye see, is blood withouten odds
Even such like, as comes from the Gods
Mocking in veraye deed the vanitee of those flattreers, forasmuch as the
thing self declared him to be nothing else but a mortal manne, as others
were. As for the allusion yt he made, was to a place of Homere in the fifthe
volume of his work entitleed Ilias, where it is told how Uenus was wounded
of Diomedes.

and praisyng the frugalitee and spare manner of living that Antipater used, who
leed a life very homely or gross, and far from all delices: yea, quod he,
Antipater wears a white mantelle outwardely but wtin he goes in purple every
ynche of him. Notyng the feigned and colorable sparyng and homelynesse of the
said Antipater, whereas he was, yt not withstandyng, in veraye deed as
ambicious and stately, Antipater, though he se^bled to live homely, yet in
deed was ambicio^s ^ stately.
as the best.

When he was on a day in the How Alexander noted a friend of his to play the
niggarde of his woodde.
Sers, either lay on woodde, or cast in frankincense. Half geuyng a check
under a color, that the feaster or banquetter played as much the niggarde of
his woodde, Unseasonable housbandrie.
as if the same had been frankincense, whereas in such extreme cold, even
veraye frankince^se ought not to have been spared: and farther signifiyng yt
there was fire sufficient for making incense to the gods, but not enough to
defend and keep away cold.

Antipatrides, and the same had brought in before Alexander at ye supper a
passing fair damysel, being a mynion dooer in syngyng, Alexander being
rauyshed with the sight of her, was soodainly stricken with hot burning love.
And anon demanded of Antipatrides, whether he for his own part were not far
in love with the damysell: The contine^cie and great chastity of Alexander.
Antipatrides plainly confessyng, yt yes, Alexander said: O ungracious manne,
wilt you not with all haste have her away from ye table and this coumpaignie? How
far was that heart and mind from defylyng an other man's wedded wife,
which stood in so great fear of himself, lest he should fall over far in
love with the lema^ of his friend making him a supper.

Alexander reuersed back again to the sea (to depart out of his army,) as
many of the Macedonians, as were sickely, maimed and feeble or impote^te of their
lymmes, there was one person bewraied, Plutarchus in the life of Alexander
names this man Eurylochus.
that had billed himself in the noumbre of the sickefolkes, whereas in deed he
had no disease nor ympedimente at all. This manne when he was brought to the
sight and presence of Alexander and being examyned, did confess that he had
made a pretexte and sembleaunce of a disease or malady, for the love of a
woman called Telesi^pa, who was gone before toward the sea, Alexander asked, to
whom might be committed the charge to command the said Telesippa to return
back again to the army. (supposyng that she had been bondewoman to one or
other of his souldyers.) But when he had due knowelage that she was no
bondewoman, but fre born: why, (quod Alexander) the^ leat us o Antigenes (for
that was the feloes name,) entreacte, and by fair means persuade Telesippa to
tarrye still with us. For by force or violence to compel her thereunto being a
free womanborne, in no wise lies in us. Alexander would not enforce or compel
any person free borne.
In such sort did he favor the love of a stout and valiant manne of war,
whom he was desirous to keep still in his army, that nevertheless he would
not ye freeborne woman to come back again, but if she might be brought i^
mind so to do with her own consent and agremente.

Alexander under the baners of his enemies, were come under his power and
iurisdiccion, How Alexander used the Greeks which took waiges of his enemies
to fight against him.
as for the Atheniens he commanded to be laid fast in shaccles and fetters
because that, where they might have had waiges competente at home at ye public
charges of their own city, they had for all that become souldyers with his
enemies. Of the Thessalia^s also, he commanded the same, for as much as they
having a right fertile country of their own, did l^at it lie waste without
bestowyng any tillage or housbandrie upon it: but the When the Thebanes became
rebels against Alexander, and had procured unto the same the aid and help of
the Athenie^s, Alea^xder with a great puissaunce laid siege to ye city of
Thebes. And yet willing to give them space to repent their folly, and by
submyttyng them selfs to be reconciled, offreed them both pardone that
present, and from thens forth for to be free upon condition to deliver into his
hands Phoenix, and Prothy^es (who had been the autours of the defeccion.) The
Thebanes on their party required of Alexander to have delivered to them
Philotas and Antipater two of the Capitaines of Alexander, and made an open
proclamacio^, that whosoever was desirous to have all the country of Greece to
be set in their old state of freedom, should come and take their part.
Then Alexander with all his power of ^he Macedonians set upon them. The
Thebanes were nothing slack, but fough^ stoutely and valyauntly against their
enemies being in nou^bre far mo, then they were. But anon came in upon them
at their backs others of the Macedoni^ns, and so in fine were they bea^en down,
their city taken, spoiled and destroyed both stiecke and stone. The Atheniens
he perdoned, and by this act he put all Greece in such terror, that they
lay al quiet and durst not (...) to stiere against him.
Thebanes he demised and leat goo at their libertee, saying: These poor solles
are by us put out of all together, nor have any thing at all leaft unto them,
nether city to dwell in, nor land to till. So did he moderate the
punyshemente of them all, The moderacion of peine ministreed by Alexander unto
the Greeks yt had highly offended him.
that those persons, who had well deserved to dye, he commanded no more but
to be laid in irons, and the fault of them which might justly make their
excuse, that by veraye necessitee they had been driven to do as they did he
laid from them, and took upon himself.

Indian taken in ye wars, bearyng name of a feloe perelesse in the feacte of
shootyng, in so much yt by the commen report and brute that went on him, he
could as often as him lusted shoot his aroe quite and clean eue^ through a ryng,
Alexander commanded to show a point of his cunnyng. And where the party
refused so to do, the king taking therewith high displeasure and anger,
commanded that he should be put to death. As he was in ledyng to the place of
execucion, he said to them that led him, that he had not of long time before
practiced his feacte of shootyng, and by reason thereof to have stand i^ fear
lest he should have myssed. When word hereof was brought back again, and
relacion made unto Alexander, that the feloe had not of any disdeigne or
frowardenesse, refused to shoot, but only for fear of being openly shamed
for ever, if he should have failled, the king having woundre at the nature of
ye feloe so desireful of glory and renoume, Glory and renoume is to many
persons more sweet then life.
both gave unto the same perdone of his life, and also dimissed him bounteously
rewarded, because he had been i^ mind and will rather to suffer death, the^ to
appear unworthy the name and fame that went on him. Here it appears not to
be altogether a lie, that is ^o commenly spoken in the proverb, Like bears
love unto like.
like bears favor and love unto like. For Alex^ander being out of all
measure desirous of renoume, loved the sembleable affeccion and appetite in
other persons.

Taxiles one of ye kings of India, prese^tyng himself unto Alexander, This
Taxiles (as t^stifieth Plutarthus in ye life of Alexander^ was a man of
singular wisdom and sapien^e, and had under his governance ye more part of
India, environed with all the whole circuit of ye universal country of Egypt,
a ^anke ground for pasture, and an excellent good corn country. And of this
Taxiles Alexand^r took many great gifts and presents, and gave to him as
many again, and last of all sent unto him for a gift, a thousand talentes at
ones.
spoke unto him in this manner, I provoke ye sir king (says he) not to
fightyng, nor yet to battle, but to another sort of tryyng maistries. If you
be inferior to me, take some benefit at my hands: if superior, let me
receive some bn^fite at thine To who^ Alex. thus au^swered. Marie, eue^ for yt
veraye point ought we to strive together, whether may in dooyng benefits have
ye over hand of ye other. And herupon. with al possible humanitee embracyng ye
said Taxiles, he did not only not deprive the same of his domynio^, but also
gave him more to it.

Indies, which by reason of the excedyng heigthe of it is called in greek,
(...), (...), a rock in the Indies.
byrdelesse, as if ye would say, so high, that ye birds may not geat to ye
top of it. When Alexander had heard of this rock, that the place self was
hard to be woonne, but the capitain that kept it, to be a fearful feloe,
and to have no more heart then a sheep: By this time, quod Alexander, ye place
is easy enough to be gotten, Signifiyng, that fortresses and municio^s do
nothing avail at al except an hardy man's body defend and maintein the same.
Fortresses and municions do nothing auaill, except hardy and valiaunte
me^nes bodies, defend and main^ai^ the same.
For a castle, or any strong hold is not so sure and fafe from enemies by the
fense of dyches and walls, as by valiaunte and hardy men's bodies.
Plutarchus thus tells the same history. Alexander having with siege
encoumpaced the town of one Sisimethres sta^dyng on a rock impenetrable, when
he saw his souldyers to be of heavy ^here, he demanded of one Oxiartes,
what hert^ and courage the said Sisimethres was of, Oxiartes aunsweryng that he
was the verayest dastarde alive, well, then (quod Alexander) by thy saying y^
rock will soon and easily be woonne forasmuch as the lord thereof is a
cowarde and no man of wa^^e. And eue^ so came it to pass, for Sisimithres
was with the only manacyng, thretenyng and facyng of Alexander so feared, that
he yielded ^ gave up his hold without any resistance at al.


Alexander. How Alexander used a captain that gave himself and his hold into
his hands and mercy.
But Alexander, not only did make the same party lord and governor of all
that seignourie and country about, but moreover spoke and said as foloeth. I
hold this manne sapiente and wise, in that he thought better, and had more
fancy, to put his trust and affiaunce in an honest and a good manne, then
in a place strong and well fensed.

Alexander said, that in featesmarcial and in noble acts of prowess he far
surmounted Hercules: Alexander co^te^ned Hercules in re^pecte of himself.
Nay, quod he, I think ye acts, that I have done sens I have been a king,
are totoo far odds, to be in the way of comparison conferred with the
things which Hercules did in his time, The mind of Alexander no f^aterie was
enough to satisfy.
The other spoke to flater him, but the mind of Alexander no flaterie was
enough to satisfy.

Certain of his friends he punyshed by ye purse, and put to their fine,
because he had perceived the^, in plaiyng at dyce, not to play for pastyme, How
Alexander used certain of his fre^des for being over earnest in playyng at
dyce.
as meet was. For many there been that bestow and use themselfes in this
game, as if it were in the most earnest matter of the world. For those
persons do not play, who dooen hasard and adventure all their substance at
ones, The incommoditees that come by plaiyng at dyce.
yea and sometimes their soones and heirs too, too stand to the grace and
direccion of the dyce At lest wise, homely play it is and a mad pastyme,
where men by the course of the game goo together by the ears, and many times
murdre one another, or at lestwyse of ^yght loving fre^des, are made mutual
enemies all days of their life after.

Among those, whom he reputed or chief servants about him and most of power,
he showed him self to honor Graterus above the rest, Alexander of al his
friends and true servants most honored Craterus, but most loved
Hephaestion.
but above all others to love Hephaestion. For Craterus (says he) loves the
king, and Hephaestion loves Alexander. This saying has more grace in the
greek, by reason of these two words (...) and (...). Craterus (...),
Hephaestion (...).
The menyng of Alexander was, that Craterus in such things as concerned his
dignitee royal did the parts of a true faithful friend, but Hephestion of a
certain priuee affeccion to bear his hertie love and benevolence toward the
person of Alexander without ye respect that he wa^ a king. Wherefore these
two parties, whose love and affeccion toward him proceeded of unlike
respects, he did after two soondrie sorts egually reward, either according
to his demerites. So high in dignitee and autoritee were these two with
Alexander, that all the Macedonians which had any suite ^o the court, were
from time to ^yme assigned to fette their answer and despeche at the hands of
Craterus, and all ye Barbarians of Hephaestion. And so highly did the king
honor Craterus, that when the same Craterus was on a time sore sick,
Alexander did openly much sacrifice to the Gods for his health and wrote
letters with his own hand to Pausanias his physician, that he should with all
diligence and attendau^c^ possible, not only tempre drynkes and medecines for
him, but also be present with him to teach him how the same should ^ee
received.
For Craterus he auaunced to high dignitees, and Hephestio^ he received to most
entiere familiaritee about his person

Unto Xenocrates ye philosophier, Xenocrates refused to take money of Alexander.
which when the philosophier refused to take, allegeyng that he had no need of
money, the king demanded whether he had not so much as any one friend
neither, that had need. For to me (says Alexander) uneath all the treasoures
and richesse of Darius has suffised to bestow and to divide emonge my
friends. The bountes of Alexander and propense mind to give.
Whether of these two me^nes minds is in this behalf more worthy
admiracio^, I cannot yet determyne nor perfectely say: either of the king so
propense unto liberalitee, or else of the philosophier, which sent back again
so great a gift by so great a king of his own mere mocion offreed

This Porus was one of the kings of India, a stout ^ a valiaunte manne of
arms, and also a man of great puissaunce, whom Alexander had a buisie piece
of work, and much a do tooe vanquishe Plutarchus in the life of Alexander
affermeth many writers to agree in this point, that Porus was in height.vi.
foot and one hand bredthe, whereas the natural philosophiers auouchen the
uttermost extente that may possibly be of the heigthe of a man not to
excede.vii. foot. Porus was so talle of stature and personage, that when he
sat on his Elephantes back (for he used to ride on no other beast) his
tallenesse was answerable to the greatenesse of the Elephante that he rode on,
although it was a might^e big Eliphante. And Plutarchus writes that t^i^same
Elepha^te showed eue^ at that season woondrefull prudence and no less
woondrefull love toward his master, then if it had been a creature with
reason endued. For as long as the king was safe without receiuynge any
wound, the El^phante made great stieryng, and fought hardyly against his
enemies, and destroyed them on every side. And as soon as he perceived Porus
to be sore wounded, and to have stickyng in soondrie parts of his body
veraye many darts, fearyng lest he should by reason thereof synke and fall
down from his back, of his own accord he sounk down fair and softely upon
his knees, and with his snoute tendrely plucked out of his masters body^ all
the said darts one after an other. And in deed of Elephantes how
disciplinable and of how great prudence, docilitee and (as ye would say)
capacitee and aptitude they are, and also what tender love and affeccion they
do naturally bear toward manne: Aristotle, Plynius, and other natural
philosophiers shown exaumples almost both innumerable and also incredible.
King Porus being subdued and Alexander, and after the field foughten, being
asked by ye same Alexander this question, how shall I now handle and use thee?
Porus answered in this manier, How king Porus being taken by Alexander, and
asked how he would be used, made au^swer.
regally: Alexander ferther demaundyng, and nothing else but that? in this one
word, regally (quod Porus) al things possible are comprised Alexander having
admiracion as well at the wisdom of ye manne, The humanitee and moderacio^ of
Alexander toward ^yng Porus.
as at his haulte courage and magnanimitee, co^ferred unto the same besides his
own former royalme a domynion of much more large and ample circuit the^ ye
same which he was lord of before. To ye said Porus humbly submitting himself,
and falling down at his feet, Alexander would not have showed so much
goodness. Such favor zele, and affeccion did yt courageous youngman bear
toward hertes that would not shrynke. The affeccio^ of Alexander toward
hertes yt would not shrynke.
Quintus Curtius tells it somewhat of another sort. Porus being at the day
of his taking asked the question, what way he thought most meet and
convenient for Alexander, (by whom he was now conquered,) to take with him:
such way (quod he) as this present day may put in thy mind, in which
thou haste by experience found, how soon felicitee or high estate may have a
fall, and be brought full low. He gave a by warnyng unto Alexander not to be
over proud of his good fortune, That kings may use their good fortune with
moderacion.
but to use it with moderacion bearyng well in mind, to be a thing possible,
that like chance might befall him, as had lyghted on Porus.

No persons so much as kings for their well doings are of some persons
eiuil reported.
Never was there any thing more noble, or of a more right sort, then this
saying, albeeit the same is named on diverse others as well as on Alexander.

An epitaphie is ye writing yt is set on dedde me^nes toumbes, or graves, in
memory, or c^omendacion of the parties there buiried.
epitaphie toward. As having half a foreknowelage, that his acts should after
his death be to his great honor and renoume chronicled and set out by the
eloquence of many writers. Neither did his geasse deceive him. For what writer
almost at least wise in matters profane is not full of the acts of Alexander?
Albeeit the menyng of Alexander was, that he plainly perceived to be no way
but death^ For ep^taphies are not commonly made, or at lest wise not set out
till the parties be deceassed. Alexander therefore as he knew that his acts
should by writers be spread through out all the world, so he perceived the
time of y^ same now approach and be at hand.

At what time he had ye daughters Darius prisoners with him, Plutarchus in the
life of Alexander writes largely of the singular co^tine^cie and chastitee of
Alexander. And as touching the daughters of Darius, he says although the wife
of Darius did in beauty and fea^^ure excelle and pass al other queens (like
as Darius on his party also was ^othe of beauty and tallenesse one of the
goodlyest manne of ye world) and the two daughters of them in all points of
beauty and making ^guall with their parents: yet not one of them in all the
time that they were with Alexander to have heard come out of his mouth so much
as one wan^on word, ne to have seen by him any wanton look or token toward
any of them: but from their first entreyng into his tents after much
comfortable and cherefull words, and right honorable entreteinemente, they
had purposely provided and appointed unto them a prive lodgyng, where they
might live at their own arbitrim^nte, without all manner fear of any point of
vilanie to be off^eed unto them, either by Alexander, or by any other
person. This writes Plutarchus of the continency of Alexander, with many
like things worthy admiracion, namely in an ethnike or gentile, in a king,
in so victorious a prince, yea and ymmediately v^on so noble a conquest, as
might in a Christian prince perchance be an occasion of insolency, and some
cause of forget^yng himself.
he would bid them good morrow, good eue^, or good speed, not castyng his
yie on them, but lookyng down to the ground, and yt but sealdome neither,
standing in fear of himself to be ravished with their excellent beauty. And
emo^ges his familiares these words following were much in his mouth: The
damyselles of Persia maken sore yies.

Alexander gave charge by proclamacion not to be peinted but of Apelles, nor to
be engraven in metal but by Lysippus.
yt his physiognomie or porturature should not be drawn by any other peinter,
then by Apelles the most excellent p^inter of the old time, and Lysippus the
best statuarie.
Apelles, nor engraven or cast in brass or other metal by any other person
then by Lysippus, Being the two principal and most exce^lent werkeme^ of
that same time. For he judged that same point also to appertein to the
dignitee of a prince. And with Cherilus the poet he was at a couenaunte, yt
the same for every good verse that he made, should receive a By a Philippes
gildr^n is not mened here the coin that is now curraunt in Flaundres by that
appellacion, but an old coin of fine gold, in which was stricken the image
of Philippus father unto Alexander, which coin Budeus valueth at ten
french crounes.
philippes gildre^, and for every eiuill verse a good buffet.

Being asked the question in A man's gooddes are no whermore safely laid up,
the^ in the hands of his friends.
quod he, Signifiyng yt a man's gooddes are nowhere more safely then so laid
up in store. For when the case requires, gooddes so bestowed, come again to
ones hands with encreasse.

When a certain person, that The zele of Alexander toward Homere.
about to make relacion of the good success and procedyng of his affairs:
Alexander said what great good news have ye to show us good sir, if ye do
not bring word, that Homere is alive again. Signifiyng that all ye glory of
his noble acts was like to perish never after to be spoken of, unless it
might be his hap to have such a trumpette of his lauds as In the work of
Homere entitleed, Ilias, are most excelle^tly described and set out the
acts, the lauds, and ye prowess marciall of Achilles to his ymmortall glory
and renoume. For which c^use Alexander had such love and zele toward the
said poet, that wheresoever he went he carried the same his work entitleed
Ilias, euermor^ about him in the day time, ^ in the night used evermore to
have his dagguer, and the said Ilias of Homere lyyng under his bolster at his
beds hedde. So desirous he was of honor, renoume and eternal memory, and
to be set out of the best and most cunnyng dooers, as may appear by
somethynges before me^cioned, and also by the.xlix. saying of this Alexander.
Homere was.

Alexander, What Alexander au^swered to a certain city offreyng him part of
their lands, and half their gooddes to be in rest and quiet.
offered unto the same a good portion of their possessions, and also ye one
moytie of all ye other gooddes that they had. To whom Alexander thus answered.
I am come into Asia in this mind and purpose, not to take what liked you to
give me, but that ye should have what liked me to leave unto you.

Alxander had in service one Eudemonicus Parasites, were called such smelle
feasts as would seek to be free geastes at rich men's tables. Who to the
end y^ they might at all times be welcome, would speak altogether for to
please and to delight the rich folks, flatreyng them, and holdyng up their
yea, and nay, whatsoever they said, were it ^euer so contrary to reason,
truth, or likelihood.
a philosophier, E^demonicus a philosophier in service with Alexander, a great
flaterer. Albeit, Plutarchus makes Anaxarchus y^ sophiste speaker of these
words.
but more full of flaterie then any parasite. This Eudemonicus, on a time when
it thoundreed very sore, in so much; that all the coumpaignie were right eiuil
afraied, said unto Alexander: the soonne of Jupiter, why do not ye also
Alexander the soonne of Jupiter thou^dre in this wise? But the other not hable
to abide ye words of such a vile philosopher, laughed and said: for I am not
willing to be terrible, as thou teach me to be, which biddest me to make a
supper service for my table with the heddes of dukes and kings. Thus does
Athenaeus a greek historiographier.
Athenaeus rehearse it. But Plutarcus in the life of Alexander tells it
somewhat variyng from this. The tender love of Alexander toward his lords.
What? art y^ angrye with me, because I am served at my table with fish, and not
rather with the heddes of noble me^ne?

Alexander as he conueighed his host from place to place in ye winter season,
The exceeding humanitee of Alexander, and tendrenesse over his souldyours.
sittyng by a fire made in ye field, begoonne to take vieue of his army, as
they passed by. And when he espied a certain aged person quakyng and sheureyng
for cold, and seeking to have a place to stand in by the fire, he commanded
the feloe to sit down in his chair, saying: Among the Persian^, it was a
matter of death for an^ private person to sit in the kings seat.
If you had been born in Persis, it would cost the thy hedde to sit in the
kings seat, but for one born in Macedonia it is not vnleefull.

Alexander being yet but even a young striepleyng, when he saw his father
Philippus, about to reiecte and cast away (as a thing that would never be
brought to do any good service,) an This horse was called Bucephalus, as ye
would say in english, bulls hedde, either of his ougly look, or ^ls of the
figure and priente of a bulls hedde, with an hot iron marked on his
shoulder. One Philonicus a Thessalian had bought him for.xiii. talentes,
purposely to the use of king Philippus. But after this fact, Alexander had the
horse, and used him for his own sadle in all his wars afterward, until the
horse was thirty years old. And then was he dedly wounded in a certain
battaille, and had much cure dooen upon him to save him, but it would not be.
The death of Bucephalus Alexander took as heauyly, as if he had lost one of
his nighest and derest friends, in so much that he builded a city in the
place where the horse dyed, and for a memory of the same called the city
Bucephalon, or, Bucephala, or (as it is in Plutarchus) Bucephalia.
horse that was passing fierce, and would not suffer any man to mount or geat
up on his back: said: Oh what an horse these folks do mar, while through
defaulte of skylle, and by reason of cowarde stomakes, they have not ye ways
to handle him. So when himself with meruaillous policy and cunnyng, without
beatyng or strykyng had had the handleyng of ye said horse, at last he lept up
on his back, and put him to a galop, and then clapped spurs to him. And
when he saw his time, ge^tly turning his hedde with the bridle: as soon as he
had brought the horse back again, and had elighted down, his father most
louyngly kyssyng his cheek, said: Macedonia was ever ^o little for Alexander.
O my dear soonne, goo search out some other kingdom meet for thee, for
Macedonia is allreadie all to little for thee. Full well did it give this
prudent and wise prince in his mind tofore, that to such an haulte courage,
and excellent nature, his fathers dicion might not suffice. But this horse is
an exaumple for us, that many wits at their first beginning excellent, are
in process utterly destroyed and lost through the fault of those that have ye
breakyng, trainyng, and bryngyng up of them, Many goodly wits marred
through the fault of the instructours.
who for the most part know not the way how to order and rewle them,
except they shall first have made them of kyndely horses, veraye sterke asses.

Alexander did contynually show great honor and reverence unto Aristotle,
Alexander did con^ynual reverence to his master Aristotle.
to whom he had in his childehood been committed to be enstructed and taught,
auouchyng himself to be no less beholding to the said Aristotle, the, the^ to
his father, for that of his father he had received entreaunce into this life,
We are no less bounden to our scholemaisters, the^ to our parents.
and of his schoolemaister to live well.

When a rouer on the sea was How a pira^e be^yng taken au^swered Alexander,
when he was examyned.
and was asked upon whose supportacio^ he durst be so bold to do such
myschief on the seaes, he answered at few words as foloeth: I (says he)
because I so do with no more but one sely poor foyste, am called a pirate,
and you, whereas, thou dooest the same with a great navy, art called a king.
Alexander meruaillyng at the fearelesse heart of the feloe, gave him perdone of
his life.

Where he had in his own person Delphos, Delphi, or^^, a town in the regio^
of Phocis, where Apollo had a notable goodly temple, and gave unto pilgrymes
that resorted thither, oracles, that is to say aunsweres, voices, and tokens
from heaven of such things as they sought to know, which we call werkyng of
miracles, and things showed by r^u^lation.
when the prophetisse there said that she would in no wise at yt present time
desire of yt gods any answer of the matter which he was come for, (because
it were days prohibited, during the which it was not leefull, no not so much
as for the oracles neither, to speak, or to give answer in any matiers,)
Alexander halyng and pullyng with him y^ said prophetisse parforce, ascended
into ye temple. And when the prophetisse by his ymportunitee and violente
compulsio^ enforced to go whether she would or not, spoke these words Thou
art inuicible my soonne. This is eue^ enough of the oracle for me quod
Alexander. Alexander took al to his advantage, yt was to his appetite and
purpose.
Accoumptyng and rekenyng the woma^nes private words, for an answer of his
purpose directely given unto him from the god.

Alexander having taken a viage on warrefare into Asia, The assured trust and
confidence of Alexander to prosper in all his entreprises.
had distributed and in manner given away by patentes unto his capitaines and
men of arms all his possessions and land: unto Perdicca askyng this
question, what have ye now leafte to yourself sir king? Marie, quod he again,
hope. Then said Perdicca: Perdicca one of Alexanders Capitaines. And
Plutarchus writes that as Perdicca did, so did a great noumbre mo^ to who^
Alexander had given and assigned porcio^^ of lands and possessions.
And as for hope shall be indifferente and commune for us your soldyours, as
well as for you, and so refused to take ye lordeship or mainour, which
Alexander had assigned out for him. Shuche assured trust and confidence had
they on all hands conceived, to make a prosperous and a luckie viage.

The Same Alexander at ye beginning Alexander would in matters of coumplainte
evermore reserve one ear wholly for the party defendau^t.
when he sat in judgment upon causes concerning life and death, he would
evermore stop the one ear as long as ye accuser was tellyng his tale. And
being asked why he did so, ye other ear, quod he, I do wholly reserve and
keep for the party defendaunte. would Christ all judges would do like wise
at these days.

Against Callisthenes was a sophiste, and a man of great eloquence as
declares Plutarchus in the life of Ale^ander. He wa^ b^o^ght into Alexanders
court, by the means of Aristotle, whose nere kynsman he was. For Aristotle
and Hero the mother of Callisthenes were come of two sisturs^ Plutarchus
says that some writers affirmen Alexander to have hanged him on the galoes,
and that other written him to have dyed in prieson, by reason of long keeping
there in cheines and fettres, and that others saien him to have dyed of the
congelyng of great or talowe between the skin and the fleashe.
Callisthenes in no behalf and guyse of the kings court, Callisthenes
contemnynge the facio^s of Alexanders court at length grew out of favor, and
encurred his mortal hatered.
but both in words and in his other demeanure openly prete^ding and showing
himself to myslike all yt ever was dooen there, Alexander had often in his
mouth this little greek verse.

(...).
I hate that wise manne, what ever he is,
That to his own behouf, is not wise.
This Nisa was a town in India builded by Bacchus. For there was an other Nisa
in Aegypte, where Bacchus was nouriced by the nymphs. There were also other
tounes mo then one or twain of the same name elsewhere, as te^tifien the
Geographiers.
Nisa, for to win it, when he perceived his souldyers by reason of the deapth
of the floodde which renneth a long by the city, The forwardness of
Alexander in mar^c^all entrepri^ses.
to be clean discouraged and afeard to adventure, he stamped and sterted at it,
cryyng out with a loud voice, oh the naughtyest feloe alive that I am, which
never learned to swymme, and even with a tryce laiyng his body upon his
shield or terguette instead of a cork to stay him above water, he swimmed
over the floodde first of all his owneselfe.

Making a journey to Troy, and Achilles with garlandes, and said, oh, happy
art thou Achilles, Alexander pronounced Achilles happy y^ ever he was borne.
that ever thou were borne, to whom in thy life time it fortuned to have such
a friend, Patroclus y^ friend of Achilles in his life time and Homere the
^rou^pette of his renoume after his death.
and after thy deceasse, such a troumpette and displaier of thine acts.
Speaking of Patroclus and of Homere: of which the one was unto Achilles a most
faythefull and trusty friend, and the other, throughall his whole work
entitleed Ilias co^teining.xxiiii. volumes spredeth and blows about all the
world his glory and renoume now when he is dead and gone. Patroclus a
Locrensian, the soonne of Menetius, when h^ had dooen a murdre in his own
country, fled into the country of Thessalia, unto Peleus y^ king there, to
whose soonne Achilles he was derely beloved, and a mutual loving friend to him
again, for he would never after forsake Achilles, but went with the same to the
battaille of Troy. And when Achille^ ^for displeasure and anger that Agamemno^
king of Greece had parforce taken away his paramour Briseis) would no more
fight against y^ Troianes, but did a long time forbear and refuse to come
forth of his pauilio^ unto bataille, Patroclus did on his own body the
armure and harness of Achilles, and myndyng thereby to make the Troianes
afeard, (for of all things in the world they could not abide the sight of
Achilles^ he byckered and fought with the Troianes, and was slain with the
hands of Hector. Wherefore Achilles to avenge his death bethought himself
again, and returned to bataille, and slew Hector, and buiried Patroclus
honorably, and often ^ymes did much sacrifice to the Gods at his ^oumbe.


By what arguments Ale^a^der perceived his mortalitee.
he said that by two things especially, he did well perceive himself to be a
ma^ne or creature mortal, yt is to wete, by sleep, and by compaigniyng with
women. For that these two things did principally above all others discrye the
feblenesse of man's body. As touching all things else, he was inui^cible. For
sleep is an image and representacion of death, Sleep an image of death and the
venereous act a spiece of the falling eiuill.
and the act of venereous copulacion a plain spiece of the falling eiuill.
Plutarc^^ adds hereunto that only the infirmitee and wekenesse of man's
nature is the brede^ and cause of werynesse, and of carnal pleasure.

Being entreed into the palaice Darius, What Alexander said, when he saw y^
palaice of Darius so gorgeously appoyinted.
when he saw a chaumbre of a great highthe, and in the same, the bed of
estate, y^ tables to eat on, and all other things after a woondreful gorgeous
sort furnished eue^ to ye point devise: why (quod Alexander) was this to be
a king? Estemyng that it was unmeet for a king to give himself to such manner
delices. Unmete for a king to give hyms^lfelf to delices.


The Same Alexander, whenever Alexander abhorred ^ffeminate delices.
and say: has not my mother (trow we) put some point of delicateness,
or some superfluous thing here about my clothes? So greatley did he abhor
from delices more apperteinyng to women, then to men.

Darius any one jewel either more precious, The precious casket, or deske, or
^^a^^dishe of Darius.
orels more goodly to ye yie. When the question was moved, unto what use it
might best be applied, each ma^ne giving, one this auise, another that. It
wylbee the best thing in ye world (quod Alexander) wherein to keep the Ilias of
Homere. How Alexand^r esteemed ye Ilias of Homere and why.
Estemyng no treasure to be more precious then the said book. Such was the
conceipte of this king being in his lusty youth, and wholly in all behalfes
framynge himself after the pattern of Achilles.

Parmenio gave the same Alexander counsel to set upon his enemies by night,
allegeyng that otherwise it would be a veraye great danger, if he should
openly by day time adventure batail upon so great a multitude, (for of the
roumbleyng noise reboundynge from a far, as it had been the roryng of the
sea, they might conjecture the contrary part to be in manner a nou^bre
infinite,) he said: The animositee of Aleander.
I came not hither to steal the victory. Refusyng to win the victory by
the defense or aid of the darkness.

When he had read a long bible Antipater, Antipater surmu^sed false accusacio^s
against Olympias the mother of Alexander.
in which lettres were contained many surmised matters and false complaints
against his mother Olympias: It appears (quod he) to be a thing to Antipater
unknown, that one tear of my mothers yien, How much Olympias might do with
Alexander with one ^ere of her yies.
shall at all times wash away all epistles that come, be they never so many.

When he had perceived and no displeasure there with, but said, to be a thing
reasonable, or, to be a thing to be borne withal, that she also should in
some behalf have prerogative to take fruicion of being a princess in a
royalme, forasmuch as she was a kings daughter. Being of a much contrary
mind to Augustus Emperor of Rome, Read of this the.vii.xlv.xlvi and.xliiii
apophthegmes of Augustu^.
who took nothing more grievously, the^ the lasciviousness of his daughter and
of his daughters daughters.

Anaxagoras holding opinion and mainteining in a certain lecture, The
insa^iable ambicio^ and desire of empier that reigned in Alexander.
yt there were worlds out of nou^bre, the report gooeth, yt he fell on weeping.
And to his friends demau^dyng, whether any mischau^ce had befallen him, meet
to weep for, he said: have I not, trow ye, a good cause to weep, in yt,
whereas there been worlds innumerable, I am not yet come to be full lord of one?

Philippus at the fighting of a certain field received of the Triballes a sore
wound, The Triballes a people nigh unto Hungary.
by having a spear thrust quite and clean through his thighe. And being
afterward by the cure and help of his surgeon saved, Philippu^ wounded in
fighting a field against ye Triballes.
and recovered from peril of death, yet he took heavily, that the deformitee
and disfigure of hymping on the one leg which had come to him by the said
wound, did still remain. To who^ Alexander said: How Alexander cou^forted
Philippus taking thought for yt he should halte al days of his life.
sir, take no discoumforte to show yourselfe abroad, but ever when ye set
forth your foot to goo, have mind on your valiau^t manhood. And prowess
that ye showed when ye received this wound. This saying is ascribed to others
mo besides Alexander.

If at any time, either in familiare Homere, one saying this verse to be best,
an other, that verse, Alexander would evermore allow and praise this verse here
ensuyng, What verse Alexander allowed best of all the verses of Homere.
above all the other verses in the book. (...)
That is, Both a good capitain to guide an army,
And with spear and shield valiaunte and hardy.
He would moreover say, that Homere did in this verse both make honorable
report of ye manhood and prouesse of Agamemnon, Al^^^nder avouched that Homere
i^ colla^dyng Agamemnon prophesied of him.
and also prophecy of the same to come in Alexander.

Alexander having passed over Hellespontus, Hellespo^tus, the narrow sea
bet^eene Greece and Asia.
went to see Troie, reuoluyng and castyng in his mind the acts of aunciente
princes of renoume, a certain person promised to give him the harp of Paris,
Alexan^^r hauyn^ ye harp of Achilles, cared not for the harp of Paris.
if he had any mind to it. No, no, (quod Alexander quickly again) I have no
need at all of ye harp of Paris, forasmuch as I have allreadie ye harp of
Achilles. Paris the soo^ne of Priamus king of Troie, of whom is noted before in
y^ third Apophthegme of Arist^ppus.
Achilles being on his own party a knight stout and active, used evermore
on his harp to play songs of the lauds and praises of hardy men and
valiaunte, whereas Paris with his harp did nothing but twang fond fancies of
daliaunce and lasciviousness.

On a time he went to see the Darius his court, The women of Darius his court
were his wife, his mother, and his two daughters.
taking Hephaestion with him. And this Hephaestion (because he went at that time
in the same manner apparel that ye king did, Hephaestion somewhat bigger made,
and taller of personage then Alexander.
and also was of personage somewhat bigger made the^ he) Sygambris the mother
of Darius kneled unto, Sygambris the mother of Darius.
instead of the king. And when she had, by ye noddyng and beckyng of those
that stood by, well perceived, yt she had taken her mark amysse, she was much
dismayed withal, and begoonne of fresh to do her duty unto Alexander.
Anon said Alexander: Alexander esteemed Hephaestion a second Alexander,
according to ye proverb, ami^^cus alter ipse that is, two fre^des are one
solle and one body.
Mother, there is no cause why to be dismayed. For this manne too is
Alexander. Dooyng to weete, that his friend, was a secounde Alexander.

When he was come into the Hammon ye ministre there, How Alexander coming into
y^ temple of Hammon, was saluted by the priest, or minister there.
being an aunciente saige father, welcomed him with these words, All haill
Plutarchus writes certain autours to aff^rme, yt y^ minister welcomed him in
greek, and myndyng tendrely and gentely to salute with this word (...),
sonnekyn, or little soonne, tripped a little in his tou^gue ^ by a wrong
pronunciacio^ instead of (...) said (...), which being diuyded into two
words (...), souneth, the soonne of Jupiter.
my soonne, and it is not I yt do call the by this name, but the god Jupiter.
Then said Alexander, I take it at your hand o father, and wilbee contented
fromhensforth to be called your son upon condition, that ye grant unto me
the empier, and domynion of all ye whole world. The priest went into the prive
chauncell, and (as though he had spoken with god,) came forth again, and
answered that Jupiter did by assured promise make him a grant of his boune
yt he asked. The^ eftsons said Alex. Now would I fain know, if there be yet
remainyng unpunished any of those persons which killed my father. To this the
priest thus made answer: As many as put their hands to the sleeyng of
Philippus, have received condign punyshemente for their offense every one of
them, but as for your father, no mortal creature has power to destroy, or
to work displesure unto, by laiyng awayte for him. Signifiyng yt he was the
soonne of Jupiter, Alexander made to believe, that he was the son of Jupiter,
and not of Philippus.
and not of Philippus.

Whereas Darius had set his Plutarchus in y^ life of Alexander says, yt
Darius had in his army si^e hundred thousa^de fightyng men besides those which
were in his navy on the seaes.
woondreous great noumbre, in a readynesse to fight, Alexander was taken with a
meruaillous dedde sleep, in so much, that, being even in the day time, he
could not hold up his hedde, nor awake. At ye last great peril and danger
being eue^ at hand, his gentlemen entreyng his bed chaumbre, made him to
awake. Alexander taken with a dedde sleep even in the day time when Darius
la^e in y^ ca^pe r^adi^ eu^^^^ h^^re to set upon him, (...) he said ^he^ he
was ^^akened.
And when they said unto him, that they meruailled how he could in that
present state of his affairs be so quiet and void of all care, as to sleep
so soundely, Marie, quod he Darius has delivered and quyte discharged me of
great carfulness and trouble of mind, in that he has gathred all his
puissaunce together into one place, that we may even in one day try,
whether he shall have ye soueraintee, orels I.

Corinthians had by ambassadors given to Alexander Magnus to enjoy ye right
of all their libertees and franchesse. The Corinthians made Alexander free
(...) of (...).
This kind of pleasure dooyng, when Alexander had laughed to skorne, one of
the ambassadors said: Sir, we never yet unto this day made any for ever
free of our city saving now your grace, and ones before time Hercules. This
heard, Alexander with al his heart, accepted the honor unto him offreed. Which
honor, partly the raritee made unto him acceptable, and partly, that he was
therein joined with Hercules, a knight of most high praise and renoume.

At the siege of a certain city, Alexander agnised and knowelaged himself, to
be a mortal man.
said to such as were present: Every body reports me to be ye soonne of
Jupiter, but this wound says with an open mouth, that I am a mortal manne.

Xenophantus customably used by certain measures plaiyng on a flute, to set
Alexander forthwarde to battaill. And all persons woundreyng ye music should
be of such force and power, one among them said: If Xenophantus be such a
cu^nyng doer, leat him play some measure to call Alexander home again from
making wars.

Meaning that it was no veraye high point of cu^nyng to bring a body to yt
thing, whereunto the same is of him self propense and of his own propre nature
inclined.

THE SAYINGS OF ANTIGONVS THE FIRST KING OF THE MACEDONIANS
This Antigonus was of all the successour^ of Alexander most puissaunt and
mighty. And Plutarchus in ye life of Demetrius says yt Antigonus had by
Stratonice ye daughter of Cor^haeus two soonnes, of which the one he called
(of his brothers name) Demetrius, and the other (of his fathers name)
Philippus. And the same Plutarcus in the life of Paulus Aemilius and else where
in moo places the^ one says that this Antigonus even by ye title of his birth
and descente, claymed to have the name of a king, and first begoonne to reign
in Asia after ye deceasse of Alexander. Albeeit (as the said Plutarchus in the
life of Demetrius testifies) the successors of Alexander were not even at the
first called kings, but certain years after, when Demetrius the soonne of
Antigonus had on ye sea subdued Ptolomeus the king of Egypt and had destroyed
all his navy, then came one Aristodenus a Milesian from Demetrius in post,
and salued Antigonus by the name of king. Then Antigonus not only on his own
party and behalf usurped the name, the honor, the estate, and y^ ornaments
and arms of a king, but also sent unto his soonne Demetrius a Diadem, that is
to say, a kings croune, together with letters, in which he called him a
king. Antigonus reigned two and twenty years, and kept in ye time of his
reign many wars, and at last was slain and dyed even in the field.

ANtigonus was an eagre and a sore manne in taking exaccions of money of his
subjects. How Antigonus excused his grievous exaccions of money emo^ge his
subjects.
Whereupon, to a certain person saying, Iwys Alexander was no such manne: A
good cause why, quod he again, for he rieped Asia and had all the eres, and I
do but gather the stalks. Menyng that Asia sometime the rychest and
welthiest country of the world, had been before his time spoiled by Alexander,
Alexander spoiled Asia and left it as bare as Job.
and that he must be glad and fain to scrape together what he might be
hable to geat among them, having been before in such wise pilled, and lea^t as
bare as Job.

How Antigonus used certain of his capta^nes which sat drinkyng while their
soldyours exercised them selfs with plaiyng at ye balle in their harness.
and to praise them in presence of their capitaines: but when word was
brought him, yt the said capitaines were drynking and making good chere, he
conferred their capitainshippes unto those active souldyers, which had played
at ye balle in their harness. All under one both punyshyng the sluggyshenesse
of the capitaines, and with honor and promocion rewardyng ye actiuitee of the
soldyers.

Every body meruaillyng that Antigonus in ye beginning of his reign, a sore
manne, but in the later end full of al mercy and gentleness.
now being stricken in age, he governed his royalme with all mercy and
gentleness: At the beginning, says he, it behooved me to have a kingdom, and
at this day I have more need of glory and benevolence. Menyng, that an
empier is often times by the sweord and by roughness purchaced or acquired, but
the same not retained, or long years continued, without the honest opinion yt
the subjects have of their king and the hertie good will of the prince
mutually toward his subjects.

Antigonus unto his soonne Philip being full of questions in presence of a
great noumbre, What Antigonus answered to his soonne being much inquisitiue
when y^ camp should remove. Albeit Plutarchus names yt it was Deme^rius yt
was so inquisitiue
and saying: Sir, when shall we remove the camp? thus answered: what, art
thou afeard, lest thou alone of all the coumpaignie shall not hear ye
trou^pette blow? Notynge the lack of experience and skylle in the young
manne, in that he would in the hearing of a great compaignie move such a
question to his father, whereas in time of war, The ententes and purposes of
price^ ought in no wise to be vttreed in time of war.
the ententes and purposes of princes ought in no wise too be vttreed ne
disclosed, but as often as the camp must remove, a trumpette gives a
knowelage thereof to the universal multitude all to gether.

Philip being a young manne, had made woondreous earneste request and suite to
have his lodgeyng appointed him at a wedooes house, How Antigonus disappointed
the purpose of his soonne, seeking to be lodged in an house where his love was
that had three fair and welfauoured daughters, Antigonus calling for ye knight
herbynger, said unto y^ same: wilt you not see my soonne voided out of such a
straight corner? He did not discrye how ye young man's heart was set,
although he knew the same to seek whereon to bestow his love, but found an
ympedemente by the narrow room of ye house in which the wedooe lived with her
three daughters.

After that he had perfectely recovered Sickness puts us in remembrance
not to be proud in heart forasmuch as we be mortal.
For this syckenesse has given us a good lesson, not to be proud in heart,
forasmuch as we be mortal. Who had taught this heathen king such a point
of Philosophy meet and worthy for any christian heart? his friends lamented
and bewailled as a great^ eiuill that he had been so sore sick, but he
enterpreted and took, that to him thereby had redounded more good then eiuill.
The malady had made his body lean and bare of flesh, but it endued and
replenyshed his heart with sobrenesse and humilitee. It had shrew dely abated
the strength of his body, but from his heart it pulled away insolency,
Insole^ci^ one of the most perilous diseases in the worlde^
that is to say, presumpcion in taking highly upon him, which is one of the
most perilous diseases in the woorlde. And therefore ye matter gooeth not all
of the wurst, when the lighter malady either forefendeth and debarreth, It
goes not al amysse when the lighter disease shifteth away the greater.
or else expels and drieueth out the greater.

Hermodotus a poet had in his versis written Antigonus to be ye soonne of
Jupiter. Antigonus readyng the same, said: The humilitee of Antigonus.
To this thing was ye pissepotte bearer, never made prive nor of counsel by
me. After a veraye pleasant sort mockyng the flaterie of the poet, and with
no less humilitee agnisyng and knowlageyng the basse lineage that he was come
of, in comparison of being soonne to Jupiter. Lasanum is greek and latin for
an yearthe^ pissepotte, Lasanum.
or chaumbre vessel, and thereof lasanophorus, Lasanophorus.
a chaumbreer, or, a groom of the stool so that if Antigonus were the soonne
of Jupiter, the same thing had unto that present hour escaped unknown, as well
to his groom whose daily office it was to give unto him his vrynall in his
chaumbre, as also to himself the said Antigonus.

all things were honest and just or leefull for kings to do: by Jupiter,
says Antigonus and even so they be for the kings of barbarous, wild, and
saluage nations, How Antigonus answered one, saying al things to be honest
and leefull for kings to do.
but to us yt know what is what, those things only are honest, To good
kings only such things are honest and just as been in very deed honest
and just.
which be honest of theimselfes, and only such things leefull or standing
with justice, which are of their nature just and leefull in veraye deed. He
did with high grauitee dampe and put to silence the flateryng words of the
party, by whose mind and will all things should be permitted as leefull
unto kings and governors For truly a king is not ye rewle of honestee and of
justice, but ye minister of them. A king is not the rewle of honestee and of
justice, but y^ ministre of them.
And would God the ears of christian princes never heard any like words
spoken, or if they did, that they would with se^bleable seueritee reiecte and
abandon the same. For what other thing saie^ those persons, who are always
harpyng on this streng, and syngyng this song, that foloeth: what stands
with the lykyng and pleasure of a prince has the force, strength and virtue of
a law. And those who dooen afferme a king not to be under bond or subieccion
of any laws, and such as dooen attribute and assign unto a king two
distinct powers, the one ordinate, and the other absolute, of which the first
may do no more nor no other wise but as the laws and statutes of a royalme,
as couenauntes and bargains between party and party, and as leages and
agrementes public between royalme and royalme dooen regnire, and the other,
whatsoever stands with the pleasure, appetite, and fancy of the prince.

Marsyas the brother of Antigonus had a matter of suite and trauerse in the
law: What Antigonus said to Marsyas his brother, besechynge yt an accion of
his might be heard and judged in a secret place, and not in open court.
but he besought the king yt the matter might be heard and a secret court
purposely holden at home within his house for it. To whom Antigonus in this
wise made answer. If we do nothing but according to justice, it shall be
mouche better that it be done in open court, and in y^ face and hearing of
all the people. The natural zele and tender love toward his own brother
could not obtein of the king, to have so much as one jot of the law or of
the order of justice releassed. The upright justice of Antoignus.
And as for Marsyas he cloggued and bound on all sides with this saying yt could
not possible be a voided. If thou know thy matier to be naught, why dooest
you sue, or trauerse ye law? if you know thy cause to be good, and the law to
be on thy side: why would thou avoid to have all the world prive to it,
and labourest in any wise to have a matter of open court to be done secretly
in hugger mugger, It is to be greatly mystrusted, if one labor to bring a
matter of open court into a secret chau^bre.
assured there, not to escape or avoid the sinistre mystrustyng of all the
country, yea, although thou shalt cast thyn adversary, and have the matter
rightfully to pass with the?

Where he had on a time in the winter season constreigned his army and tents
to be removed unto a place where was no store ne provision of things
necessary, and for that cause certain of the soldyers spoke many naughty
words of reproach by ye king, not knoweyng him to be even at their polles, he
put abroad the louvres of the tente with a ruttocke that he had in his hand,
and said: Sirs ye shall beshrewe yourselfes, except ye goo ferther of to
speak eiuill of me. What thing more full of mercy then this word of
pleasaunce? The lenitee and mercyfulnesse of Antigonus.
or what thing more full of pleasau^ce then this deed of mercy? he sembleed
and made as though he took not indignacion or displeasure for their speaking
eiuill of him, but for yt they did it so nere his nose, that they might easily
be heard of the party, on whom they raylled.

Aristodemus (who was one of the kings prive chamber nere and familiar about
him, but descended (as it was thought) of a cook to his father) unto this
Aristodemus auisyng him to abate somewhat of his great charges and of his
bounteous geuyng rewards and fees, he said. How Antigonus answered one
Aristodemus auisyng him to abate of his charges and pe^sions geuyng.
Aristodemus thy words do smell and savor all of the gruell. Couertely and
by a preatie color tellyng him that ^paring, pynchyng, and plaiyng the
nygardes or haynes belonged to cooks, and not to kings: Bounty and largess
is befallyng for kings.
and therefore that he the said A^istodemus in such counsel geuyng had no
remembrance ne co^sideracion with whom he was of household in high degree
favor, and acceptacio^, but of what man to his father he was descended.

When the Atheniens, to show honor Antigonus, What Antigonus said, when the
Atheniens had made a bondmanne of his free citezen among them.
had admitted and recorded, or enrolled a bondema^ of his in the noumbre of
their free citezens or burgesses, as though the same had been come of an
honest stock, or had been borne out of servitude and bondage. It is no point
of my mind or will (quod Antigonus) yt any citezen of Athenes should come
under my hands to be scourged with whippes. Signifiyng to be a thing of their
own voluntary dooyng and of their own ha^die workyng, that he might lawfully
scourge, or beat with whippes one citezen of Athenes, In old time it was
leefull for the masters to beat their bond servants with ^oddes, or to
scourge them with whippes at their own pleasures and as often and as much as
them lu^ted.
being and remaynyng still his bondeman: but yet in the city of Athenes many
moo then one to had well deserved to be whipped of the king, for that as much
as in them lay they releassed and made free another man's bondseruaunte.

Anaximenes the rhetorician, pronounced in the presence of Antigonus an oracion
devised and made by his master not without great study, and the young thing
taught before for the nones, and purposely brought in to pronounce it, (as
though the oracion had been of his own making, and that i^ might none
otherwise appear unto the king) And so when Antigonus in the mids of geuyng
audience unto the proposicion (being desirous to be certified and to have
knowelage of whatsoever it was) asked a question, and the young man forthwith
had soodainly stopped in his matter nothable to proceed in it, nor having a
word more to say: why how say thou (quod the king) was not this also
drawn and copied out for the before in a book? That this king judged contrary
to all reason and reprocheable in one that was in manner but even a veraye
child, the same now at this day is accoumpted an high point and royal
thing, that is, eue^ graund sequiours having to say before kings and princes,
to counne by heart, and to render again after the manner of an oracion or
sermon, Bosom sermons and oracions of an other manne^ making.
having been in making a whole half year together with sore labor and study
by some rhetorician or learned manne hiered thereunto. And many times it
chances, that such persons, (yea even no body at all breakyng their tale)
forgetten theimselfes, and fallen clean out of their matter, and maken all the
presence to laughe at them.

Hearing one other rhetoritian sort, Atigonus was much offen^ded with a
thetoricia^ vsyng ou^r ^urious ynkehorne terms in telling his tale.
(...), yt is, the snow castyng season now coming in place, has made this
climate utterly desolate of herbage, or has brought this climate to clean
dissherbageing: why (quod he) will thou not surceasse to deal with me, in thy
terms, as thou dooest with ye simple innocents of y^ comen people. The king
was much offended and displeased with the over exquisite manier of tellyng his
tale, with the which manner curious filed terms ye rhetoricia^s vsen to set
out their peinted sheathe emonge the vnexperte or ignoraunte multitude of the
people. But the same to do before a king was an abusyng of the princes
patience. Instead of these words, (...), the snowecasting season, he might
have said, the winter season. And these words, A clime is a re^io^ or cost
of a country.
(...), that, is has brought this climate to clean dis^herbageing, smellen all
of the ynkehorne, and may scacely be well licenced unto a poet, much less to
an orator.

Thrasillus a Cynique asking of him, in the way of a reward a grote or six
pence: How Antigonus defeacted a Cynike philosophier askyng a reward of him.
yt is no reward for a king to give, quod he. The Cynique eftsons replyyng,
well, then give me a talente: Nay (quod he) that is no meet reward for a
Cynique to receive. Of ye valor of a drachme and a talente it is noted before
in the secou^de saying of Aristippus and.xlii. leaf.
So on both sides he defeated and disapointed the ymportunitee or saucynesse of
the crauer that would not be answered, whom he demed not worthy to have any
good dooen him.

When he sent his soonne Demetrius Where it is before noted yt Antigonus had
two soonnes and named the one by his brothers name Demetrius, and the other by
his fathers name Philippe, Plutarchus says that such was the fame and brute
that went of him. Albeeit (says Plutarchus in the life of this Demetrius)
many chronicleers have left in writing, that this Demetrius was not the soonne
of Antigonus, but his brothers soonnes soonne. For ye father of Demetrius
being deceassed, and his mother being married unto Antigonus, Demetrius
being a veraye young infant, was believed to be the soonne of Antigonus, and
much the more, because that Philippe being two or three years younger of
age then Demetrius dyed, and Demetrius was by Antigonus made his heir
apparaunte to succeed him in his croune and empier.
with a great navy and with a great puissau^ce of soldyers for to deliver the
Greeks, How Antigonus exhorted his soo^ne Demetrius, when he sent him forth
with an army to deliver Greece.
and to set them free from all yookes of homage or foreign subieccio^: he
said, that glory and renoume was like a beaken enkendleed or set on fire
from greece, as from a mountain with an high top to extend and spread light
over all ye whole universal world. Prickyng foorthwarde y^ young manne with
desire of glory to make him do the part of a valiaunte knight, forasmuch
as by so dooyng y^ brute of that same his high praise and commendacion was not
to be hidden or pended within ye limits and precintes of greece, but rather to
run abroad throughout all costs and parties of the world, by reason of the
great fame and name that Greece had every where allreadie.

Antagoras he found on a time in his tente sethyng a coungre, and buisilie
stieryng ye pan with his own hands: and standing eue^ herd at his polle
behynd him, he said: dooest thou suppose o Antagoras that Homere, The
familiare iestyng between ye king Antigonus and the poet Antagoras.
when he wrote the acts of Agamennon, Agamemnon the king of Mycena, and of all
the Argiues, the soonne of Atreus, and the brother of Menelaus king of
Lacedaemon, (for whose wife Helene, all the kings of Greece made war against
Troie.) And Agamemnon was the hedde and chief king of them all. But at his
return from Troie he was slain by his own wife Clytemnestra, by ye help of
Aegyptus who kept her by adultery, because he had (as Clyte^nestra supposed)
slain Iphigenia his daughter and hirs in sacrifice unto Diana at the port of
Aulis, when ye Greeks should take their viage toward Troie.
did sethe cou^gres, as thou do now? To this said Antagoras again: And
thou sir king, dooest thou suppose yt Agamemnon in the time of dooyng those
noble acts, made such curious serchyng as you dooest, if any body in the
host sodde any coungres? The king took pacientely and in the good part to
be paid home ieste for ^este, even as though the matter had been between two
familiare plaiefeers eguall of degree, or feloes like.

Antigonus had on a season in his Mithridates repyng golden corn, and
therefore laid awayte to have the same Mithridates by the back, and to
despeche him out of the way. And when he had opened this matter unto his son
Demetrius, he bound the same by an oath to make no words at all of it.
Wherefore Demetrius taking Mithridates in compaignie with him went walkyng up
and down on ye sea bank, The feithfulnesse of Demetrius toward Mithridates
his friend saving his oath upright, and not breakyng the commandment of
Antigonus.
and with ye nether end of his spear wrote in ye sand, as foloeth,
Mithridates avoid the country. Mithridates Of this Mithridates king of
Pontus, it is written that he was a man of a mighty great stature, strong of
body, of a noble courage, of excellent wit and policy, and of incredible
memory. For where he was king of two and twenty nations, it is certain that
unto every of the same severally he made laws, and kept courts, and
ministered justice in their own toungues, and that during the time of his
reign which continued by the space of six and fifty years, he never neded
the help of any interpreter between him and any of the nations being under
his obeisaunce and subjection, but would talk with all and singular persons
of the said nations in their own languages. He kept war against the Romans
many years. At last he was discoumfaicted by Lucius Scylla, and utterly
ouercomed by Pompeius Magnus. And at last being besieged in a certain castle
by his own soonne, he. took poison to destroy himself, but when he saw yt
it would not work upon him (for he had by the continuance of long and many
years, accustomed himself to take every day preservatives and ymmediatly
upon the preservatives to take poison purposely, that if any such chance fell
it might not hurt him) he called one of his trusty servants to slay him,
and where as the feloe being with the veraye sight of his maiester dismayed,
failled in herte^ nor had the power to execute that deed Mithridates called
him back again, and helped his hand to the ministry of cuttyng his own
throat.
well perceiuyng what ye matter meant, fled into Pontus, and there reigned as
king al ye days of his life after. But this history, forasmuch as it is no
apophthegme, (for an apophthegme consists in words spoken) seems to have
been put in by some other body. Then by Plutarchus who compiled the treactise
of apophthegmes. Albeeit words after such sort and for such purpose written
may have the force, strength and place of words with the tongue and voice
pronounced.

When the friends of Antigonus Athenes he should fe^se and ward the same with
strong fortresses and sure garrisons, to the end that it might no more fall to
rebellion, and that he should with most earnest cure and diligence keep it, as
the foundamente, Athenes the foundamente of all Greece, and ye only post to
lean to.
the stay or ye leanyng post of all Greece: he answered that he had evermore
been of this mind, The most sure garrison of a royalme, is ye benevolence of
the subjects toward their prince.
that he believed none to be a more sure fortres or gariso^ of a royalme then
ye benevolence and hertie love of ye subjects toward their prince.

Antigonus when he heard reported that all the other kings of Greece had
co^spired his destruccio^, What Antigonus said when it was showed him that all
the other kings of Greece had conspired his exterminacio^.
woundreous presumpteously au^swered, that he would with one stone and with one
shoughte make them all to take their heles and to run every manne his way,
eue^ as one should spryng a whole flighte of birds peckyng up corn newly
sown. but nevertheless in this battaill was Antigonus slain, and Demetrius
vanquyshed and put to flight, and all their kingdom spoiled, and parted
among Antiochus Seleucus, and the other princes that made war against them,
as testifies Plutarch^s in the life of the said Demetrius.

Antigonus had camped in the brows or edges of felles and cliefes, and in
places all uneven and full of pittes, arisyng and hangyng in heigthe much
above the plain champian ground, This was at the siege of Argos a noble city
in Achaia. For Pyrrhus and Antigonus came thither both at one time, and both
in mind and purpose to win the city. But ye Argiues se^dyng to either of
them ambassadors, and praiyng them to hold their hands, and to abstain
from dooyng injury to a foren city which neither of them both had any right
or title unto, Antigonus promised to depart and gave unto the Argiues in
hostage thereof his soonne Alcyoneus. But Pyrrhus, whereas he promised to do
the same, yet did it not, but by night entreed the city unawares and unknowing
to the Argiue^ till he was even in the m^ddes of their high street. Then were
the Argiues fain to desire Antigonus to come with aid and rescue and so he
did. And there and then was Pyrrhus slain.
Pyrrhus after pitchyng his tents about Naplia, sent on the next morrow by an
haralde of arms to bid him come down into ye plain, and there to assaye and
try what he could do in battaill. But Antigonus made answer, that his
manier of battreyng stood not a whitte more in the furniture of harness and
ordeinaunce, then in the oportunitee of times when to fight, and that for
Pyrrhus, (in case ye same were werye of his life) there were ways many enough
open or ready to dispeche and rid him out of the world.

Antigonus being asked the question, of his time he judged to surmount al
others in worthiness, Marie, Pyrrhus was king of the Epirotes (a nation
between Macedonie and Illyricum, which Illyricum is now called S^auonie,) much
praised of all writers for a gentle and a courteous king, witty, politic,
quick in his buisynesse, auenturous and hardy, and of such a ^^ieryng nature,
yt (as Plutarchus in his life testifies) neither having gotten any victory or
co^queste, nor yet being venquyshed or ouercomed, he could quiet himself to
be in res^e and peace. And Plutarchus in the life both of Anniball, and also
of Titus Quintius Flaminius tells, yt when Scipio among many other things
required Annibal to show him eue^ as he thought in his mind, who^ he reputed
of all that ever had been or were then alive to be the most worthy and most
noble captain of an army, Marie (quod Anniball) Alexander ye great I esteem
to be chief and principal, and next unto him Pyrrhus, and my self the
third. And of the same Pyrrhus he said at an other time, yt if he had had the
feacte to hold and keep an empier, as well as he could achiue and win it, he
had had no cousyn. All this was dooen when Pyrrhus would have taken the city of
Argos, as is said in the annotacion of the apophthegme next before gooyng.
Pyrrhus (quod he again) if he might live to be an old manne. He gave not a
determinate sentence yt Pyrrhus was allreadie the veraye best, but that he was
like to be the principal best in deed, if age and contynuaunce of time might
acquire ye experience and perfect knowlage of things.

Antigonus seeing one of his soldyours, The tendrenesse of Antigonus toward
his souldyours if they were sick.
being in all behalfes, or, at all assaies stout and valiant and foreward or
pressed to entreprise al manner hasardes or aue^tures, to be not veraye well at
ease in his body, demanded what was ye matter yt he looked so pale and wanne
of color. When the party had confessed unto him a prive disease lyyng within
his body, Antigonus commanded his physicians, that if it might possibly by
any means be dooe^, they should give him medicines yt might cure him. But the
soldyer being now clean rid of his malady, begone to weaxe eiuill willing,
slack, and loathe to fight, and with less forewardnesse to put himself in
any perilles or daungiers. The king greatly meruaillyng there at, asked of
him, what was the cause of his mind so changed. Then said the soldiour: for
south sir, eue^ you and no man else has been the cause. For when I lived in
contynuall angyshe and peine, Felicitee makes me^ne timorous and false herted.
I had no great fear of my life being in such case, but now, se^s by your
means my life is become more dear unto me, I am much more charie, that it
may not be lost.

Antigonus the first unto a certain Sophiste offreyng him a book conteinyng a
traictise of justice, This Antigonus was ye first king of that name, and there
was besides him an other Antigonus the secounde king of Macedonie.
said: certes you art an unwise man^e which, where thou see me with all
ordeinau^ce of war werkyng and dooyng myschief to the citees of foreners, yet
nevertheless wilt needs talk to me of justice. His meaning was, that such
persons as either for the enlargeyng of their dominion, orels for to purchase
glory and renoume dooen make war upon aliene citees, Such persons as for
empier or for glory dooen invade foren citees cannot save ye laws of justice
upright.
or fore^ countrees, cannot save ye laws of justice upright.

Antigonus the first, when he had often times suffreed Bias ymportunately, With
what words Antigonus gave a talent unto Bias, of whose ymportune crauyng he
could not be rid.
troubleyng him with beggyng this and that: at last being ouercomed with
werynesse thereof, sirs (quod he) deliver unto Bias a talente, though it be
perforce and against my stomach. Signifiyng that Bias had not with his good
heart and will obtained that benefit, but rather had forceably and by
violence extorted the same with ymportune and endelesse crauyng.

Antigonus, when he heard in the The exceeding humanitee and most noble heart
of Antigonus, in auengeyng eiuill words spoken by him.
and when he had dispeched them out of the moyre (the parties not knoweyng who
had succored and helped them so well to pass through it: Now (quod he) curse
Antigonus by whose fault ye have fallen into this encoumbreau^ce, but wyshe
well to the same and pray for him, that he has now recovered you again, and
brought you out of this goulfe or quauemoyre. With this sole auengement was the
right noble heart of this king contented and satisfied.

Antigonus when the greeks were besieged in a little preatie pyle or castle, and
the same greeks upon the affiaunce and boldness of the place (because it was a
veraye strong hold of so small a thing) setting their enemy at naught, made
much and great iestyng at the deformitee and bleamishes of Antigonus,
Antigonus low of stature and having a flat nose.
and made many mockes and skornes, now at his dwarfyshe low stature, and now
at his noose as flat as a cake bruised or beaten to his face: What Antigonus
said when the Greeks whom he besieged in a castle iested and ^ailled at him
over the walls.
I am glad yet (quod he) and trust to have some good chance and fortune by
it, now yt I have Silenus was the fosterfather of Bacchus, whom for his
monstreous myshape, and for his fond toys, Jupiter, Apollo, Mars, Bacchus,
Mercury and Uulcan, and the universal coumpaignie of the poetical Gods
used for their fool (such as our princes and noble men have now of days)
to make them sport and passetyme to laugh at. For it was an eiuill disfigured
apyshe body, croumpe shouldreed, short necked, snatnosed, with a sparowes
mouth, full of ungracious prankes of laughter, cladde in a fools cote, never
without his belle and his ^ockes comb, and his instrumente whereon to play
toodle loodle bagpipe, much after the facion of fools (such as are exhibited
in Morice daunces, and such as are peinted in many papers or clothes with wide
mouths ever laughyng with their Iille, and having fools hoodes on their hedde
with long asses ears.) By the pattern and likeness of this Silenus, were devised
and made in old time to set in the galaries and chaumbres of noble me^ne,
little monstreous and eluyshe mys^apen Images, so wrought that they might be
taken one piece from an other, and that they had leaves to fold and to open.
These Images being shut cloce represented nothing but ye likeness of a fond
and an eiuill favored myshapen body made like a fool, blowyng on a bagpipe,
or a shalme, or on some other facioned pipe, but the same being unfolded and
spread abroad showed some high mystical matter, and some excellent piece of
work ^ull of maiestee, most contrary to that it showed to be at the first
vieu when it was shut. Unto this sort of Images does Alcibiades in the
work of Plato entitleed, ye banquette, compare and liken Socrates, because
the same was a much other manner manne if one saw him thoroughly, and took vie^
of hi^ mind and heart within, then at the first blushe in appearance of body
he seemed to be, (as who lusts to read may see more at large in the
proverb Sileni Alcibiadis, in ye chiliades of Erasmus.) And to the same alluded
Antigonus signifiyng, that although he were of personage, of feacture, and in
shape not most comely, nor all of the best made, yet in good qualitees of the
mind, in feactes of policy, in Marcyall prowess, in knowlage of gouernyng a
royalme, and in all semble^bl^ princely virtues, he gave place to none other of
his progenitors the kings that had been tofore him. Yet Plutarchus saie^h in
the life of Demetrius, that the same Demetrius was a veraye tall manne of
personage and stature, and yet not althyng so talle as his father.
Silenus in mine army. And after yt he had with lack of vitailles brought those
choppeloges or great pratleers as low as dog to ye bow, (as the manier is
to do with such persons as are taken priesoners in war, How men taken
priesoners in battle were used in old time.
that is to wete, such as may do good service in war to be appointed,
sorted, and placed under one baner or another among the ordynarie souldyours,
and the residue to be offreed to sale by an open cry) he said that he would
not do so with them neither, The humanitee of Antigonus and lenitee toward
his enemies.
saving for that it was expedient for them to have some master to correct
and punyshe them which had such naughty toungues. This saying I suppose to
be all one with yt which Plutarchus makes mention of, saving that it is
otherwise told of Seneca.

Antigonus when he had taken up in his hand an instrumente written in great
letters of text hand: yea marie (quod he) these lettres are big enough to see
even for a blind man's yies. Antigonus i^sted at ye ympedimente of his own
yies.
Iestyng at the bleamy^he and ympedime^te of his own Antigonus being a
singular good man of war in his young lusty years, when Philippus ye
father of Alexander, lay in siege of Perinthus (a noble city of Thracia in
the cost of Propontis now called Heraclea) had the one of his yies stricken
clean out with the shot of a quarrel out of a crossebowe. And many persons
approchyng unto him, and addressyng to pluck out the quarrel, Antigonus would
not suffer them, but leat it stricke still, neither did he pluck it out, or
depart aside or cease fightyng, until he had discou^faicted his enemies
within the walls of the city, and put them to flight.
yies. For he had no more but one yie to see withal. But those same words an
other body should not have spoken without ieoperdie and peril of his best
ioynte, which thing even so proved and came in ure by The history of
Theocritus ye Chian, does Erasmus write in the sixth book of ye apophthegmes,
as foloeth: when Theocritus had been attached^ and should be brought before ye
king Antigonus, and the persons, which led him by the arms, bid him to be
of good chere, for that he should escape and be as well as ever he had been,
at the first hour of his coming unto the kings yies. Nay (quod Theocritus)
now ye put me clean out of all hope of my life to be saved. Geuyng a sore
bytyng, or bloody word toward the king, tha the had but one yie and not
yies. The king no sooner heard of the feloes iestyng, but he commanded the same
straight ways to be hanged on the galoes.
Theocritus ye Chian, of whom in another place and time shall be mentioned.

Antigonus, when word was brought unto him, What Antigonus said when he heard
yt his soonne Alcyoneus was slain in battaill.
that his son Alcyoneus was slain fighting in the field: stood hangyng down
his hedde a preatie space musing or studiyng with himself in his mind, and
within a while he brake out into these words: O my soonne Alcioneus thou
haste changed life for death, not so soon as of right thou should have
dooen, which have so indiscreetly assailled thine enemies and auentured upon
them, not having regard neither of thyn own life, nor of my often warnynges
to beware. He thought his own son not worthy to be mourned or sorowed
for, Antigonus thought him not worthy to be mourned for, that had bee^ cast
away through his own folly.
which had through his own folly myscarryed, and had been the procurer of his
own ca^tyng away. This is told of the report of Plutarchus.

Antigonus seeing his soonne Demetrius somewhat feersly or roughly, and after a
strange sort of lordelinesse, vsyng or handleyng his subjects over which he
had Empier and dominion, said: Soonne art thou ignorant that our state of
reignynge, or being kings, is a servitude faced or set out with dignitee and
woorshyp? Nothing might possibly be spoken with more high wit or prudence.
Reign or empier, saving for the dignitee is a mutual servitude.
For as well is the prince co^streigned to serve the co^moditee of the people,
as the people to serve the turn of the prince, saving that the prince does it
with a prerogative of dignite^, that thing excepted, in veraye deed it is a
mutual servitude of the one party to the other. For the prince both night
and day perpetually cares for the safegarde, A prince perpertually cares for
the wealth of his subjects.
tranquillitee, defense, co^moditees, wealth, and auauncemente of his
subjects, never satisfied ne pleased with his own felicitee, except it be al
well with his people too. Now to the entente that we may after a sort make
soome lykely match of Roomains with the Greeks, we shall to Alexander set
Julius Caesar, to Philippe we shall set Augu^tus, and to Antigonus we shall
turn Ponpeius of Room.

THE SAYINGS OF AUGUSTUS CAESAR.
Octauius Augustus Caesar was the soonne of octauius by Julius Cesars sisters
daughter, which Julius Caesar the first perpetual Emperor of Rome, had before
his death made a will by which he adopted, that is to say, freely chose the
said Augustus to be his son and heir, and executour, and successor.
Augustus then being a young mnane absent from Rome a scholare or studente in
Apollonia (a goodly city of Macedonie.vii. miles from the sea into the land
ward, at the first inhabited by Corinthia^s, purposely sent thither to
inhabit when it was deserte) afterward then Augustus being come to Room, and
set in possession of such gooddes as the said Julius had left unto him,
and having pourcha^ed the fauou^ and benevolence of the citezens, by reason of
distributyng certain legacies of Julius unto the people he joined him self in
societee with Marcus Antonius, and Marcus Lepidus. And these three divided all the whole empier of Room between them to hold by strong hand, as it had
been by a just and right title of enheritaunce due unto them. In process
Augustus and Antonius (not withstandyng al bonds of societee, leagasie, and
allyaunce) fell out, and warred either against the other Antonius at length
was driven into Egypt, where he was received into the city of Alexandria, and
aided by Cleopatra the Queen there, (who loved him). And there did he gore
himself through the bealy with a sweorde. And Augustus took Cleopatra, and all
her riche^se and ieweiles, and woonne the city. etc.

WHen Rhymerales king Thracians (who had emonge other kings moo forsaken
Antonius; Rhymirales king of the Thracia^s, forsook Antonius, and took y^
part of Augustus Caesar.
and taken the part of Augustus) did at a certain banquette veraye arrogantely
or with many high braggyng words make great vaunte of his deserts toward
Caesar, What Augustus Caesar said when Rhymirales made vaunte of his deserts
toward him.
and without end entwytyng the same with taking his part in war, made much
tittle tattle nor would in no wise lynne pratyng thereof: Caesar making as
though he marked not the reprochefull chattyng of the said Rhymirales, drank
to one other of the kings, and said: The treason I love well, but the
traitors I do not commend. Signifiyng, no thanks at all to be due unto
such persons as have dooen a man a good turn by committyng treason on
their own party. No thank at all is due to them yt do an other body a
pleasure, by commit^yng treason on their own behalf.
For though the pleasure, that they shown be for the time acceptable, yet are
the parties selfs reputed for naughty felooes, and breakers of league and
feithfull promyses before made to another.

Alexandria (the hedde city of all Egypt) after their city entreed and taken
by force of arms, The cleme^cie of Augustus toward the Alexandrines when he
had woone and taken their city.
thought to have none other grace, but utter exterminacion by fire and
bloodshed, Augustus got him up into an high place, taking with him even by ye
hand one Arius a philosophier of the same city borne, and said unto the
people, that he did freely perdon the city: For what ca^ses Augustus freely
perdoned ye city of Alexandria.
first for the greatness and goodlinesse of the city self: secondarily, for
the respect of Alexander the great that was the first founder, edifier, and
builder of it: and finally for to do his friend Arius a pleasure. Arius a
philosophier of Alexandria, to whom Augustus for his learning showed much
honor and friendship and familiaritee. And (as Plutarchus in y^ life of Marcus
Antonius writes) even at this time besides this high point of honor showed
toward Arius, he did at the intercession of the same perdon many particular
persons which had dooen him much displeasure, and had deserved not only his
displeasure but also all extremitee.
It was a point of mercifulness not many times seen or heard of, not to
riefle or spoil a city which had most stubbernely and obstinately rebelled,
but no less praise deserved that same his great ciuilitee, that the thank of
such a benefit as this was, he took not to himself, but gave one, yea and
the principal part of the same unto the city self, another portion he
attributed unto Alexander, whose memorial he knew to be of most high
acceptacion among ye Alexandrines, the third piece he put over to Arius a
burgoise of the same city, with so high a title commendyng and ^ettyng forth
his friend unto his own countremen.

When it was complained unto Augustus yt one Erotes the solliciter of Egypt
had bought a quaille which in fightyng would beat as many as came, and at no
hand could be beaten or put to ye wurse, and the same quaill being roasted,
to have eaten up every morsel: he commanded the feloe to be brought before
him, and the cause well discussed, ymmediately upon the parties confessyng of
y^ cause, he commanded yesame to be hanged up on ye top of a maste of a
ship. Erotes y^ solliciter of Egypt put to death by Augustus for eating of
a quaille.
Iudgeyng him unworthy to live, who for so small a delight of his only
throat, or dentie mouth, had not spared a bird, which in fightyng might many
a long day and to many a person have showed pleasure and solace, and the
which furthermore by a certain glad sign of good luck to ensue betokened
unto Caesar perpetual sucsesse and prosperyng in his wars.

Sicile in the stead or place of Theodore he made Arius capitain or
lieuetenau^t. Tharsus the chief city in Cilicia, where saint Paul was borne.
And when a certain person put up unto Caesar a supplicacio^ or bille of
complainte, in which were written these words, The pield pated Theodore of
Tharsus was a briber and a thief, what seems you? The bille perused, Augustus
subscribed nothing but this only, Mesemeth.

Athenodorus a philosophier by ye pretexte or excuse of old age making
instaunte request that Athenodorus a philosophier in ye time of Augustus.
There was also an other Athenodorus a philosophier of Athenes of who^
Plutarchus both in the life of Alexander and also of Phocion makes mention.
And the third, a werker of Imagerie in metal a Rhodian born, of whom is
me^cioned in the xxxiiii. and in ye.xxxvi. book of Plynie.
he might have license to depart home again into his country, Augustus
granted his desire. But when Athenodorus had taken his leave and all of the
emperor, being in mind and will to leave with the same some monume^te or
token of remembreaunce meet and semyng for a philosophier, this he said more
the^ ever he had dooen tofore Sir emperor, at what time thou shalt be
angreed, neither say, ne do thou any thing, before that you shall have
rekened up by rewle one after other in thy mind the names of the.xxiiii.
lettres of the greek alphebete. The^ Caesar fre^dly taking the philosophiers
hand in his, said: What counsel Athenodorus a philo^sophier gave unto
Augustus against y^ furious heat of sudden angre^
yet a while longer have I need of thy coumpaignie and presence about me. And
so kept him there with him still even a full year more, allegyng for his
purpose, that same the proverb of the Greeks. Of feithfull silence, the
rewards are daungerlesse. Of feithfull silence the rewards are daungerlesse.
Either allowyng the philosophiers sentence, for that in deed to repress and
keep in ones anger that it breaks not out into words, To keep in anger that
it break not out into words is a poincte of safety.
were a thing sure and safe from all peril of after clappes: orels meaning,
that it should have been a good turn to the philosophier, if he had spoken no
such word at the later end being in purpose and readynesse to depart his
way. Albeeit, such an wholesome and especial good lesson deserved to have some
royal reward and recompense. An wholesome lesson geuyng deserves at ye hands
of a price an high recompense


Alexander being two and thirty years of age, Alexander at ye age of.xxxii
years having woonne almo^te all the world, dou^ted what he should have to do
all ye residue of his ^ife.
after having passed over not a few regions or countrees of the world, had
put a great doubt what he might have to do all ye residue of his life to
come, Augustus meruailled much if Alexander had not judged it a greater act
or work well to govern an empier gotten, then to have acquired or purchaced a
large and ample dicion. Of good right did he reprove the insatiable ambicion of
Alexander, How Augustus reproved ye insatiable ambicion of Alexander.
which had esteemed none other office belongyng to a king, but to enlarge the
precinct or limits of his dominion, whereas it is a great dele both a more
goodly thing and also more hard, It is both more goodlye and also more hard
with good laws and maniers to adourne a kingdom, then by war to add royalme
to royalme.
with right and just laws, and with honest or goodly manners to beautify a
royalme that to a man is fall is fallen then with dynte of sweorde to add
kingdom to kingdom?

Augustus had enacted and publyshed a law concerning adulterers after what
form of process persons Augustus Caesar made a law, yt there should be no
adulterers, or if any such were found, yt they should be punished And it was
called, Lex Iulia,
and what kind of punyshement the same should have, if they were co^uinced or
found guilty. Afterward, in a rage or fury of wrath, he flewe on a young
manne accused of having to do with Iulia the daughter of Augustus, and all to
pumleed the same with his hands. But when the young manne had cried out in this
manner, O sir emperor, ye have made and set forth alawe of this matter it
repented the emperor so sore of his dooyng, Augustus with his own hands beat
a young ma^ne detected of having to do with Iulia his daughter.
that he refused to take or eat his supper that day. The offense even of it
self was heinous and besides that, trespaced in the emperors own daughter.
What prince in such a case could tempre his dolor and anger? Or who in such
a case could abide the long process of the laws and of judgments? yet this
so great a prince took such displeasure with himself, yt he punyshed his
own person, because he had not in all points been obediente unto the law,
Augustus sore repented yt he had in his fu^^^ dooen contrary to the law,
which him self had made.
which himself had given unto others.

Caius his daughters soonne into the country of Armenia Armenia, a royalme in
Asia, lyyng between the two great mountains, Taurus and Cancasus, and
stretches on length from ye country of Cappadocia unto ye sea called Mare
Caspiu^.
with an army against the Parthians, What Augustus wyshed unto Caius, his
daughters soonne, when he sent him into Armenia an warrefare against the
Parthians.
he wished of the gods, yt there might goo with him, the Of Pompeius it is
written, that never had any other person of the Romans the propense favor
and benevolence of all the people, either sooner begoonne in his young days,
or in his prosperitee on all behalfes more assured and strong orels when good
fortune failled him, more costaunte in long contynuyng. And just causes there
were (says Plutarchus in his life) moo then one, wherefore the people did
bear such hertie love toward him, his chaste living, his expertenesse in
feactes Marciall, his eloquence of toungue to persuade any matter, his
substanciall and true dealyng, and his sobrenesse or humilitee to be communed
withal. He never desired or asked any thing of any person, but with an heavy
mood as one loathe to ask, he never did any thing at the request of another
but with a glad chere, as one pressed and ready to do all persons good. And
of his good gifts or graces, one was to give nothing after a disdaignefull or
stately sort, an other, to receive nothing but as though it had been a large
and high benefit, were it in deed never so s^endre. Even of his childehood he
had a countenance or look of no small grace to allure and win the hertes
and favor of the people. etc.
hertie benevolence of me^ne which Pompeius had, ye auenturus courage Of the
stomach, courage and hardynesse of Alexander, besides the testimony of
Plutarchus, of Quintus Curtius, and of other historiographiers, sufficient
declaracio^ may be taken by his ieoperdyng to ride the unbroken horse
Bucephalus (of which in the.xl. apophthegme of Alexander it is before
mentioned) and by auenturyng over the ^^oodde of Granicus, whereof read in the
fifth apophthegme of Alexander. Neither was there any so high, so hard, or so
dangerous an entreprise, that Alexander would fear to attempt and to
adventure. At the age of.xvi. years he set upon the Megarians, and the same
discoumfeicted and vanquished. He sought the way to the temple of Ammon
through wilderness, where both he and all his coumpaignie should have been
lost, had it not fortuned him to be brought into his ways again, and to be
counduicted or guided by a flight of crows. In pursuyng Darius he rode.iiii.C.
miles in ten days upon one horse. At the town of Gordium (the principal
town of all Phry^ia) whereas there was in the temple of Jupiter a wayne with
thonges, writhen and wound with so diffuse a knotte, that noman could vndooe
it, and a prophecy dependyng of the same, that whosoever could vndooe y^ knotte
should achiue and obtein the Empier of the whole universal world, Alexander
perceiuyng the knotte to be over buisie to be vndooen with his hands,
neglected al religion and supersticious fear, and with his sweorde chopped me it
quyte in soondre at a stroke. These things and many others mo did Alexander
whereby is evident what stomach and courage he was of.
that was in Alexander, and the As touching the felicitee and good fortune of
Augustus, Cornelius Nepos in the life of Pomponius Atticus says in this
manier. So high and great prosperitee foloed Augustus Caesar, that fortune
leaft nothing vngeuen to him, that ever she had at any time before conferred or
purchaced to any living creature, and that was possible for a citezen of Room
to have. Which he adds, because Augustus was no king. For at that day it
was not leefull for a citezen of Room to be a king, and it was high treason
if any manne attempted to be a king.
happy fortune yt himself had. What was in every of the said three persons
severally the chief and highest poincte the same did Augustus wish to be in
one manne alone. But as for this thing, truly it proceeded of a singular
humbleness, The humbleness and modesty of Augustus.
that being a man in wit, in knowlage, and in policy excellyng, he
ascribed his own noble acts unto fortu^e. And would not take them upon
himself.

Romans such a successor in the Empier, as never consulted or took
deliberacio^ twys of one matter. Menyng by Tiberius. The ready wit and
policy of Tiberius.
A man of a veraie ready wit and of great policy.

On a time when his mind was The autorite of Augustus, eue^ of a young manne.
ye young me^ne (quod Augus^ns) to whom being but a young manne, old folks
have given ear. For Augustus being scacely come to man's state was put to
have doings in the commenweale, The cleme^ci^ of Augustus.
and was of right high autoritee. With this only saying he appeaced ye parties
that were at strife neither did he ministre any ferther punyshemente to the same,
for ye troubleous rumor and noise by them areised and stiered up.

When the people of Athenes seemed Aegina in this manner. What Augustus wrote to
the Atheniens having trespaced against him.
I suppose not it to be to you unknown that I am angry with you. And in deed
I purpose not to lie here at Aegina all this winter to come? Neither did he any
thing else speak or do unto the said Atheniens, rekenyng sufficient to
manace and threaten them, unless they would surceasse so to abuse him.

Euclides taking his libertee and pleasure to tell his tale at large, and to
speak even his bealye full, at the last had gone so far, that he spoke much
what these words following: If all these things seem not to your grace high
and great matters, command him to render unto me the seventh volume of
Thucidides: Caesar being highly displeased with those words commanded ye
said accuser to be had to ward. The cleme^cie of Augustus.
But as soon as he heard that the same party was alone remaining alive of the
of spring of Brasidas a stout and valiaunte Capitain of the Lacedaemonians,
slain in battle in defendyng the Greeks which inhabited Thracia. For at his
first setting forth toward battaill, he wrote unto the officers of
Lacedemon, that either he would put of for ever all the eiuill that was in
battle, orels he would dye for it. And when word of his death was brought by
ambassadors, purposely sent therefore to his mother Archileonide, at the first
word that ever she spoke, she demanded whether Brasidas had dyed with honor
or not. And when the Thracians praised his manhood, and said that the city of
Lacedemon had not his feloe leaft in it, yes yes (quod the woman again,) full
little do ye know, what manner feloes the Lacemonians are. In deed (quod she)
Brasidas was a right good man of his hands, but yet the city of Lacedemon
has many better me^nes bodies then Brasidas was. For the respect and memory
of this noble and valiaunte capitain, Augustus perdoned the unmeasurable
accusar of Euclides.
Brasidas, he bid ye same come to him, and after a moderate or gentle
correpcion leat him goo at his libertee.

Unto Piso substancyally buyldyng What Augustus said unto Piso buildyng a
substa^ciall house.
Augustus said: O Piso, thou put me in good cumforte, and make my heart
glad, in that thou so make thy buyldinges, as though Rome must ever endure
and continue to the worlds end. He was not offended with the over curious
furniture of edefiyng: Augustus enterpreted the doings of men to the better
part and not to the wurse.
but yt some other prince would have suspected and mistrusted to mean some
spiece After the expulsion and final exterminacion of kings out of the city
of Room, if any manne either had any high or large mansion place, or attempted
any sumptuous or ample buildyng, he encurred suspicion of tyranny, and of
taking a kings croune and power upon him: in so much, that Ualerius Publicola
a noble manne of Room, and one of the chief dooers in expulsyng Tarquinius the
proud the last king of Room because he had a fair house and high, and nere
unto the kings palaice, was not free of that suspicion, but to declare him
selfe^ was fain to pull down his house stick and stone even to ye plain ground.
The Same thing purchaced unto Pompeius also and diverse others much envy, and
suspicion of vsurpyng a kings power, which to do in Room at those days
was the most high and rank treason that could be.
of tyranny, Augustus turned unto a glad beginning and prophecy of the Empier
of Room long to endure. Thus far has Plutarchus in his treactise of
apophthegmes. The apophthegmes following are for the most part taken of
Macrobius, and out of Suetonius.

Augustus had written a tragedy entitleed Ajax, The tragedy of Augustus called
Ajax.
and yesame tragedy afterward (because it myslyked him) he wyped out with a
spou^ge. So, when one Lucius a writer of tragedies demanded, what is Ajax did:
by my feith (quod Augustus woundreous merely again) he has re^ne himself
through with a spounge. Augustus his Ajax ran himself through with a spounge.
Alludyng to the argument or matter of the entrelude, in the which it is
contained, y^ This Ajax was ye son of Telamo^ and of Hesione ye daughter of
Laomedon, and was the most valiaunte and most worthy knight of all the
Greeks, next after Achilles. But when Achilles was slain, Ajax required to have
his harness and weapen, as a man most apt and mete to have the wearyng and
use of it. Ulysses also made suite for the same, and by help of his eloquente
tongue preuailled against Ajax, and had the said harness delivered unto him by
the judges. For anger whereof Ajax fell mad, and in his madness went among
an heard of catalle and slew a great noumbre of them, weenyng to him that
he had slain Ulysses and his cou^paignie. Afterward being come to himself
again, when he considered his folyes, he killed himself synkyng down on the
poincte of his own sweorde.
Ajax, as soon as he wist what things he had both said and dooen in the time
of his madness, ran or sounke down upon the poincte of his own sweord, and
killed himself.

To a certain person presenting What Augustus said to one fearfully puttyng
up a supplicacion unto him.
now puttyng forth his hand, and now pulling it back again, he said: what?
do thou think thy self to give a penie to an Elephante For little boys
used to hold forth and to give little pieces of coin to an Elephante which
pieces of coin the same Elephante, (not without the woundreyng of the
beholders) will in such wise snatche up quickly with his long snoute, that
he will not hurt the childs hand. In the same wise do we see children p^tte
their hand into the yanyng mouth of bears, not without our fear. It was to
this most good prince a matter of greef, that he was feared. It was grievous to
Augustus that he was f^ared.


Pacinnius Taurus asked a reward of him, How Augustus avoided one Paci^ius
asking a reward of him being not disposed to give.
allegiyng to be spread abroad by the come^ voice of the people, that no small
sum of money had been given to him by the emperor: well (quod Caesar) yet be
not thou of mind to believe it. By a pleasant word of ieste doing him to
weete that he would none give him The other party looked to have it come to
pass, that Caesar would save his honestee, left that, (in case it should come
to light and be openly known the said brute and communicacion of ye people
to be nothing true) he should be had in derisio^. But Augustus showed him
another remedy, which was, that he should suffer the people to talk their
pleasure, and to say what they would, so that they persuaded not to him the
thing that were false.

An other person being dismissed How Augustus avoided a feloe asking a
pensio^ when he was put from the capitainship of a compaignie of horsemen.
was not afeard for all that to require of Agrustus a great fee too, by this
color, allegeing himself not to ask such waiges or pension for any lucre or
gains, but (says he) to ye end that I may appear to have obtained such
reward or recompense by your graces judgment, and so may be verayly
believed, not to have been put from mine office against my will, but willyngly to
have resigned and given it up: well (quod Augustus) say thou to every body
that thou haste received it, and I will not say nay. If nothing else moved
the crauer, but only the fear of shame and reproach, a way was showed by
which he might as well save his honestee among the people, as if he had in
deed received the money, that he asked.

Herennius being with many vices corrupted, the emperor had commanded to
avoid his camp and army. And when the party being discharged of his room,
did with falling on his knees, and with most lamentable blubbering or weping in
this manner beseech the emperor not so to put him away: Alas sir, with what
face shall I return into my country? and what shall I say unto my father?
Marie (quod Augustus) say, that I have lost thy favor. Because the young
manne was ashamed to confess that himself had encurred the disfavor of
Caesar, Caesar permitted him to turn the tale in and out, and lay the wit or
blame on himself the said Augustus.

How Augustus did put to silence a souldyour of vnmeasurably gloriyngs of
his acts and wounds received in battaill.
and being thereby with a notable scarre of ye wound in his forehed
disfygured because he bare the open mark of an honest wound, bosted and
craked beyond all measure of ye great acts yt he had dooen. The presumptuous
vau^tyng of this souldyer Augustus thus chastised after a gentle sort: well
sir, (quod he) yet beware yt ye look back no more in your rennyng away.
Half notifiyng that it might full well be, that the wound, which he gloried
and braggued of so highly, he caught not in fightyng manfully, but in fleeyng
cowardely.

One Galba having a body misshapen Galba to be lodged in an eiuil dwelling
place) where this Galba pleadyng a cause before Augustus every other while
said these words, emend and streighten me Caesar, if ye shall see in me any
thing worthy to be reprehended or disallowed: The feacte and merry au^swer of
Augustus unto Galba.
Nay Galba (said Augustus) I may tell ye what is amysse, but streighten the
I can not. A thing is said in latin corrigi, and in english to be eme^ded or
streightened, yt is reproved or disallowed and also that of crooked is made
straight.

Seuerus Cassius were dispetched and rid in judgment every one of them, and
the carpenter with whom Augustus had couenaunted and bargained, Augustus wyshed
yt Cassius Seuerus had ac^used his court house that he had pu^te to making, for
then it should have been rid ^ dis^etched as all those were whom y^ said Cassius
accused.
for edifiyng a court house where to sit in justice, delaied him a long time
with co^tynuall lookyng and lookyng when that work should be finyshed: full
gladly would I (quod Caesar,) that Cassius had accused my court The latin
word, Forum, in one significacion is a court house, or a place where to sit
in justice, such as is Westmynster halle, or the Sterre chaumber, or Guilde
halle. And we ^eade of three such courtehouses or Guilde halles in Roome^ one
that was called, forum latiu^, or forum Romanu^, which the aunciente Romans
used at the beginning: the secounde that was called forum Caesaris dictatoris,
which Julius Caesar builded, and had there standing his image in harness like
a Capitain and a knight of puissaunce: and the third Augustus erected within
the temple of Mars, that was called, Vltor, Mars the auenger.
house too. He found a matter of testyng in a vocable of double significacion.
For both a piece of work is said in latin, absolui, and in english, to be
despetched or rid, that is finyshed and brought to a perfect end, and also
a person that in a matter of justice or law is quytte and delivered. Both a
master carpe^ter riddeth his work and also a judge riddeth a person
aunsweryng before him to the law at the bar.

In old time great was the In old time the r^ligio^ or obseruaunce of
sepulchre^ was great.
and that portion of men's grounds which was especially appoincted for their
monumentes or graves, was not broken with any ploughe. Whereupon when one
Vectius being with this poincte of religion no thing afeard, What Augustus
said, when one Uectius brake up his own fathers grave with a plou^he.
had eared up his fathers grave, Augustus made a pleasant ieste of it,
saying: yea marie this is even in veraye deed to harroe and visit ones
fathers monument. Yet ones again he dalyed with a word of double significacio^.
For the latin verb, colere, in one significacio^ is to honor or to wurship,
and in an other significacion it is to tille or to housbande, as ground or any
other sembleable thing is housbanded. Which I translate to harroe or to
visit, as we say that Christ harroed hell, and visited hell when he
descended down to hell ymmediatly after his passion, and pourged, scoured, or
cleansed the same of such solles as him pleased. And visityng is in english a
kind of showing honor, as we viset sick folks and priesoners to do them
honor and coumforte. It had been a double amphibologie, at lest wise for the
latin if instead of, monumente, he had said, memorial, as I think Augustus
did say in deed. For unto us high and holy is the memorial of those, who^
being out of this life departed, we honor, (as y^ memorial of all saints
and of all folks departed in the true feith o^ Christ.) And the monumentes of
persons deceassed we call their memorials by imitacion of the greeks, who
callen the same (...), or, (...).

Herod his crueltee was come to the ears of Augustus, how yt the said Herod
It is, I think, to no Christian manne unknown the most detestable slaughter
of infantes which Herod caused to be slain round about all the precinctes
of Bethleem for the hatered of Jesus, and upon the querele, that he had been
mocked by the wise men that were called, Magi, as appears in the secounde
chapitour of the Gospel of Matthewe. And that the Jews should eat no swynes
fleashe, was prescribed unto them in the law of Moses by God himself, in
the.xi. Chapter of Leuiticus, and in the.xiiii. of Deuteronomium. Where are
forbidden all unclean meats. And unclean are accoumpted as many kinds of
beasts, as do not both divide the hoof into two claws, and also chewe the
cudde.
had commanded to be murdreed and slain all ye young babes in Iewrie as many
as were not above ye age of two years, It is better to be the hog of Herod
(said Augustus) then his soonne.
and how that among ye moo Herod his own soonne also had gone to ye pot as
well as the best: yea (quod Augustus) it is much better to be Herod his hog,
then his soonne. Herod was a Jew. And the Jews of a great conscience and of
a rewle dooe^ abstein from eating of allmaner swynes fleashe. So yt Herod
would kill no swyne.

Augustus after the taking and Alexandria, had granted life to many persons
for Arius ye philosophiers sake: Of Arius and of ye taking of Alexandria it is
noted before in the.ii. apoph^hegme of Agustus.
yet one Sostratus (a man in deed of a veraye ready toungue and especial
good vttreaunce, Sostratus an Alexandrine a ma^ne of special good vttreaunce,
but ^eddyly taking on him to b^e an Academique.
but yet of such sort, that he encurred the indignacion of Caesar, for that
indiscreetly or harebrainlike he would needs in any wise be reputed and taken
for an Academique,) he would not hear, ne receive to grace. But the said
Sostratus, in raggued apparel as one yt had no joy of the world and with his
hoar white bearde hangyng down of a great length, Of philosophiers Academiques
is before noted in the sayings of Plato.
begoonne to follow Arius at the heels whethersoeuer yesame went having ever
in his mouth this little verse of greek, Why Augustus would not at ye first
perdone Sostratus among other of ye Alexa^drines at the intercession of Arius.
(...)
Wise men, if in deed they wise be,
Can save wise men, and make them free.
By this crafty means he constreigned Caesar in manner parforce to give him
perdone. Alb^it Caesar p^rdoned him (says Plutarchus in the life of
Antonius,) more forto deliver Arius from envy, then Philostratus from fear.
For so does Plutarchus call him and not by the name of Sostratus.

When he was now fowertie Lucius Cinna a young gentleman of noble birth, Cinna
ye neffewe of Po^peius sought to destrui the person of Augustus.
that is to say, the neffewe of Po^peius, wrought treason against his person
and went about to destruie him. Plain relacio^ was made, where, when and how
the traitors intended to assaill him. For they had purposed and fully resolved
to murdre him, A notable history, how Augustus Caesar made a perpetual
friend of Cina, who had secretly wrought high treason against his person to
destrui him.
when he should next be in dooyng sacrifice. The enditemente and sentence of
atteindour of ye said Cinna was set on work to be drawn and engrossed. But
Augustus speaking at that present many words to this and that soundrie
purposes, (Concerning how Cinna should be used) In comes Liuia ye wife of
Augustus. The co^nsail of Liuia the wife of Augustus, given to her housbande.
Sir, says she, do ye according to ye guyse and usage of ye physicians who
at such times as ye customable medicines will not work, dooe^ assaye and prove
ye contraries. With rigor and sharp execucio^ yet unto this day little have
ye preuailled, now an other while practice to be merciful. Cinna being thus
found and proved faulty or culpable is not of power to do a poinctes worth
of harm to your life, but to your renoume he may do much good. Immediately
herupo^ Augustus commanded Cinna to be sent for by himself alone to come and
talk with him. How Augustus used Cinna, being found and proved an offender in
high treason against his person.
As soon as he was come, the Emperor caused an other chair to be set for
Cinna. Then spoke ye Emperor and said: First and foremust o Cinna this I
require of the, that thou do not interrupt ne break me of tellyng my tale.
Thou shall have time and leisure enough to say thy mind at large, when I have
dooen. The^ after ye rehersall of diverse and soondrie his benefits toward
Cinna how yt he had saved his life and pardoned him being found in ye ca^pe of
his enemies: The benefits of Augustus Caesar toward Cinna.
how that he had releassed and granted unto him al his whole patrimony and
inheriau^ce, (which of right he ought to hau^ forfaicted and lost) how that
over and besides this, he had ornated, enhau^ced or promoted him with the
dignitee of a prebe^de in a college of prestes: After ye rehersall of all these
things, he demanded for what cause Cinna thought him worthy to be killed.
Cinna being herewith utterly dismayed, Augustus in this manner ended his
chidyng. Well Cinna, now this is twyse that I perdone the of thy life, ones
before being mine open enemy, and now ye secounde time a werker of prive
treason against me, and gooyng about to destrui me thy natural prince. From
this day foorthward leat amitee and frendeship begin between us two, leat
us strive together, whether I have more feith fully to trust unto, given the
thy life, or thou bound unto me for the same. And forthwith he offreed unto
Cinna the Consulship. Will ye know the end what foloed? Caesar had of Cinna
from thensfoorth a veraye assured friend, and when Cinna dyed, was mad^ and
leaft his sole executour and heir. Neither was Augustus any more after that
day by any person living assaulted with any prive treason against his person.

Augustus used to say nay, in manner to no person that would desire him to
any banquette. Augustus used not to say nay, almost to any person that
would desire him to any feast or banquet.
And so being on a time received and entreteined by a certain person with a
veraye spare supper, and in manner cotidia^ or ordynarie fare, when he should
depart from the maker of the feast, he whispreed softely in his ear, nothing
but this: What Augustus said to one who had entreteined him at a spare supper.
I had not thought myself to be so familiare unto the. Some other prince would
have enterpreted such bare purueyau^ce to be a plain despite and mockage, but
Augustus ferthermore saved the honestee of the party that had desired him to
supper, ymputyng it unto familiaritee, and that in the parties ear, lest the
others might think niggardship to be vpbraided unto him, and cast in his
teeth. What thing may be more amiable then this courtesy, Augustus an high
and mighty prince.
in so great a Monarche, as at this day uneath thirty kings set to gether
were well hable thoroughly to match?

Being about to bye a piece of Tyros making, Tyros an ysle where y^ ^este
purple was made.
he found fault that it was over dark and sad of color. And when the
seller said, lift it up on high sir, and then look up to it: why the^ (quod
Caesar) to have the people of Room say that I goo well besee^ in mine
apparel, must I be fain to walk on ye solares or loftes of my house?

Augustus had a biddel veraye obliuius, whereas this sort of men ought
chiefly among all other things to be of especial good memories. What a
preatie quippe Augustus gave unto a biddel of his, being a feloe veraye
obliuious.
This biddelle being about to go unto ye guilde halle, demanded of the
Emperor, whether his pleasure were to command him with any service thither.
Marie (quod Caesar) take with the our letters of Letters of commendacion, he
mened lettres directorie, or lettres of address, that is to say, lettres that
should expressly contein as well the name of every person that he had any
matier unto, as also the message that should be dooen or said unto the same,
that the biddell might not faill though he were of himself forgettefull.
co^mendacio^, for thou know no man there. The propre office and duty of a
biddel
And yet is it ye proper office and duty of such biddelles (who were called in
latin Nomenclator, is a vocable co^pouned of y^ latin word, nom^ and of the
greek diccion (...) a caller, reherser, or rekener. So that nome^clatores were
those that we call bidelles. To whom peculiarly apperteined to know by heart
the names, ordres and degrees of all persons. For their office was ^o call and
reken up at times requisite all persons, as senator, alderman, comener,
Lord, knight, esquier, gentleman, yeoman, freeman, bondeman, and every party
according to his state, degree, hauour, office or occupacio^. As for exaumple,
in courts of justice, persons sued at the law, or in solemn feasts, (such
as in old time the consuls, the pretours, and other hedde officers of Room
made unto the citezens, and such as now in London and other cite^s and towns
of England the Maiour make does unto the inhabitauntes or y^ sergeau^tes at
the law when they be first created) the name^ of all the geastes, whom the
feaster must in the dinner time haill, salute, and welcome each party by his
name and according to his degree. The^ did also attend on such persons as
stood for the consulship^ the preatourship, the tribuneship or any other of the
chief offices at every change from year to year in Room, and when need was,
showed the party that sued for the office, the names of those persons whose
favor and voice the same should su^ and desire to have toward his eleccion
and creacion. Wherefore Cato is much praised in the histories, for that he
duly observed and kept y^ law, which law did forebidde that any such
byddelles should awaite on any person suynge for an office, but would yt every
such suter standing for any such magistrate, should know to salute and call
every citezen by his nam^ without the help of any byddelle to prompe him.
Such biddelles have every craft in London that know every person of that
craft that they belong unto, and their dwelling plac^s, their degrees, their
au^cientee, who be masters of y^ craft^ who have been wardens, and wardens
peers, who be bach^lers, who be in y^ liuerie, and who be not yet come to
it. Such^ biddelles have the vniuersitees, whose office is to know who ^een
regentes, and who none rege^^es, to present y^ inferior graduates to their
superiors at their circuites gooyng, or at disputacions, at taking degree of
school, at obites, at general processions, or at other acts scholasticall.
And to use and to place every person according to his degree. his auncientie
of standing, his dignitee, or his office. etc. And these biddelles may well
be called in latin nomenclatores.
Nome^clatores) to have perfect knowlage and remembreau^ce of the names, of
the surnames, and of ye titles of dignitees of all persons, to the end that
they may help the remembreaunce of their masters in the same when need is.
Of which propretee was their name given them too. For they were called,
Nomenclatores, by a word compouned of latin and greek mixed together.

Augustus being yet a young thing under man's state, touched Vatinius
feactely and after a pleasau^te sort. How Augustus touched one vatinius
sembleyng y^ he had clean shaken of the disease of the gout.
For this Vatinius being eiuil coumbreed with a spiece of the gout labored to
appear yt he had clean put a way that ympedimente, and made a proud braggue
that he could now goo a whole mile at a walk. I meruaill nothing there at (quod
Caesar) for the days are of a good length more then they were. Signifiyng the
other party to be not one whytte more free from the disease of the gout,
then he was, but the days to have weaxed longer.

be so far in debte, yt the su^me ammou^ted to two hundred thousa^de
crounes and above. And this had ye said knight during his life time kept
secret. So, when his gooddes was preised for to be sold, to the end that ye
creditours might be satisfied and paid of the money to be levied of ye sale,
Augustus willed and commanded the matresse or vnderquilte of ye knights own
bed chaumbre to be bought for him. The bed of a person being in great
debte is an vnrestefull thing.
And to his ge^tleme^ having meruaill at such commandment: It is a
necessary thing (quod Augustus) for me (to the end that I may take my natural
sleep in ye night) to have ye same mattresse on which that manne could take
rest and sleep being endebted for so great a sum of money. For Augustus by
reason of his great cares many a time and often passed over the most part of
the night without so much as one wynke of sleep. The high cures of a good
prince.


Cato surnamed the Vticensian had enhabited in his life time. Cato killed
himself at Utica that he might not come ali^e into the hands of Julius Caesar.
And so when one Strabo, for to flater Caesar, spoke many sore words against
the obstinacy of the said Cato, Cato the Uticensian, or Cato of Utica, was
Cato the elders soonnes soonnes soonne. This Cato the younger in the civil
battaill between Julius Caesar and Pompeius the great, took part with
Pompeius. And when Caesar begoonne to weaxe stronger and to preuaill, Cato
fled unto Utica (a town in Aphrica.xxx. miles from the cytee of Carthago)
and held the same with a strong garrison of men of war. And when he saw
that Caesar had conquered, and he must needs be taken, he killed himself
because he would not come alive into the hands of Julius Caesar. And because
he did this at Utica, he was surnamed Uticensi^. Cato of Utica, for a
distinccion from the other Cato his great graundefather. Read of this more in
the.xiii. apophthegme of Julius Caesar.
in yt he thought better to kille himself with his own hands, the^ to agnise
and knowlage Julius Caesar for his conqueror, He that is contented with the
present state of his time, is a good subject and an honest manne.
whatsoever person (quod Augustus) is unwilling to have ye present state of a
comme^weale, which is in his days changed or altreed, the same is both a good
citezen and membre of a commenweale, and also a perfect good honest manne.
With one sole saying, he both defended the memory of Cato and also spoke
right well for the safegarde and co^tynuaunce of himself, puttyng all persons
in fear from that day foorthwarde to set their minds on new chaunges. For
ye present state was by the words of Caesar called, not only the same that
was at that day when Augustus spoke these words, but the same also that had
tofore been in the time of the conspiresie against Julius Caesar. For this
latin diccion, praesens, among the right latin speakers, has respect unto
three times, that is to weete, the time past, the time that now is, and the
time to come. As for exaumple, we say in latin of a man that was not
contented with such things as were in his days, or in his time praesentibus
non erat contentus: This latin diccion praesens, may be referred unto the
time past, the time that now is, and the time to come.
we say also in latin, praesens uita, this present life that is now in
ledyng, and thirdly, of a thing at a more conueniente, apt, or propice time to
be dooen, we say in latin praesens in tempus omittatur, be it omitted or
leat alone unto a time to serve for it, that is to say, until a propice time
of oportunitee and occasion herafter to come.

Augustus had a great delight and fancy to find and make pastyme at others
with words of ieste consistyng within ye bounds of honestee, As Augustus had
a great delight to ieste at others, so would he veray^ patiently take m^rie
jesting again.
so would he wou^drefull pacie^tely take merry bourdyng (yea some times being
with ye largest and over plainly) either begone, orels reuersed back again upon
him. A certain young ge^tlemanne was come out of one or other of ye prouincies
unto Room, in the likeness of visage so mervaillously resembleyng the
Emperor, that he made all the people full and whole to gase on him. Augustus
being hereof advertised, commanded the said young gentleman to be brought to
his presence, and having well vieued the stranger, he examined or opposed
the same in this manner: Tell me young manne, has your mother never been here at
Room? No forsouth Sir, (quod ye other). And perceiuyng Augustus to ieste,
reuersed scoff for scoff, saying more over in this wise: How Augustus was
au^swered by a young gentlema^ne, whom he would have brought in suspicion to
be his soo^ne.
But my father has many a time and often? Augustus being pleasauntely
disposed, would fain have laid unto the young man's mother suspicion, as
though he had had his pleasure on her: but ye young manne with a tryce reuersed
that suspicion to the mother of Caesar, orels to his sus^ur: for the
resembleau^ce of the favor or visage did no more argue or prove ye party to
be the soonne of Caesar, then to be his brother, orels his neffewe, that is
to say, his sisturs soonne. For (except I ^ee much deceived) Erasmus wrote
it, sororis filium, and not, nepotem. For, nepos, is proprely the soonnes
soonne, or the daughters soonne, and no^ the brothers soonne, ne the sisturs
soonne, as Augustus himself was unto Julius Caesar, not nepos, but sororis
filius^ his sisturs soonne as before is said.

In ye time while ye The Triumuirate here mentioned was when three persons
being together confederated as sworn brethren, took into their hands by
usurpation the whole universal empier of Room to be egually divided emonge
them, and they to have the administracion, rewle, governance and ordreyng of
all things, and the one to maintein the other in all causes. Which begoonne
in the time of Julius Caesar, being so coupled with Pompeius the great, and
Marcus Cra^^us the rich.
Triumuirate And ended in the time of Augustus when the same fell to like
societee and composicion with Marcus Lepidus and Marcus A^tonius. Of which is
somewhat touched before ye first apophthegme of this Augustus. There were also
in Room diverse other triumuirates, of whom it were superfluous in this
present place to make any mention.
Octauius, Lepidus, and Antonius, all three together holdyng the empier of
Room in their hands as lords of the world,) Augustus had written a great
There was in Campania a town called Fescenium, the first inhabitauntes whereof
issued from the Atheniens (as Serui^s reports.) In this town was first
invented the ioylitee of mynstrelsie and syngyng merry songs and rymes for
making laughter and sport at marryages, even like as is now used to sing
songs of the Friar and the Nun, with other sembleable merry iestes, at
weddynges, and other feastynges. And these so^ges or rymes, (because their
original beginning issued out of Fe^senium) were called in Latin Fescennina
carmina, or Fescennini rythmi, or Versus. Which I do here translate
(according to our English proverb) a ragmans rewe, or, a bible. For so do
we call a long ieste that railleth on any person by name, or touches a
bodies honestee somewhat nere.
ragmans rewe, or bille, to be soung on Because ye name of Pollio is co^me^ to
many, I have thought good to admonyshe, that this Pollio was called Uedius
Pollio, alias Atedius Pollio, a familiare friend of Augustus. Of which Pollio
shall be spoken more at large in ye note of the.lix. ^pophthegme of this Augustus.
Pollio in derision and skorne of him by name. What Pollio said to Augustus,
who had written rymes and raillyng so^ges on him by name.
At the same time, well (quod Pollio) poor I hold my peace. For it is not for
mine ease, nor it is no matter of iape, to write rymes or raillyng so^ges on yt
person, in whose hands it lies to write a man out of all that ever he
has. Notyng the tyrannical power of Augustus. And yet was not the same
Augustus any thing offended with that frank and plain speaking of Pollio.

One Curtius a knight of Room, Curtius a knight of Room.
a ruffleer and one drouned in all kinds of ryotte and sensualitee, when he
supped on a time with Augustus, took up a lean bird of the kind of black
mackes out of the dishe, and holdyng it in his hand, he demanded of Caesar,
whether he might send it away. And when Caesar had thus au^swered, yes, why
should ye not? The other without any more bones cast me the bird (because it
was so caren lean) out at the wyndoore. Quickly taking an occasion to play
that merry toye of the ambiguitee or duble significacion of the latin word,
mittere, in english, to send. For meat is sent from a table unto men's
fre^des in y^ way of a preasent, A thing much used i^ Room to make dyshes
from their tables and send it to their fre^des.
which making of a dyshe at a feast was a thing among ye Romans at all
such seasons ordinary, and a thing (both by the significacion of the latin
diccion, The ge^tlenesse of Augustus in taking things dooen for mirth.
and also of the english) is sent a way, that is floung away. Yet was not
Caesar offended with this merry pranke neither.

Augustus, being not desired thereunto, Augus^us of his own mere mocio^
secretly paid.xx. thousa^de pou^des of debte for a senator of Room whom he
loved.
had of his own mere mocion satisfied and contented the debtes of a certain
Senator whom he had in right good favor, and loved veraye well, and had paid
down for him out of his cofers in ready money one hundred thousand crounes.
And the said Senator after yt he had knowelage thereof, wrote unto the Emperor
to give him thanks nothing else but this: To me not a penie. In the way of
mirth pretending as though he had had a querele to Caesar forthat, whereas he
had told out ready paime^te to all his creditours, How a c^rtain senator of
Room thanked Augustus for paiyng a great sum of money to his credi^ours.
he had given to him for his own part not a ferthyng. Such bourdyng as this,
some other eagre person would have enterpreted and taken for ingratitude and
unthankfulness, but this noble Emperor highly rejoiced, Augustus highly
rejoiced, if such as he favored, put their affiau^ce in him.
yt the Senator had so much confidence and trust in him, that he durst be
bold to write unto him after such a familiare sort.

Licinius, whom Caesar of his late Licinius of a bondeseruau^t made free by
Augustus and enfranchesed.
used even of an ordinary custom to give unto his old master, whenever
the same begoonne any new works of buildyng, great su^mes of money toward the
charges of it. Which custom Licinius still co^tinuyng, promised unto Augustus
against he should enter the ereccion of some new edifice what soever it was, one
hundred thousand crounes by a bille of his hand, in which bille, after the
su^me of money expressed, How Augustus served Licinius geuynge him by a bille
of his hand a certain su^me of money toward his buildyng.
(which was marked and set out with a capital lettre of C signifiyng an
hundred, and a long strieke above ye hedde of it, in this wise, C) which in
writing romain sums of money betokens so many thousand pieces of coin,
whether it be gold or silver, as the express letter^ dooen signify
hu^dreddes or scores there stood a space vacau^t. Caesar not refusyng such an
occasion, added an other.C. unto the former sum yt his late bondeseruaunte
now enfranchised had written, and so made it two hundred thousand, (in this
wise.CC.) fillyng up as trymme as a trencher ye space that stood void, with
his own hand, but forgeyng the lettre as like unto ye hand of Licinius as
could possibly be made. Where upon he received at the day of paime^te double
the sum of money that he should have dooen, Licinius making no countenance
at the matter, ne saying any word to it. But when Caesar not long after,
eftsons e^treed new buildings, his old seruau^te touched him a little
courtesy for yt fact, by making and geuyng him an other bille of his hand,
How Licinius served Augustus for doubleyng the sum of his bille of fre^ gift
made unto him.
of such purporte and tenor as follows: Souerain I shall depart with you
toward the charges of these your new buildings, as much as shall be your
pleasure to annoincte me. And did not expre(...) ^umme how much or how little
he would confer unto him, that it might be at his pleasure to put in the
bille as much as he would himself, forasmuch as he had dubleed the former
sum at the other time.

When Augustus was in the office Censura, in Rome was an office, that we call ye
high cou^stableship and he yt bare the office was called Ce^sor, high
counstable, or lord coumptroller his office was ^o enquier and examyn of all
persons how they demeaned theimselfes, and to punyshe tra^sgressours by his
discrecio^. We read of Censours that have deposed Senators from their estate,
for their mysdemeanure. The office co^^ynued in one man's hand v. years. And
ones in y^ year there was as it were a moustre of all the knights and
ge^tleme^n^ of Room, whishoulde pass through the vieu of ye Ce^sour. If any
were found a person woorth^e blame, he was punished at the discrecion of y^
Ce^sour. And if y^ case so required he was deposed also from the order of
knighthood.
Censour, that is to say, of lord Coumptroller, or high Cou^stable. A certain
knight of Room was by the way of complainte presented unto him, that he had
decayed and wasted his substance. But ye knight being brought to his
answer, made due prouf that he had contrary wise emended and encreaced his
substance. And even in ye neck of this, it was laid to the charge of yesame
knight yt he had disobeied the laws biddyng each manne to marrye a wife. But
he made his declaracio^, and brought in his trial, yt he was father of three
children of his own body begotten by his lawful wife. Whereupon the said
knight thought not himself well, nor held him contented for to be freely quite
and discharged of these crimes, but vpbradyng unto Caesar his lightness of
geuyng credence to reports and enformacio^s said moreover in this manier:
Fro^hensforth Caesar when thou make enquierie of honest persons, give it in
co^missio^ to men of honestee. After a metely plain sort pronou^cyng, that
those we^ no honest feloes, which had presented unto him things manifestely
untrue. And by ye way laiyng shrewdly to the Emperors own charge, in that he
made and autorised such surmuisers and piekers of quereles to be his
deputies, or to represe^te his person. And this large talkyng also Caesar
perdoned for the respect and in consideracion that the party was innocente
and giltelesse.

Being in a certain mainour How a ^ertain souldyer aue^turer served Augustus
not rewardyng him according to his expectacion.
he took veraye eiuill rest in the nights, by reason of an oule, breakyng
his sleep every half hour with her oughlyng. A launceknight or a souldyour
auenturer being well skilled in foulyng took the peines to catch this
oulette, and upon hope of some veraye high reward brought the same unto
Augustus, who, after gannyng him thank, commanded a thousand Nummus, in
y^.xxx.xxxv and.xxxvi. apophthegmes is taken for pieces of gold and here it is
taken for brass pens, orelles pieces of silver of the value of a dandipratte
or i. d. ob. a piece or thereabout so that the thousand pieces were much about
the sum of twenty nobles sterlynges The French enterpretour translateth it
five and twenty crounes.
pieces of money to be given him in reward. The other party (because he
thought the reward over small) was not afeard, but had the heart to say unto
the Emperor: Nay, yet had I rather she live still, and with that word leat
go ye bird again. What person can but maruaill, that such a soulain froward
pra^ke should escape unpunished in the souldyour auenturer?

Augustus even as he went in the open street, desiryng him of his aid, and to
help to stand between him and harm in the court before the judge. Caesar out
of hand appoincted to go with the feloe in his stead one of his chief
ge^tleme^ purposely chosen out of his own train, who^ he required and charged
in ye suitors cause to do his true diligence. At these words ye souldyour
criyng out with an open mouth, said: I wys Caesar, when ye were in daungier at
ye battaill of Actium the peake of the country of Epirus (yt is to say) an
high mountain to the seawarde such an on^ as saint Michaels mou^te in
Cornewal) where Augustus discoumfaicted Antonius and Cleopatra, and after ten
hours fightyng destruied on the sea five thousand men, and took all the
navy of Antonius to the noumbre of three hundred ships. Antonius being so
put to flight, Augustus recovered also his army that tarryed the coming of
Antonius on the land to the noumbre of.xviii. legions of footmen and two and
twenty thousand horsemen. At this Actium after the vanquyshyng of Antonius
and Cleopatra, Augustus builded a city which of that same victory was call
Nicopolis, for (...) is a victory, and (...), a city. In this city of
Nicopolis was there a noble templ^ consecrated unto Apollo. And the city a
free city, inhabited with men of Augustus his sendyng thither.
Actiu^, I did not seek for a deputy or assigney to fight in my stead, but I
fought for you mine own hands, and even with the words speaking, discovered
the marks of wooundes received in ye said battaill. Caesar showed a red
pair of chekes, and went eue^ in his own person to help him in his cause,
much afeard lest he should seem not only proud, but also unthankful,
toward such persons ^a had dooen him true and feithfull service.

He had on a time at a supper of syngyng children brought purposely to sing
before him by one Turonius Flaccus, yt brought the^ up in it for ye nones to
geat money by them, and had given to the same for their reward wheat, whereas
his guyse was to give unto others large rewards of money. And so when Caesar
an other day at supper required to have yesame boys again to sing before him,
Turonius thus made an excuse: How Turonius Flaccus made au^swer unto Augustus
requiryng to have his boys sing be^fore him, to whom he had given in reward
before, not money but wheat.
In feith (quod he) they are at the mill. Upbraidyng unto Caesar his gift of
corn instead of money. Neither had he any punyshement for the word that he
had spoken, being not a man of arms that did contynuall service in ye
Emperors wars, but a lewd brynger up and seller of boys.

When he returned to Room Actium, among a great multitude meetyng him for to
welcome him home, a certain person hearing on his fist a crow having been
taught to speak these words: Augustus gau^ a great su^m^ of money for a
crow that had learned to speak.
All haille Caesar Emperor most victorious: Augustus being much delited with
this salutacion, bought the crow, and gave six thousa^de pieces of gold for
him. The partener of him yt had dooen this feacte, because no portion of yt
liberal reward had come to his snapshare, did Caesar to weete that ye
selfsame feloe had yet an other crow too, which he beesought of Caesar that
ye feloe might be compelled to bring before him. When she was brought, she
sou^ed out plainly such words, as she had learned, which were these: The
goodness of Augustus in complaints or informacions presented of malice and
envy.
All haille Antonius most redoubted co^querour. Augustus being nothing
stiered to anger, only commanded the reward before given to be egually
parted with the feloe that was ye promotour of ye later crow. Because he
perceived that his complaint^ had proceeded of mere malice and envy.

Augustus being se^bleably hailled or saluted by a popiniaye, Augustus bought
diverse birds that saluted him as they were taught to speak,
commanded her to be bought too. And meruaillyng at ye same thing in a pie,
bought her up also. This exau^ple would not suffer a certain poor souter to
be in rest, until he must take in hand ye making of a crow to a likemaner
salutacion. Who when he had clean beggered himself with expenses, would ever now
and then thus say unto the bird, when it would not say after him: both our
labor and all our cost is lost. Yet in process of time at last by reason of
contynuall beatyng it in to ye crow, he made ye same eue^ by strong hand that
she could soune the salutacio^ so often recited unto her. And when she had
therewith salued Augustus as he passed by, Tushe tushe (quod Caesar) we have
enough of such saluters as this at home already: Anon the crow recorded also
the other words which she had so often heard, How Augus^us bought a crow
that a poor souter had taught to salute him.
brought out them also in this manner, both our labor and al our cost is
lost. C^sar laughyng hertely thereat, commanded a great dele more to be paid
for her the^ he had given for any such bird tofore.

A poor greek poet (to crepe in Augustus Caesar, used this facion. Ever when
the Emperor should come down from his palaice, the poet would exhibit unto
him some Epigramme or other in his honor and praise. How Augustus served a
poor Greek poet geuyng him epigra^mes of Greek and how he was served of him
again.
And when he had often times so done in vain, and Augustus saw yt he would not
leave, he wrote out with his own hand a well made Epigramme of Greek, and
sent it to the poet approaching to meet him, as one entendyng to recompe^se
verses with verses. The Greek having received the Emperors Epigramme, read it,
and not only in words, but also with countenance and with gesture of body
praised the same, and made much woundreyng at it. And afterward when he had
approached to the littre that Caesar rode in, puttyng down his hand in to his
thredebare pouche nigh penylesse, he took out a grote, or two or three, and
put it in ye hand of Caesar, with these words: not accordyngly as your
estate requires o Augustus, but if I had more, more would I give, When all
that were present had taken up a laughter thereat, The liberalitee of Augustus
toward learned me^ne.
Caesar called his pursebearer or coferer, and commanded him to deliver unto
the poet an hu^dreed thousa^de pieces of gold. Niggardship in open presence
cast in the nose of the Emperor happed well for the Greeks part.

Iulia the daughter of Augustus, when she came on a time to do her duty
unto her father, perceived his yies to be offended with her over wanto^ and
staryng araie though he would nothing say to it. Augustus offended with his
daughter Iulia for going in over dissolute araie.
Wherefore the next day following, her apparel changed into a more sad
sort, she enbraced her father. Then Caesar, who had kept in his grefe the day
before, was not hable likewise to keep in his joy and gladness, but said: how
much better does this sad sort of apparellyng become the daughter of
Augustus. The young lady had an au^swer ready quickly: The ready answer of
Iulia to Augustus for e^c^synge her gorgeous going in her apparel.
Forsouth (says she) I have this day trymmed my self to please the yies of
my father, and my yesterdayes array was to please my housbande.

At a certain sight of fightyng The diuersite^ of ye trains awaiting on Liuia
the mother, and Iulia ye daughter
^iuia the mother and Iulia the daughter had turned the yies of all the people
on them twain, by reason yt their trains were so far unlike, the one to the
other. About the person of Liuia awaited a coumpaignie of men sage and
aunciente, Of Iulia read more in the.lxiii, apophthegme.
Iulia came accoumpaignied with a sort of lusty young rufleers and wild
merchauntes. Augustus therefore by lettres admonyshed his daughter Iulia, to
mark what great difference and odds there was between two women of high
estate She wrote to her father again: The au^swer of Iulia unto her father
Augustus aduertisyng her of her ryotious c^u^paignie of servants.
well, and these folks shall be old too, when I am. This answer if one do
interpret it in ye good part, may^ seem feactely and proprely made, if to the
wurst, without either shame or grace.

Iulia begoonne somewhat with the soonest to have white hears in her hedde.
Iulia the daughter of Augustus bego^ne to have a whytehedde somewhat with the
soonest.
And ye soudain coming in of Caesar upon her, took unawares the women, that
had ke^bed her hedde, as they were piekyng up her white hears and took upon
their clothes diverse of the hears that they had plucked out of his daughters
hedde. How Augustus rebuked his daughter Iulia for pluckyng ye white hears out
of her hedde.
This matier Augustus made as though he had not known. And the (...) a preatie
while passed forth with communicacio^ of other matiers, at last he brought in
mention of old age. And by this occasion he demanded of Iulia whether she had
lieffer in process of a few years to have an hoar white hedde, orels to be
altogether balde. And when she had thus made answer: forsouth father of ye two
I had rather to have a white hedde: Why then (said he) dooen these damyselles
all yt they may to make the clean balde before thy time? With this preatie
inuencion subtly devised, he took her tardie with a plain lie.

To a certain friend of hirs a counsel to frame hirself after the exaumple of
her fathers soobre and aunciente manner of living the same Iulia answered
pertely enough again: What Iulia said to an au^cie^t saige manne exhortyng her
to ye frugalitee of of her father.
he does not remember (quod Iulia) tha^ ^is an Emperor, but I do remember
that I am an Emperors daughter.

Augustus setting two iesters together forto play their merry parts in
gesturyng the one after the other by course, called the one of them a daunser
and the other a stopper. Because the one was out of measure full of his knackes
and toys, and the other (which when he should countrefaict to do after
him, as he had dooen before could come nothing ^igh to his facions) seemed to
do nothing but to make pauses, and stop or let him of his daunsyng.

Tarraco^, How Augustus reproved the ^laterie of the Tarraconians, bryngyng
him tidings that a date tree was grown up in his altar.
for a glad token of prosperous fortune, bryngyng him tidings that in his
altar was sprongen and grown up a palmetree: thereby (quod Augustus) full well
appears how often ye do sacrifice of incense in our honor. That they
would feign have attributed unto the gods as a miracle, he imputed to their
negligence, who seldom or never did sacrifice of burning incense in the altar
of Caesar. Tarraconia, a country of Spain now called Aragousie. Tarracon, the
chief city of that country, where was an altar consecrated to Augustus
Tarraconenses, the inhabitau^tes of Tarracon.


The Same Augustus when the Galls Dolobella prouyng his mind in sport, How
Augustus avoided Dolobella asking a golden chain of him.
proceeded in merry co^municacion, till at the last he said, Sir Emperor I
pray you give me this chain: Nay, (quod Augustus) I had rather I might give
you a garlande A garla^de ciuike, was called in latin ciuica corona, which
one citezen having been rescued and saved from killyng in battaill made and
gave to another citezen by whom he was so rescued and saved as a testimonial
of his life saved when he should (but for the others aid and help have been
slain. And this garlande was of more honor then a^y other gift by manhood
and prowess marcyall to be acheued, (saving only corona graminea a garlande
of grass, otherwise called corona obsidionalis, a garlande obsidionall, which
was given to that person, who by his aid and rescue had saved ye whole
universal army of the Romans being besieged and besette or on every side
environed with their enemies.) And yet we^ there many garlandes given in
battaill of much more price and value then either of both aforesaid, as may
appear by the words of Plynius, which I have thought good here to set
because it makes to the declaracion and understanding of this place. The
garlande ciuike (says Plynius) at y^ first was of holme, afterward it was
more fansied to have it made of Oken leaves with acornes. There belo^ged unto it
many co^dicio^s, and many circumtaunces were required, he that should have it
must be one which first of all gettyng up to the walls of the town that he
fights for in his own country has slain whatsoe^er person was so hardy
to entreprise brekyng in. And one that had more desire to save the life of one
of his own cou^treemen and feloes, then to slay his enemy. And how that
the same place where the deed was dooen the enemies was like to have enjoyed
the same day. And that the party so saved confess the same with his own
mouth, other wise witnesses dooen nothing auaill, and that he were a citezen of
Room Other for^ner coming to succor and aid the Romans g^ue not that
honor though one save a king. Neither does the same honor ^asse the commen
rate in dignitee though the high capitain be sembleaby rescued and saved. For
the first found^^s would the highest of all to be in any y^ were a citezen
whatsoever he were. A ciuike garla^d once received, it was lawf^l^ for him that
had i^ ones given, to wear all daie^ of life af^^^. If h^ came to any commen
plays or open sightes, it is ye guise even yet still that reverence be dooen
to him, yea eue^ of the Senate. He had authoritee to sit in the seats next
unto the Senate. He was exempted and chartreed or priuileged from be^ryng
alman^r offices of charge both for himself, and his father and his fathers
father.
ciuike, or I will rather give you a garlande ciuike. After a pleasant witty
sort did he put back ye vnshamfastnesse of one that craved to have a
reward, and yet had never been in battaill (where he might deserve a reward,)
and therefore a garlande ciuike was more meet for him, A garlande ciuike made
either o^ holy, or else of oken leaves.
which was wont to be made of oken leaves, and of holme leaves, as the
garlande triumphal of gold. Albeeit, as well castrensis corona, otherwise called
uallaris corona, the garlande which was given by the high Captain of the
Romans unto him that first had entreprised to break into the camp and
tents of the enemies and over their trenches in the felde^ as also corona
muralis, the garlande murall, ^whiche was the said graunde Capitain conferred
to such person, as at the a^^aulte of any town or fortress had first
scaled the walls, and braste into the town or holds of the enemies,) and
corona naualis other wise called corona rostrata, ye garland that was given to
him that in battaill on the sea had first bourded any ship of their enemies,
or else subdued any pirates,) every on^ of them ordinaryly made of gold. Of
which matier see Aulus Gellius in the sixth chapitour of the fifth volume. And
the garlande ciuike, The garla^de ciuike of more honor the^ any thing of gold
that was given for reward in battaill.
as a reward of more honor then any other, Augustus offreed in sport to
Dolobella. For Suetonius tells that the same Augustus (among the gifts, where
with men of arms were rewarded for any worthy act or feacte dooen in
war) used of a custom much sooner to give golden trappour or bardes for
horses, and chains and what so ever thing else was made of gold and silver,
the^ garlandes vallares, ^ugu. would much sooner give rew^rdes of gold to his
men of arms, then garlandes ciuike or mural yt were made of leaves.
and muralles, which (as touching honor) were far above ye other things.
Which thing except one do know, the merry saying of Augustus has no grace
in the world. Albeeit as touching the stuff whereof every of the said
garlandes was made, Gellius and Suetonius do square and disagree.

What Augustus ^eied of Room, by him beautified and for^^^ed.
and had also for many years to come, as much as in him lay, made yesame suer
and safe from all daungiers, Not^yng to a prince may be more royal, the^ if he
make y^ state of his realm better then it was ere it come to his hande^.
being proud thereof not without cause, he would often say: I found Room
made but of brick, and I will leave it of marble. Nothing to a prince may be
more magnificente or regal, the^ if the same do meliora^^ and bettre ye state
of a dicion or royalme descended and come to his possession.

When one of his me^ne of war How Augu^gustu^ put of two ympudente cr^uers
at ones.
) and he had espied besides him one Martianus also coming a pase toward him,
who^ he mystrusted, yt he for his part too would beg hard on him ere he
would have a nay, he said: I will no more do that you desire (good feloe
mine,) the^ that thing which Martianus goes about to crave on me.

It was ye law in Room, that The law for such as killed their fathers.
should be made fast in a A law was made in Room by Pompeius (and was of his
name called, Lex Pompeia) that if any person wrought the actual deed of
killyng his father or his soonne, either pri^ely or ap^rte, the same should b^e
sewed or fast knitte in a poke of sac^^cloth, together with a live doggue, a
cock, an adder and an ap^, and so should be cast into the sea if there we^
any nigh to the place, orels into the river: to the end that being enbr^ked
and hampered in the mids of those mortal streighte^, he might even in his
life time begin to lack the use of all the elements, and that the aier
should be taken away from him while he were alive, and the earth when he were
dedde.
sack, o^ (and so cast into ye river. And yet was not this punyshemente
executed, but upon the party having first confessed the case. Augustus
therefore to the entente that he would help save from the most grievous
tormente of ye foresaid punyshemente a person arrained at ye bar for killyng
his own father, that all ye world knew to be so in deed, used this manier
of examynyng and laiyng ye matier against him: In feith (I think for all this)
thou did not kill thy father. The cleme^cie and gracious^nesse of Augustus
in ministryng the law.
Dooyng enough to him for to make him say nay in ye matier. So great was the
fauourablenesse of this prince in ministryug the law.

Hastyng and want of discrecio^ ye wurst propre^ees y^ m^^^ be in a good
Captain.
then over much hastyng, and vnauisednesse, and he had almost ever in his
mouth this saying of greek (...). (...), make haste fair and softely, or speed
the fair and softely.
That is, hasten fair and softely. For much better is the Captain that will
be sure of his matiers ere he goo about them, then he that is of courage to
ieoperd at all auentures. Of which matier I have said at large in my work of
proverbs, which is entitleed Chiliades. The proverb, speed the fair and
softely, ^s a lesson of cou^saill whereby all persons, and especially princes,
rewlers and Capitains are admonyshed, Primum co^sulto: at ubi consulueris,
mature opus est facto.
in dooyng of thyn^ges both to adhibite or show the quick spedyng of
ac^^uitee, and also the slownesse of diligence and circumspection, according to
that the saying of Sallustius: needful it is first to take good deliberacion,
and as soon as you hatt ones consulted, expediente it is, not to fors^ow^ the
time of dooyng when it comes.

Unto his wife Liuia making in: Augustus wol^ not grant unto Liuia to have a
certai^ ^alle incorporated citeze^ of Room.
he gave a plain nay, but yt the same Galle should enjoy the priueleges and
fra^chesses of Room, (as if he had been a citizen i^ deed,) he granted her
of his own mocio^ undesired: Augu^tus would not make the honor of y^ city of
Room over common.
allegyng that he could be much better contented to have of his own rentes
and cofers abated, the^ the honor of the city of Room to be made over
commune. As one that preferred the dignitee or high estate of the commenweale,
before his own singular advantage. Augustus preferred the dig^itee of the
comme^ weal before his own si^gulare auaun^age.


When he saw at an oracio^ or palliatos, instead of, pullatos as I suppose
verayly ye books of Suetonius should be) clad in great large capes or
mantelles, being veraye sore moved therewith and in an high fume, lo (says
he) these here been our Roomaines, the lords of the world, and woonte in
times past to goo in au^ciente side gounes^ Augustus studied to bring up again
in Room the aunciente, facions decayed.
So greatly did he study and labor to call back again and to renew y^ old
aunciente facions, y^ it grieved his heart to see the old gooyng in apparel,
and garments changed.

Unto ye people making great How Augustus answered the people of Room
co^plainyng of y^ scarcitee and dearth of wine.
he said, that by reason of great abundance of waters co^ueighed to run
out of new counduictes lately made by Agrippa his soo^ne in law, there was
sufficient provision made, yt men neded not to be in thirste. In deed
Agrippa bestowed all his study and diligence, from all places that could be,
to provide for ye city of Room to have abundance of waters. Agrippa made
many new counduictes in Room for the conueighaunce of water to the city.
And Augustus on the other side, did sharply call back the people from wine to
water.

Timagines a writer of histories Caesar, The incomparable cleme^cie and
graciousnesse of Augustus toward one Timagenes a writer of histories and
chronicles.
many slau^derous words by his wife, and many naughty words by all his
whole family. Augustus sent him a gentle warnyng to keep a better tongue in his
hedde, and to use it more sobrely. And where the feloe persisted and held on
still to make eiuill report, and to speak the wurst, Caesar did nothing else
in ye world but forbid him his house. Well, Timagines solemnly before
audience read over certain books which he had written co^teinyng the acts or
chronicles of Augustus, Timag^nes for hatered of Augustus bur^ed y^ books
which he had written of his ^hronicle.
and when he had perused them, he cast them in ye fire, and burned them, for
hatered of Caesar as one couetyng to suppress and extinguyshe for ever, the
memorial of things from time to time dooen by the same. Yet for all this did
not one of yt citeze^s of Room keep out of his doors the said Timagines thus
openly and stiffely showing contynuall enmitee against Caesar. In the house of
Pollio Asinius he continued till he was a veraye aged manne, and yet did
Augustus never so much as give one foul word unto Pollio, in whose house his
enemy was lodged and entreteined, The lenitee of Augustus toward Pollio
Asinius.
saving yt one time he said unto him only thus: (...), yt is, ye feed in your
house a beast, or a serpe^te, (as if he should have s^ied, your house is a den
or cave for a se^pente.) And anon where Pollio addressed him self to make his
purgacio^ or excuse, Caesar broke his tale, saying: Nay, my friend Pollio,
take ye fruicion of him hardely, take the fruicion of him. But when Pollio not
being yet clean out of fear, said, sir Emperor, if ye so command, I will
ere I drink forbid him my house. Why, (quod Augustus) thynkest thou that I
will so do, which have bee^ the manne that ones made you at one? For this
Pollio had aforetyme been angrye and foul out with Timagenes, and had none
other cause to surceasse his maugre, but that Caesar begoonne to take
displeasure with the said Timagenes. When Augustus begoo^ne to take displeasure
with Timage^es, then begoo^ne P^llio to be his friend.
So ye graciousnesse of this prince took in good gree the eiuill will of
both the said parties against him.

Augustus to suppe at the house of one Of the strange crueltee of this A^edius
Pollio, alias Uedius Pollio, Plynius (in the.xxiii. chapitour of the nynth
volume, treactyng of the nature of Lamproyes) speaks in this manner. Uedius
Pollio a knight of Room, and one of the familiare friends of Augustus Caesar,
devised and inverted in this fyshe, exaumples and ways how to do cruel
tormente, castyng into close pondes and stews of them, the live bodies of
bondemen condemned to dye, not as though the wild beasts of the earth being
for such purpose vnsufficiente, but forbecause in any other kind he might not
stand and look upon while a live manne were toren piece mele in all the members
^ par^es of his body at ones. Against the same Pollio for the same crueltee
does Sen^ca also sore inueigh.
Atedius Pollio, alias Vedius Pollio. The strange so^te of crueltee, that
^te^iu^ Pollio v^ed, in castyng his s^ruauntes (if they displeased him^ ali^e
unto live ^a^proyes which he kept in a stewe.
And one of the bondpaiges of this Pollio had by chance broken a drynkyng
glass of crystalle stone. Anon was commau^deme^te given that the paige should
at ones be had away, and cast to his lamproyes. The lacke^ ran for succor
and fell down at the feet of Caesar, myndyng to desire of him nothing else in
ye world, but that he might dye some other kind of death then to be cast
alive unto the live lamproyes. Caesar being moved with the vnquod manner of
crueltee, commanded both the boy to be leat goo, and also as many cups or
other vessel of crystalle as were in ye house, to be broken in pieces before
his face eu^ry one of them, and ye stewe (where the lamproyes were kept) to be
filled up with the same instead of the boy. And as for his friend Pollio he
grievously rebuked, The sore rebuke yt Augustus gave unto Pollio for his
crueltee.
saying: why, art thou such an one so lordely, to bid away with thy men
in all haste even from thy table, and to be gnawe^ piece mele with a torme^te
of a new sort never see^ before? If it chance a scalde cup of thyn to be
broken, shall the bouelles and guts of a man be toren in pieces for it?
Will you so highly stand in thyn own conceipte, The pietee and merciful
co^passio^ of Augustus toward men.
or take upon the as to command any body to be had to death or torments in
such place where Caesar himself is present?

Corduba a city in Spain where Seneca the Philosophier, and the poet Lucanus
were born.
where unto the charge of one Aemilius Elianus of Corduba among other crimes
moo it was laid even as one of ye principal matiers against him, that he was
a speaker of eiuill by Caesar: Augustus turnyng to ye accuser, said: The
clemency of Augustus toward ^emilius Elianus accused for speaking words
against him.
I would have the to bring me in prouffes of that, and I shall make Elianus to
know that I have a tou^g too as well as he, and I will tell as many good tales
of him again, I warraunt him. And being contented with this manacyng, he made
no ferther enquierie at all against the said Elianus.

Tiberius ofte^tymes by lettres wrathefully complainyng on such persons as were
reporters of eiuill by Augustus, This Tiberius suc^^ded Augustus.
the same Augustus wrote lettres again, How Augustus answered Tiberius
wr^thefully complainyng of persons reportyng eiuill by him.
yt he should not in yt matier be over eagre as men of his age were wont to
be. For it is enough (quod he) if we have the matier at this poincte, yt noma^
is hable to do us any harm.

He never commended his soonnes How Augustus used to commend his sons to ye
people.
but with this excepcion: if they shall deserve it and be found worthy.
Myndyng and willing that honor should be deferred and given not unto
autoritee, but unto merits and deserts.

He had banyshed out of court Iulia his daughter, and Iulia his daughters
daughter, Augustus banyshe^ out of his court Iulia his daughter, and Iulia his
daughters doughte^ and A^rippa for their lewdness and v^thriftynesse.
yea, and after that Agrippa also, before adopted and made his heir apparaunte,
and afterward (because of his beastely and fierce or vnrewlie facions) cast of
again. At all times whenever was made any mention of these three, he would
customably cry out with this verse of Homere. (...). What Augustus would say
when any me^cio^ was made either of Iulia his daughter, or Iulia his nice, or
of Agrippa, and what name he gave the^.

That is, Oh, would god, would god, that my chance had been,
To live single, and dye without children.
Neither used he to call ye said three persons by any other name, but three
rotten apostemes, or three rennyng sores of his, orels his three cancres. For
he could much more pacientely take the death of his children and kinsfolks,
August^ could better take ye death of his children, then their dishonor.
then their dishonor. Yea, and ferthermore he provided ^^ his last will, yt,
in case any thing should chance unto Iulia his daughter or Iulia his nice
other wise then well, Augustus would not have his daughter Iulia to be ^o^bed
with him.
neither of them both should be buiryed under his toumbe.

Augustus would not have any thing made of him in writing, but after a
substancial sort, and of the best dooers.
but after a substanciall sort and by the principal best dooers. And to ye
justices he signified his pleasure, yt they should not suffer any poincte of
vilanie to come unto his name by ye meetings and coming to gether of iesters
or of commen plaiers of entreludes. In deed in this behalf cousyn to
Alexander. Before in the xxxiiii. apophthegme of Alexander.
And certes meet it is for the autoritee of a prince, euerywhere to be
maintained in his royal estate, without any manner spotte or touch of
derogacion.

Another certain Isle lyyng Capreae, aru^, is a little Isle beyond the town of
Surrentu^ in the royalme of Naples, which royalme of Naples is in latin
called Campania.
Capres (into the which such of Caesar's court were wont to depart for a
season, How Augustus named a ly^le I^le lyyng nigh to ye Isle of Capres.
as were desirous to se^iourne and repose theimselues) he commenly used to call
in greek, (...) as if ye should say in english, the city of dooelitle. For
the greek word (...) souneth in english, vacacion or reftyng from all
buisynesse.

When he perceived and feled What Augustus demanded of his fre^des a little
before his death.
he enquiered of his familiares being leat into his chau^bre to come and see
him, whether it seemed to them, yt he had any thing handesomely enough played
his part in passing his life. Menyng of ye trade and course of this present
life which many writers dooen resemble and compare unto plaiyng a part in an
entrelude. And then pronounced he this greek verse following, customably used to
be sou^gen at ye last end of comedies exhibited and played to an end. (...).
That is. Clappe hands, in sign of contentacion,
And with good heart, allow this our accion.


THE SAYINGS OF JULIUS CAESAR.
Julius Caesar, when he fled from Sylla, Sylla a senator of Rome and a man of
great power who made civil ba^tail with Marius, and vanquished, and afterward
weaxed a cruel tyranae.
being yet but eue^ a striepleyng under man's state, came by chance into the
hands of pirates being Cilicians. And at the first when the same Pirates had
named the sum which they would require of him for his ransom, he laughed
the thieves to scorn, Cilicians, the people of Cilicia, which is a region in
in Asia y^ less ioynyng unto Syria, a goodly champian country.
as fools that knew not what manier feloe they had taken priesoner, and
promised of his own offer to give them double their asking. So, the time
gooyng on, whereas he was safely kept and watched while the money was in
fetchyng he would charge them to keep silence, The hault stomach of Julius
Caesar, being but a young ma^ne.
and to make no noise that might trouble him while he was slepyng. Unto the
same pirates he would ever read such oracions and verses as he wrote being
there, which his makynges if they did not in the best manier allow, he would
call them asses and barbarous fools, and with laughter would threten to hang
them one day on ieobettes which thing he did in deed too. For being leat
goo ymmediatly upon the bryngyng of the money which the pirates patyshed for
his ransom, Caesar hanged up y^ pirates by whom he had been taken priesoner^
men and ships gotten together out of ye country of Asia, he caught the
selfsame robbers, and hanged them up, but first hedded, yt the seueritee might
not be vntempreed with mercy. Julius Caesar most like in facio^s unto
Alexander the great.
Do ye not here even at the first chop see and know of old the nature and
facions of Alexander the great, to whom no mean thing could be enough?
Because the words of Plutarchus in the life of Julius Caesar seem to give no
small light to the understanding of this present place. I have thought it
worthy y^ dooyng to annexe the same at large. Silla rewelyng the roste, and
bearyng all the stroke in Rome (says Plutarchus) was in mind and will to
take away from Caesar Cornelia the daughter of Cinna the dictatour, (that is
to say, the lord great master, or the lord co^maunder) Which thing when
he could neither for fear ne for hope, that is to say, neither by foul
means, nor by fair menes bring to pass, he stopped her dourie as forfaicted
to the chaumbre of the city. As for the cause of enmitee between Caesar and
Sylla, was the allyaunce of Marius and Caesar. For Marius the elder had to wife
Iulia the aunte of Caesar of whom was born Marius the younger Caesar's cousyn
germain (they two being sisters children.) When (Sylla setting and bestowyng
his mind, care, and study about other matiers after the doing to death and
slaughter of many a person in the time while he reigned (Caesar saw himself
to be nothing at all regarded of him, yet did not the same Caesar shrynke, ne
spar^ being even a very child of age, to step to the people, and to enter
suite with them for the obteinyng of a room, dignitee, or promocio^ in the
order or college of prestes, which dignitee he was put besides and could not
obtein, by reason that Sylla was not his friend, but against him in his suite.
Sylla continually from that time foorthward deuisyng and co^sultyng how to
destroy Caesar and to rid him out of the way, where certain persons
avouched to be contrary to all reason and conscience to do such a young
boy to death, Sylla affermed them all to be more then mad, if they did not
in that one boy alone espy many s^che as Marius. When this saying came to
Cesars ear, he went for a space about from place to place and lay hidden
among y^ Gabines (a people in Italy not far from Room) afterward, while he
nightely removed from one lodgyng to another though he were veraye sickely, it
chaunsed him to come into the hands of Sylla his sodyours then scouryng the
country to take al such persons as lay lurkyng there in any place, and at
the hand of Cor^elius the capitain of the said launceknightes he raunsomed
himself for two talentes. Upon this, taking his way to the sea, he took
passage over into Bithynia (a regio^ of Asia y^ lesser butty^g fore right
against Thracia) unto Nicomedes the king there, with whom no long time having
made abode, as he went down from thens, he was taken about Pharmacusa (a little
Isle in the sea of Salamin not far from the region of Attica) by a sort of
pirates, which at that present season with great ships of war, and with
whole nauies out of noumbre held and kept the possession of all the se^s
about. By whom when at the first were ^^maunded of him tw^ntie talente^ for his
ransom, he mocked them, for that they knew not what manner a man they had
taken, and therefore of himself he pro^ised to give them fifty t^lentes^ Then
sendyng his folks abroad some to one city and some ^o another for spedie
leuiyng of the said money, himself remained priesoner among the most
vncourtise Cilicians, with one and no moo of his familiare frende^, and two
servants. But as for the said Cilicians he ha^ in so vile reputacion, that
as often as he was disposed to lay him down to sleep, he would send one
straightly to charge and commau^de them to keep silence and to make no noise.
And making demourre there emonges them with grea^e suffreaunce forty days
lackyng two^ and vsyng them not as kepers but as servants and garders of his
body, he would provoke them now at gamyng, now with proving one or other
maisterie, otherwhiles writing verses and oracions he would desire them to
geu^ him the hearing of the same, and if they did not highly esteem his doings,
he would plainly without any courtesy call them foole^ or loutes and
barbarous feloes, ^hretenyng them under the cloak of laughyng and sportyng to
hang them every one on the galoes^ In which things they like fools took
^reate joy and pleasure, as attributyng all that plain and frank speaking
unto iestyng and simplicitee. And ymmediately upon the bryngyng of the money
for his ransom from the town of Miletu^^, and the deliverance of the same
being set again at his libertee, a navy of ships even with a tryce
furnyshed and set out from the haue^ of the Milesians, he made upon these
pirates, whom lyyng yet still at rode with their navy al at rest and quiet
about the said Isle, he took and subdued almost every one. And so al their
gooddes and money taken from them, he laid the feloes fast and s^ere in irons
at Pergamus, (a toun^ in Asia and a province of the Romans) and went unto
Julius the chief Justice having at that time the ordreyng of the province of
Asia, unto whom it belonged to punyshe such as were taken for any trespace. But
the said Julius rather having yie unto the money, (for it was no small sum)
said that he would at leisure see what was to be dooen with the persons whom
he had taken. Wherefore Caesar, when he saw his time biddyng him farewell, took
his journey unto Pergamus, and hanged me all the said thieves on ieobettes from
the first to the last, accordyngly as he had often times made promise unto them
while he abode in the Isle. etc.

When he made suite and labor There was in Room of old antiquitee a certain
college, y^ is to say, a coumpaignie or feloship of magistrates, to who^
appertei^ed the ordreyng, ministreyng, execuiyng and iudgeyng of all sacres, of
all holy rites, ceremonies, funeralle obsequies, and of all other causes that
in any poincte concerned religion. And they were called Pontifices. And there
were of them two o^ders, that is to weete inferiors and superiors, as if y^
should say, ^at lestwise in case the term may serve) bishops and
archebishoppes. And among them was one hedde, yt was called summus pontifex,
the highest prelate, and as ye would saie^ the chief ordinary, to whose power
and autoritee belo^ged to make constitucions concerning all the said rites,
ceremonies and all poinctes of their religion, and to see reformacion of all
inferior magistrates encurryng any contumacie, contempt or disobedience. This
magistrate was first instituted by Num^ Pompilius the second king of Room.
prelate or ordinary at Room, What Julius Caesar said to his mother when he
stood for the dignitee of high bishop in Room.
( Quintus Catulus a man of right high dignitee and power among ye Romans
standing in eleccion with him for the same office) unto his mother bryngyng him
going to the gate, Julius Caesar a man of a woondreous hault courage
Mother (says he) this day shall ye have your soonne either the high prelate,
orels a banyshed manne. An haulte courage toward, and that could in no sauce
abide to be put back.

Julius Caesar forsook and put away his wife Po^p^ia. This Po^peia was
Caesar's third wife, as witnesses Plutarchus, (...) first wife ^as Cornelia the
daughter of Cinna before me^cioned by whom he had a daughter called Iulia,
which was afterward married unto Po^peius ye great.
Pompeia, because she was in great slaundre, (as one yt had mysused hirself
with Clodius,) in deed he forsook and put away from him. But yet when
Clodius was vexed in the law and arrained for the same matier, Caesar being
called forth for a witness, reported no eiuill word by his wife. And when
the accuser said, why the^ have thou made a divorce with her? forsouth (quod he
again) because the wife of Caesar ought to be pure and clear from all slaundre
too. as well as from the crime. Besides the witness of the answer, his
ciuilitee also may well be praised, that he spared to defame his wife whom he
had abandoned.

When he read the chronicle of Alexander the great, Caesar, when he read the
acts of Alexander, could not hold weeping.
he could not forbear to water his pla^tes. And to his fre^des he said: At
thissame age (quod he) yt I am of now, Alexander had subdued Darius, and I have
not yet unto this day done so much as any one valyau^te act of prowess
Suetonius writes this thing to have chanced, The ambicio^ of Julius Caesar.
at what time Caesar being lord After that the city of Room had subdued many
countrees they did from year to year create and send into every several
province that they had a several magistrate, who was called, p^aetor, a lord
preside^^e. To whose authorite apperteined the determinacion of cause^, and the
redress of all matiers concerning justice and law. A magistrate of much
like sort as is here in England the lord presidente of the counsel in
Wales, and the Lord presidente of the counsel at York, saving that the
praetor of Room had ye assistence, aid and main^^i^aunce of men of arms
wheresoever he went to keep sises, sessions, courts or lawedaies, or to
sit in iudgemen^^.
presidente in Spain and rydyng his circuit to hold ye graunde iuries or
lawedaies in tounes appoincted for sises and sessions to be kept, had seen the
image of Alexander in the temple of In the most fe^^hest part of Spain,
beyo^de Granad^ weste ward are two little Isles called, Gades. In the less of
these two Isles was a city called Iulia, inhabited all with citeze^^ of
Room. There was also in the same a temple dedicated unto Hercules, in which it
is thought by many persons, that ye two pillars of Hercules were, which
pillars were of brass eight cubits high a piece which Hercules (when he had
peragrated all the world as far a^ any land went) did erect^ and set up
for a memorial that there he had been.
Hercules within the Isle of Gades. But would God such a nature as this would
rather have used his forwardness and quick spirit in taking after a prince
of a sobre sort, then after one that would be perelesse and alone above al
others.

Sauoye, his coumpaigne that were with him puttyng doubts and questions whether
in tha^ dog hole also were sedicions and quereles for preemynence and
superioritee, as there contynually were in Room, he stayed and stood still a
preatie while musyng with himself, The ambicio^ of Julius Caesar.

Nec Romae potuere pati Caesarue priore^ Po^peius ue parem.


and anon, well (quod he) I promise you, I for my part had lieffer to be the
first or the chief man here, then the second manne in Room. This certes is
even veraye it that is written in the poet Lucanus that neither Caesar could
abide to have any manne above him, Neither Caesar could abide to have any
superior nor Pompeius to have any manne feloe with him.
ne Pompeius to have any peer.

He said that things of high Julius Caesar would high entreprises to be
gooen through with all, without castyng of any perilles.
and were great) ought to be executed and dispeched out of hand, and none
advise ne deliberacion to be taken of them, because that to the gooyng
through with such matiers, celeritee does veraye great help, and castyng of
perilles does pluck a man back from hardy auenturyng.

When he departed out of y^ province Galle to match against Pompeius, as soon
as he was ones passed over ye flood of Rubicon, now (says he) be There is a
proverb, omnem iacere aleam, to cast all dyce by which is signified, to set
all on six and seven, and at all auen^ures ^o ieoperd assaiyng the wild
chance of fortune, be it good be it badde^ Therefore when Caesar said: Be
all dyce already cast. His menyng was, to be now ouerlate to repent yt he
had dooen, or to call again yesterdaye. And therefore that he would now cast
no more ^eniwoorthes in the matier, but go through with his purpose, chance as
it would. Cadat alea fati (says Lucanus in the person of Caesar against
Pompeius) ^lterutrum mersura caput, yt is. Leat the dye of fate chance as it
will. The One or other of our lives to spil. Euripides, Plato, Terence,
Plutarchus, Lucianus, and other writers moo liken ^he life of man to the game
of dycyng, in which play, what to cast lies not in our hands, but only in
chance and fortune, but that that we have cast, we may with policy,
con^eighaunce, and good ordreyng, if it be well cast, use and apply it to our
commoditee, if the contrary, yet tempre it the less to hurt us.
it past castyng the dyce again (as if he should have said, Omnis iacta sit
alia.
now hap what shall hap, leat altogether turn which way it will,)
Declaring that he was utterly minded to put al in hasarde to make or mar, and
to be manne or mous. For the said flood of Rubicon disseuereth the Galle
cisalpine from Italy.

Pompeius had forsaken Roome^ and had fled to the seaes, Metellus ye high
treasourer of Rome withstod Caesar being desirous and feign to take money out
of ye treasourie, Metellus let^ed Caesar going about ^o take money out of the
treasue^ of Room.
and shut up yesame treasourie fast. But Caesar thretened to slay him, which
word when it had astouned the said Metellus, iwys young manne (quod Caesar)
this thing was more hard for me to speak the^ to do. The manacyng of great
men.
Menyng that it was in his power eue^ with a beck of his hedde, to put to
death whom soever he were disposed, forasmuch as whersoeuer he went he had with
him a bend of harnessed me^ne.

At the town of Durachiu^ or Dyrrachiu^ a town in Mac^donia, first called
^pidamnu^, but the Romans when they had conquered it, would needs have it
called Dyrrachium^ this was when he went to pursue Pompeius.
Durach he tarried Brundusiu^ a town in the royalme of Naples liyng upon the
sea of Adria^ from which Bru^duse, lies the passage over into Greece.
Brunduse. Which thing forasmuch as it was very slack and long in dooyng,
geattyng him privily into a little foyst he assaied to pass over the sea of
Adria. And the vessel being even welnigh overwhelmed and sounken with the
main swellyng sourges of this fierce sea, unto his pilote being now clean in
despair to escape drounyng, and thynkyng to be no way but one, Caesar opened
who he was, saying: put thy trust and affiau^ce in lady fortune and weete thou
well yt thou carriest Caesar in this little boat of thine. He was of such
excedyng haulte courage, The ^^cedyng haul^ courage of Julius Caesar.
as though he had had both ye gods, and fortune even at his own will and
commandment. But yet at that present season, the raige of the tempeste
wexyng still worse and worse, he was let of accomplyshyng that he had
ente^ded. But as soon as his soudiours that were already at Du^ach had
knowelage of this his dooyng, they came full and whole rennyng unto Caesar, The
hertes of Caesar's soul^diours toward him.
and took veraye grievously, if the same looked for any moo or other bendes of
men, as having some mystruste in them.

Pompeius woonne the field, Pompeius woo^ne y^ first field against Caesar.
but he did not follow his victory to ye uttermost (as he should have dooen,)
but reculed back to his camp. Then said Caesar, Pompeius could no skill
(said Caesar) how to use a victory.
this day (quod he) the victory was in the possession of our enemies, but
they have not a capitain that can skill how to use victory, when he has it.

When Pompeius had commanded Pharsalum, Pharsalu^^ or Pharsalos, or Pharsalia,
a city in Thessalia, in the feldes of which Caesar va^quyshed Pompeius.
yet there to demourre, and to tarrye the coming of their enemies: Caesar
avouched him to had dooen far wide, in yt he had by such delaie and
tarryaunce in manner killed the habilitee, the fiersenesse, and a certain divine
inspiracio^ of his soldiers hertes, being fully appointed and ready to fall
upon their enemies. So greatly did Caesar contend and strive with Pompeius,
Julius Caesar matched Po^peius not only in the fortune of battle, but also in
the experience.
not only about the fortune of battaill, but also in the expert knowelage of
war keeping.

Pharnax or Pharnaces, the king of Ponius, and soo^ne of Mithridates, whom
^eeyng his own father he persecuted, and at length drove to kill himself. For
he favored Pompeius making war against Mithridates. And in fine the said
Pharnaces rebellyng against Caesar, was by the same discou^faicted vanquyshed
and driven out of his country. This feloe (says ^^cius Florus, who writes
an abbriegemente of the chroni^^^^ of Room out of the histories of Titus
Liuius) was by Julius Caesar even at one field, and yet not that all foughten
so trodden under feet, as it had been a thing with a flashe of lightenyng
suddenly crummed to dust and pouther.
Pharnaces, he wrote briefly to his fre^des after this sort: I came, I looked,
I conquered. Signifiyng the great celeritee and speed of dooyng.

Scipio in Afrike were fled, Scipio a noble capitain of Room.
and Cato being vanquyshed by Caesar had killed himself at Vtica, Of Cato is
before noted in y^ xxxi. apoph^theg. of Augustus Caesar where unto is to be
added, y^ Caesar made all the speed and means possible to have Cato alive, and
when he could not, he wrote a book of unkindness against him, which he
entitleed Anticato.
these were the words of Caesar: I envy to the o Cato this death of thine,
sens thou have envied unto me the saving of thy life. Caesar thought it a thing
like to redounde highly to his honor and renoume, if such a noble manne as
Cato having beeen ouercomed in battaill should be bound to him and no man else
for his life. But Cato rather chose death with honor, then after the
oppressyng of ye public libertee and freedom to be as a bondeseruau^te to
any person. And therefore Caesar envied unto Cato ye honor of such a death
because he had envied unto Caesar the laud and praise of saving the life of
Cato.

Persons not a few (because Antonius and Dolobella in great mystruste lest
they should conspire and we^ke some treason against Caesar, What Julius Caesar
said when he was warned to beware of Antonius and Dolobella.
) gave warnyng unto the same, that he should in any wise beware of them. Tushe,
no no (quod Caesar) I ^eare not these ruddie colored and fat bealyed feloes,
but yondersame spare slendre skragges and pale salowe colored whooresoonnes,
Antonius and Dolobella fat and well colored. Brutus and Cassius lean and
pale.
showing with his finger Brutus and Cassius. Brutus and Cassius slew Julius
Caesar.
Neither did his suspicion deceive him, for of them two was he afterward
slain in deed. Of which matier such as be learned may read Plutarchus and
Suetonius.

Communicacion being on a time in a supper season begoonne what kind of death
was best, What kind of death Julius Caesar thought to be b^ste.
he answered without making any bones, yt is soodain and nothing thought on.
And that he judged to be best, chanced to him in deed. Plutar^hus says yt
he supped the same time (being the day next before his death,) at the house of
Mar^us Lepidus his great and feithful friend.

Marciall having turned his back to flee, and plucked back ye contrary way.
And stretchyng forth his hand to his enemies ward, When one of Iul. Caesar's
standard bea^^^^ would have fled Caesar plucked him back by the thro^e to go
toward his enemies.
said: whether gooest thou away thou fellow? Yonder been they that we fight
against. Thus with his hands he chasticed one person and no moo, The way to win vict^rie is not to ^^ee and to run away from the ^n^mies.
but with these sharp and poynaunte words he clean put away y^ fearful
trembleyng of all the legions, and where the same were at the veraye poincte to
be discoumfaicted, he taught them a lesson to win the victory.

After that Publius Mimus a plaier Laberius a maker and a plaier as Publius
was, the same Julius Caesar pronounced the sentence of judgment in this wise.
How Julius Caesar gave iudgeme^te of Laberius being ouerco^med by Publius
Mimus in iestyng and plaiyng.
Caesar showing the o Laberius all the favor that may be, thou art
ouercomed of ye Syrian. For the said Publius was in condition or state of
living a bondeman, and of nation or country a Syrian borne. Far a way is he
left behind, that is ouercomed, ye judge being his friend or showing him
favor. And the judge being but indifferent, it was toto far odds yt a
Syrian born should in Room ^uercome a Romain.

When Caesar saw in Room certain What Julius Caesar said whe^^ he saw in
Room straungiers carrye young puppees and in their arms to play withal.
and to make all sport and play with the same, he demanded, whether the women
in their country did bring forth no children. Pericles a noble manne of
Athenes, which governed y^ co^me^ weal ^here by the space of xl. years, a
ma^ne in ^aturall eloquence in co^parable
Menyng that there were no such young whelps of any kind more pleasau^te to
play or find pastyme withal, the^ their own little sweet babes. Plutarchus
tells this history in y^ life of Pericles, allbeeit he shows not which
Caesar's saying it was. I deem it to be Augustus Caesar's.

Wh^t Julius Caesar said to his soldiers being in great ^eare of their
enemies, whose coming they daily looked for.
he spoke openly to the whole cou^paignie in this manier. Be it known to you
all, that with in these veraye few days, there will come hither a king with
ten legions, This king was the king of the Persians.
thirty thousand horsemen of others in light harness an hundred thousa^de,
and three hundred elephau^tes. Therefore some among you here, cease to make
any ferther enquierie or search, or to conceive this or that opinion, and give
they credence unto me, who ^haue certain knowelage of all the truth, orels in
feith I will cause all such persons to be put in the oldest and most
rotten ship that I can geatte, and to be carried hens what soever wind
shall blow into what soever countrees it shall chance at adventure. A strange
fac^on of puttyng away fear, Great mati^^ of dau^gier requires heart and
stomach according, for to resist the same.
not by nay saying, ne by lessenyng the noumbre of the enemies, but by
encreasyng the occasion of terror, to the end that being adcerteined of sore
peril and hasarde to come, they might take unto them stomakes and hertes for
such great daungier conuenable.

To certain persons coming Sylla had given over his office of Dictature as he
should do, What Caes. said for his excuse of not leuyng, y^ office of
dict^tour.
whereas Caesar kept it still and would not out of it at all, (which thing to
do lacked veraye little of plain usurpation of tirannie:) he answered yt
Sylla was not bookyshe, nor half a good clerk, Julius Caesar said yt Sylla
was not half ^ good clerk.
and therefore gave up his For the better understanding of this place, it is to
be noted, that by reason that the city of Rome was rewled by two persons of
eguall power, who were called Consules, and were changed from year to year,
there chanced often times matier of contention and strife whether of the two
Consules should goo to battaill, or if they kept war in two places at ones
whether should goo to this place, and whether to that. And by reason of such
contencio^ many times the affairs of the city proceeded not, and the city
self was often in great daungier. It was therefore by a law provided that in
such time and state of the common weal, if ye two Consules between them
twain or else the Senate emonge them did not ne would agree, there should be
elected an officer, who was called dictator, as if ye should say, a lord
commander, he was called also, Magister populi, the master of the people. His
office was called, Dictatura ye dictatourship, or y^ dictature. Which was as
touching his autoritee, the veraye absolute power of a king. And whatsoever the
dictatour commanded or bid to be dooen, should be e^ecuted without any
manner let, contradiccion, or reasonyng. And because the power was so great,
it was by the same law provided that no one person should continue in it above
the space of six months at ones. And whosoever would not give up the
dictature at the sixth months end, encurred the suspicion of tyranny, and
of conspiryng to be a king, and there by the crime of high treason against the
commen weal. This law not withstandyng Sylla being dictator would not at his
due time yield up his office, but by means usurped a perpetual dictature for
the term of one hundred and twenty years, yet at last he gave it up in his
last days. The^ came Julius Caesar, and so sembleably usurped the
dictatoursh^p for term of life. And of that came in, the power of them who
were afterward called Caesares. And the office of dictature ceased. Neither was
there any that were ever called perpetui dictatores that is perpetual
dictatours, or dictatours for term of life, but these two aforenamed.
dictature. Schoolemaisters, when they show before word by word, orels
recite unto their scholares what to write after them, are said proprely in
latin dictare discipulis. Dictare discipulis.
Caesar herunto alludyng said that Sylla was not half a cunnyng clerk. Menyng
(as I suppose) that on the one side, if Sylla had been so well seen in
histories, in chronicles, and in experience of y^ world, as to consider what
great dau^gier it was, from such an office so long time by strong hand
continued to return to his former state of a private manne again, he would
have looked twys on the matier ere he would have given it up, (of which matier
is somewhat touched before in the.xxiiii. apophthegme of Diogenes) and on the
other side, that such a person as should be in aroume of such high power and
autoritee, that what soever he would command must and should needs be dooen,
ought to be a man of high wisdom, knowelage, and discrecion, to keep
himself upright in all beehalfes, and to do nothing by violence ^ power
which he might not at all times after auouche and justify, as Sylla had
dooen, who in y^ time of his dictature, would not only be rewled by no laws,
ne ministre any justice, but ferthermore, used such detestable crueltee and
tirannie over the city and all degrees and sorts of men, as could not
choose afterward but redound to his final co^fusio^ and exterminio^. Albeit
(except my memory fa^l me) y^ histories saie^ y^ Sylla gave not up the said
office until he lay sick in his death bed.

Caesar making his triumph passed alonge by the seats of the Tribunes,
Pontius Aquila being one of the noumbre of ye Tribunes, Caesar took ver^ye
grievously yt one Aquila a Tribune made no reverence to him at his triumph.
alone of them all not o^s arose out of his place to do him any reverence.
This matier Caesar took so highly eiuill, that he said to him as loud as he
could cry. Then come thou Aquila being a There were ^^^tain me^ne of office
and autoritee in Room called Tri^uni, they were as chief of the co^me^s And
their power was as well in making of lawe^ and decrees, as also in all other
causes, to intercede between the Senate and the people, that the lords and
nobles might not by any new found acts, statutes, or decrees, in any wise
oppress or grieve the commenalte. And so great was their autoritee in this
behalf, that whatsoever the consuls or Senate would enacte, if but one of the
Tribunes said nay to it, all their dooyng was ^oide, ne could take any
effect. The college of Trybunes for the people in Room might well be likened
to ye coumpaignie of Bourgeoysses o^ the parliamente here in England. There
were of the Tribunes at y^ first no more but twain, afterward six, in process
a college of thirty six. There were also tribuni militares, tribunes of the
souldyours, whose office was, to se that the souldyours were well armed and
appointed as they should be.
Tribune and take the commenweale out of my hands. Neither did he by the space
of a good many days together after, make promise of anythyng unto any person
but with this excepcion, at lest wise if we may be so bold for Pontius
Aquila.

Unto the people for flaterie salutyng Julius Caesa^ r^fused to be called king.
I am Caesar (quod he) I am no king. He rather chose to be called by his own
private name, then by the name of king, which at that time was sore hated in
the city of Room.

Some one feloe of the people Caesar a garlande of laurel wound about with a
white lyne^ roll. A croune wou^d about with a white lyne^ roll, was the token
of ^ king and was y^ veraye diadem.
But when the Tribunes, the lynen roll pulled of, had Plutarchus says that a
diadem or croune imperial was at this time set on sondrie images of Caesar
in diverse places, and the two Tribunes that plucked away the crounes he
names the one Flanius and the other Marullus, and ad^eth that the same tribunes
did cast in prieson all such persons, as they found had salued Caesar by the
name of king.
commanded the feloe to prieson, Caesar after yt he had given ye Tribunes a
sore rebuke for it, Julius Caesa^ put out of office the tribunes which had
taken away from his por^erature ^ kings diadem.
deprived yesame of their offices. And yt he might not by so dooyng seem to
attempt the usurpation of the name and power of king, he pretended for an
excuse, ye glory of refusyng such honor his own self to had been taken
away from him by them.

Caesar had chose^ many alienes of strange countrees into the senate, Julius
Caesar chose many aliens into the nou^bre of senators of Room.
there was a bill written and set up, that it should be a good deed, if some
manne would goo show ye parliamente chaumbre, to one of the new chose^
senators strau^giers. He mened (what feloe so ever it was that set up the
bille) those foreners newly made Senators of Room, not so much as to know
the way to ye senate house, except yesame were showed unto them.

Brutus, What poses certain persons wrote under the images of Brutus and
Caesar.
would god thou were yet alive: because that Tarquinius the last king of Room
was expulsed and driven out of the city by the means of the said Brutus. And
under ye porturature of Caesar they had written among them, verses of this
sense and menyng.

Brutus quia reges eiecit, consul primus factus est,
Caesar quia consules eiecit, rex postremus factus est.
Brutus There were seven kings of Room, the first Romulus, the secounde Numa
Pompilius, the third Tullus Hostilius, the fowerth A^cus Martius, the fifth
Tarquinius Priscus, ye sixth Seruius Tullius, the seventh Tarquinius the
proud. Who for his high mind and over stately vsyng his citezens, and for his
most hoorible crueltee, encurred their mortal disdaigne and hatered. And so
it was that while the same Tarquinius was from Room laiyng siege to the town
of Arde His soonne Sextus Tarquinius came to Room privily by night, and by
force and violence ravished Lucretia the wife of Tarquenius Collatinus against
her will. Whereupon ye said Collatinus and Iunius Brutus the kings sisturs
soonnes confederated with Tricipitinus banysh^d for ever out of Room both the
soonne and the father, and shut the gat^s of the city against them. And
made a law that ther^ should never after be any more kings in Room, but
two magistrates governors which should be named consules. And the first
co^sull in Room were created thesaid Lucius Iunius Brutus, and shortly after
joined to Tarquenus Collatinus. And of the same Brutus descended this Brutus
here mentioned, who with Cassius conspired, wrought, and executed the death of
Julius Caesar.
for chacyng of kings out,
Was created first Consul of Room,
Caesar for driuyng Consuls out,
Is now last of all a king become.
Better ones to dye then ever to fear said Julius Caesar.
and warnyng was given him, that he should take good heed to himself, he
answered, yt better it was ons for all together to dye, then to be in
perpetual care of taking heed. Signifiyng, y^ person not to live, who lives
in perpetual fear of death. One were as good be out of the world as to live
in perp^tual fear of death.


Caesar, after that he had made the The Tigurines, a people of Germany, which
dooen inhabit the fower^h part of Suycerlande.
Tigurines cry creake, being on his way toward a certain city of people
joined in league with him, The animos^^ee and courage of Iul. Caes.
heard that an other sort of ye The Suyceners are y^ whole nation of
Suycerlande which is called in latin Heluetia, and the people Heluetii, men
of such sort, that for money they will fight, they care not vnde^ whose
banner. And subjects they are unto no prince, ne do any thing pass on life
or death, heaven or hell.
Suyceners were co^yng against him in the way yt he had to goo, he reculed into
a certain place strong and well fensed. There all his co^paignie gathered
together, and well set in araie, his horse Plutarchus in the life of Caesar,
and Plynius in the.xlii. chapitour of the eight book dooen write, that Julius
Caesar had an horse with feet facioned and shaped like a man's foot, and the
hou^e divided as it were into.ii. toes even as a man has. And that he would
not suffer any body to si^te him, or get up on his back, saving only
Caesar. A like strange thing is before noted of Bu^ephalus the horse of
Alexander.
yt he had been accustomed to ride on, was brought unto him Well (quod Caesar)
after yt I shall have gotten this victory, and not before, I will occupy this
horse in pursuing mine enemies. And so even on foot he set upon the
Suyceners.

Caesar now openly dooyng many What Considius a Senator of Room saie^ unto
Caesa^ dooyng all things by force and violence in Rome.
and contrary to all laws, one Considius being a man veraye far stricken
in age, plainly and with a bold spirit said unto him, that y^ senates were
for this cause only slack in meetyng and sittyng in counsel, that they
stood in fear of his bills and glieues. And when Caesar at these words had
said, why then dooest not thou for the same fear, keep thyselfe at home within
thy house? Nay as for me (said Considius) old age makes me out of fear. For
sens there is but a veraye little little time of my life behind, there is no
cause why I should take any great care or thought for the matier.

Julius Caesar unto Pomponius a lance knight, What Julius Caesar said to a
souldyour making vaunte yt ^he had rec^iued a wound in the face for him.
making much a do of a wound received in the face, at the insurreccio^
which Sulpitius This Sulpitius was a Tribune or bourgeoyse for the people in
the time of Sylla and Marius, when Caesar was a veraye young manne. Of whom
Plutarchus in the life of Sylla writes in this manier. Therefore Marius took
unto him Sulpitius a Tribune of the people, a man in no poincte behynd
whosoever was most flagicious And never ask ye the question how he was more
ungracious then an other, sens he was more mischievous then his own self, a
man of excedyng crueltee, and set a gog with toto much both presumpcion and
avarice. To whatsoever deeds dooyng abominacion and all kinds of mischief had
enticed him, he had no regard, he had no consideracion to sell the commenweale
of Room even in the open street to men that had been not many days before
bondeseruauntes, and to denysens having not a foot of land of their own, and
to tell such money as was by them paid upon tables set even in the open
mercate place. He maintained three thousand persons that never went without
sw^ordes and buc^lers, he had also of young horseme^ne most quick and ready
unto all manner feactes a great power for the guard of his person. And these he
named Antisenatum, a coumpaignie to match the Senators. This manne when he
had made a law that no man of the degree and order of the Senators might
owe above two thousand drachmes at ones, him self when he was departed this
world left thirty hundred thousand drachmes yt he owed of due debte. This man
being set the people on by Marius, when he intended to do all things with
violence and with the sweorde, partly enacted many flagicious laws, and
especially one, which made Marius chief capitain of the war to be made
against Mithridates. Wherefore, the consuls geuyng commandment that the
ministryng of laws should for a time cease, the same consuls declaryng their
minds unto the people in the temple of Castor Sulpitius bryngyng in among
them a coumpaignie of feloes in harness, both slew many persons, and also
thrust to the heart with a dagger the son of Pompeius then co^sull being of
age in manier but a veraye child, even in the mids of y^ guilde halle. But
he was within few days after condemned to death by Sylla, and by the tr^^son
of one of hi^ own bondeseruauntes slain, and the servant made a free manne
(as Sylla had promised) and ymmediatly by the commandment of the same cast
down hedlong from a rock where he broke his neck.
made against the Senate, which wound the said lance knight made a braggue
yt he had taken in fightyng for Caesar, well (said he) never look behynd the
again when thou rennest away. Such a like thing does Macrobius father upon
Augustus Caesar, Quintilianus ascribes it to Julius Caesar.

Caesar, when a certain plaintiff to aggrauate his harms, and to make ye most
of them, alleged that ye party accused had strieke^ altogether at his
thighs and legs, said: Why, what should he have dooen, thou having a salette
on thy hedde, and a cote of fense on thy body? He was not ignoraunte, for what
cause the other feloe was desirous to strieke that part chiefly, but the same
thing disse^bled, he had more pha^sie to ^est. An helmet and a Jack or
platecote hides all parts of a man saving the legs.

Caesar unto Metellus with standing that he might not take any money out of the
treasourie or chaumbre of y^ city, This is touched before in y^ ^viii.
apoph^hegme.
and bryngyng forth laws forbiddyng the same to be dooen: The time of weapen
(says he) and of laws is not all one. What Julius Caesar said unto Metellus
withsta^dyng that h^ should not take any money out of the treasourie of Room.
That in case thou can not be contented with the matier, now for this
present get the out of the way, and after that (al leages and bonds of
peace thoroughly drieue^) we shall have laid down all wepen, then (if you shall
so thynk good) lay to my charge in the behalf of the people, and I shall make
the answer.

The Same Caesar would often Enemies in battaill are to be overcome rather with
famyne then with the sweorde.
as ye most part of good phisicians have against the maladies and sores of
men's bodies, which is, rather with hungre then with iron to overcome them
For the physicians do not fall to cuttyng, except all other means and ways
before proved. And this usage even at this present day still endures among
the Italians: The Italia^^ in all diseases dooen enioyn^ abstinence.
against al kinds of diseases they do straightly enjoin abstinence. A like
thing unto this it is, Dimitius Corbulo, would enemies to be ouercomed sokyngly
by little and little.
ye Domitius Corbulo used much to say, that a man's enemies in bataill are
to be ouercomed with a carpe^ters squareyng are, that is to say, sokyngly one
piece after an other. A comme^ axe, cutteth through at the first choppe, a
squaryng axe by a little and a little werketh the same effect.

Caesar, What thing was occasion of grea^e envy and grutche against Julius
Caesar.
that one of those persons, whom he had sent to Room, standing in the senate
house, as soon as he knew that the senate would not give ne grant unto
Caesar prorogacion, that is to say, a longer time in his dictature, gave a
great stroke with his hand upon ye hiltes of his sword, and said: well yet
this feloe here shall give it. Thretenyng to ye commenweale force and violence.
Julius Caesar by force and viol^nce oppressed the co^me^weale.


Sylla having obtained the pretourship, manaced Caesar veraye sore, What Caes.
said to Sylla thretenyng to use his power upon him.
that he would use his autoritee and power upon him: yea, (quod Caesar laughyng
at it) thou dooest of good right call it thy power, which you have bought with
thy penie. Sylla purchaced the praetourship with great gifts and rewards.
Notyng Sylla, that the same had purchaced ye said office by geuyng great
gifts and rewards.

Marcus Tullius in ye third book de officiis, (that is to say, of honest
behauour, or, how each manne ought to use and to demean himself) writes that
Caesar had ever in his mouth these greek verses out of the third tragedy of
Euripides entitleed, Phoenissae. (...),
(...).
That is. If a man should needs do wrong,
It ought to be only in this case,
To make himself a king, by hand strong,
In other things leat right have place.


When Caesar gooyng toward Africa had slipped and gotten a fall in gooyng
out of a ship, How Caesar turned an eiuil likelyhode to the better part.
the likelihood of evil chance to come, he turned to the better part,
saying. I have ye fast in my hands o Afrike. Sextus Julius Frontinus a latin
autour that writes four books of stratagemes, that is to say of the
s^^ightes and policies of war.
Frontinus thinks, that this happened at his taking of ship, and that he
said: I have the fa^t o earth which art my mother. Alludyng (as I suppose)
herunto, that where he was on a time sore troubleed with a certain dream, The
dream of Iul. Caes.
in which it seemed to him, that he had to do with his own mother, the reders
or southsaiers expouned, the empier of all ye whole world to be prophesied
unto him.

THE SAYINGS OF POMPEIVS THE GREAT.
CNeus Of Pompe^us it is before noted in the viii. apophthegme of Augustus Caesar
Pompeius surnamed the great, was with the people of Rome as far in favor,
as his Plutarchus in the life of Pompeius writes, that the Romans never
showed against any Capitain or hedde citezen either greater orels more eagre
hatered, then against Strabo, ye father of Po^peius. For during his life time
they stood in perpetual fear of his great power purchaced and gotten by the
sweorde (for he was a veraye hardy and valyaunte manne of war.) But after
that he was ons departed out of this life, strieken so^dainly to death with a
flashe of lightenyng, his corpse being carried forth to be buiryed, ye people
violently haled the ded body from the bear, and did unto it all the most
vilanie that they could ymagyn. The cause why he was so sore hated, was esteemed
to be his insatiable auari^e and coueteousnesse.
father before him, had been in grutche and hatered. This Pompeius being yet a
veraye young manne, wedded himself wholly to the faccion of Sylla. Po^peius
being but a veraye young manne gathered an army in Italy, before yt he was
eit^er any officer of the city, orels a senator, and took part with Sylla.
And although he were neither any officer of the city, nor senator, yet he
got unto him out of one place and other of Italy a great army. And when
Sylla had commanded the same to come and join with him, Nay (quod he) I will
never present an host unto ye high captain of Room without booties or
spoils, nor vnfleashed on their enemies. Neither did he repair unto Sylla,
before that he had in soondrie battrees and encountreynges vanquyshed diverse
capitaines of enemies. Even at the first date, showed he a great token and
lykelyhood of a prince most worthy, and born to do great things. It was
not his entente to bring unto Silla, philip and cheiny moo then a good meiny,
but to bring hable soudiours of manhood approved and well tried to his hands.

Pompeius eue^ at his first beginning did ye parts both of a valiau^t and of a
righteous capitain.
when he was by Sylla sent into Sicilie, he begoonne to do the parts, not
only of a valiau^te and worthy captain, but also of a just and righteous
captain For when he had heard, that his soudiours in gooyng foorthward on
their viages, made by stertes out of their way, and did much oppression in
the country as they went, and pieled all that ever they could fyngre, such
persons as he took rouyng and trottyng or scuddyng from place to place they
could not tell where about them selfs he punyshed, Pompeius would not his
souldyours to do any oppression or pi^lage where they went.
and what compaignie himself had sent before, he empriented on every one of
their sweardes ye seall of his ryng, that they should do no body no wrong ne
harm by the way.

The The Mamertines, a people in Sicilie, whose town wa^ called Messana.
Mamertines (because they Sylla) he had appointed to slay every mothers soonne.
But Sthenius the lord of ye city or country came unto Pompeius with these
words: Sthenius the lord of the Mamertines took part with Marius against Sylla.
O Pompeius ye do not according to equitee and conscience, in yt ye goo
about, for one man's cause that has offended, to do a great noumbre of
innocents to death. I wys even very I myself am ye manne that both have
persuaded my fre^des, The noble and ma^ly heart of Sthenius.
and also have coarcted mine enemies to take the part of Marius against Sylla.
This was dooen in ye civil battle between Marius and Sylla.
Here Pompeius greatly meruaillyng at the manly heart of this Sthenius, said
that he perdoned the Mamertines who had been persuaded by such a man,
^o^p^ius for the respect of Sthenius perdoned y^ Ma^ni^t^ines.
as preferred his country above his own life, and so delivered both ye city
and Sthenius. In Sthenius ye have an example, what heart a prince ought to
bear toward the co^menweale in case any peril or daungier do chance: and
in Pompeius a good lesson of placabilitee or myldenesse, in that he was more
propense to show honor unto one that had a natural affeccion and zele toward
his country, then to execute his wrath to the uttermost.

Libya a part of Afrike ad^o^naunte to Egypt, so named of Lib^a y^ wife of
(...) Jupiters soonne.
Libya against Domitius, and had ouercomed the same in a He calls it a great
victory, for the said Domitius (a noble Senator of Room and consul with
Messala) peryshed in ye battaill. And of twenty thousand, which he had in an
army, there escaped alive no mo but three thousand. At this victory Pompeius
subdued all Aphrike into the power of the Romans. And for this victory was he
surnamed Magnus, and was called Pompeius the great.
great and sore battaill, his soldiers full and whole salutyng him with the
title of Emperor, he said, he would not take at their hands the honor of
that high name, as long as the trenches and bulwerkes of his enemies camp was
standing whole. This heard, his soldiers, The good cou^age of Pompeius his
souldyours.
(although it were the^ a great rain to leat them) soodainly with all their
might assaillyng the camp of their enemies, woonne it, and beat it down hand
smoothe. Po^peius refused honor until he knew himself to have deserved it.
Thus the said Pompeius refufed an honor not yet truly deserved with deeds.

The Same Pompeius being returned The surname of Magnus, when wherefore and by
who^ it was given to Pompeius.
was partly with other honors highly received by Sylla, and also besides other
things he first of all gave unto him the surname Magnus, the great. But when
Pompeius not satisfied with all this, would needs triumph too, Sylla would
none thereof, because Pompeius was not yet of ye degree of a senator. But when
Pompeius had said unto the coumpaignie then prese^te, Sylla to be ignorant,
yt moo persons dooen worship the soonne when it arises, Mo persons wurship
the soonne wh^ it arises, then when it gooeth down said Pompeius.
then when it gooeth down Sylla cried with a loud voice, leat him triumph. He
was strieken in fear of ye courageous stomach of the freashe young manne,
Po^peius tri^mphed being a veraye young manne not yet a Se^^^our.
and of his glory daily more and more encreasyng. Neither sticked he or put
any doubts to give place unto such an one, as he saw could in no wise he
brought to yield an ynche to any manne living. The menyng of Pompeius was, that
the people would be more propense to favor the honor and glory of a young
manne coming upward, and grow^ng toward the world, as himself was, then of an
old manne being almost past, and beginning to decay, as Sylla now did.

Seruilius a ioyly feloe and among the hedde men in the co^menweale highly
esteemed was mad angrye that a When any consul or other high Captain by the
Senate and people thereunto deputed, had holden great wars, and had with
saving his own army (or at le^t wise with small loss of men achiued some
notable high co^queste, or had gotten some excel^ente victory upon any foren
nation, king or capitain, to ye high honor, renoume and auau^cemente of the
commenweale of Room, or to the victorious enlargeyng of the empier of the
same, he should at his returnyng home be received with all honor, joy,
solemnitee, pomp and royaltee that might be devised. He should have to go
before him ye king or captain by him subdued, and all captives taken in the
wars, he should have pageauntes as gorgeously set out as might be, of all
ye tounes, castelles, fortresses, and people or provinces by him subdued,
himself should ride in a chairette most goodly beseen, bare hedded saving a
garlande of laurel, and after his taille should come his own souldyours with
all joy, mirth and solace that was possible to be made. And this was called a
triumph, the highest honor that might be showed. Neither was it awarded to
any manne, but by the judgment of the whole army, with the decree of the
Senate upon the same, and consent of the whole universal people, nor without
the ^esertes above rehearsed.
triumph was granted to Pompeius. The souldyours also not a few of the^ made
many stoppes and lettes that there might be no triu^phe dooen, not for that
they bare Pompeius any grutche, but they required to have certain rewards
distributed among the^, as though ye triumph must have been bought at their
hands with great largess: orels the soldiers thretened that they would
echema^ne for himself catch away of the treasures and richesse yt should be
carried about in the triumph. And therefore the said Seruilius and one Glaucia
gave him advise and counsel rather willyngly to part ye said money among ye
souldyours, the^ to suffer it to be taken away every ma^ne a flyce by strong
hand. But when Pompeius had made them answer that he would rather leat al
alone and have no triumph at all, Pompeius would rather make no triumph at
all, the^ flattre his souldyours or bye it with money.
then he would make any seeking or entreactyng to his own soldiers and even
with that word set down before them ye rods bounden together with an axe
in the mids garnyshed and decked with garlandes of laurel, yt they should
thereof first begin their spoil if they durst: Nay, quod Seruilius, now I
see the in veraye deed to be Pompeius the great, and worthy to have a
triumph. What triumph is honorable and show woor^^^^
For Pompeius judged no triumph to be honorable and worthy show, except
that it were as a thing in the way of recompense or so duty repaied to good
demerites, without any great suite making, and without gifts geuyng.

It was the guyse in Room, The guyse and custom in Room for souldyours yt
had been horsemen in the wars.
Censours, Of the office of Censours in Room it is before noted in ye xxxvii
saying of Augustus Caesar.
and there, after rehersall as well of such viages as they had been in, as also
of ye capitaines under whom they had been in waiges, according to their
demerites, either to have thank and praise, orels rebuke and blame. So
Pompeius being Consul, even in his own person came and brought his horse
before Gallius and Lentulus then Censours, How Po^peius presented himself and
his horse to Gallius and Lentulus the Ce^sours.
which persons according to ye custom and usage demau^dyng, whether he had
truly exercised and dooen all the parts and duties to a souldyour belongyng,
yea (quod Pompeius) to the vttermust in all behalfes under mine own self the
lord high captain Signifiyng, Pompeius so executed ye office of a captain,
that nevertheless he accomplished all the parts of an inferior souldyer.
that he had in such wise executed and ministered ye office of a capitanie,
that he did nevertheless like no sleper acco^plyshe all poinctes that ever
belonged to an inferior soldier. So was he one and the same manne, both an
especial good captain, The highest praise and commendacion yt a capitain^
may have.
and a lusty valiaunte manne of his hands, then the which praise and
comme^dacion there may none higher or greater possible chance to a captain.

Sertorius was born in Nursia, a town of the Sabines, and was a citezen of
Room, at last an outlawe and a banysh^d man of whom Plutarchus thus tells.
Capitaines that have been as good men of war, as ever were any, have lacked
the one of their yies, as Philippus, Antigonus, Anniball, and this Sortorius,
of whom no man can deny, but that he was a ma^ne more chaste of his body in
absteinyng from women, then Philippus: more assured and feithfull to his
friends, then Antigonus: less fu^ious and eagre on his enemies, the^ Annibal:
in wit inferior to never an one of them all, but far behynd them all in
fortune, which fortune although he found at all times more heavy and sore
unto him then he found his enemies, ye^ did he match to the vttermust in
perfectenesse of war, Metellus: in hardiness of auenturyng Po^peius, in
fortune Sylla, in power the whole people of Room, being a man banyshed his
own country, and bearyng rewle among the Barbarous, that is to weete y^
Portugalles, whose country is called in latin Lusitania.
Sertorius his lettres in the which were close trussed the lettres of
capitaines not a few inuityng and calling the same Sertorius to Room, there
for to make a new turn of the world, and to change the state of the city,
he burned ye lettres every one, The moderacion and cleme^cie of Po^peius.
to the end that he would give unto the caitifes time and occasion to repent,
and leave or power to change their traitreous ente^tes to better. This history
like as it might well be rekened in ye noumbre of things vnwrathefully and
prudentely dooen, so do I not see what it should make among apophthegmes.
Albeeit, right many of such like sort are found in the colleccions of
Plutarchus. If he had discryed their names, they would undoubtedly by and by
addressed theimselfes to a manifest sedicion for veraye fear of punyshemente.
To open an other bodies lettres, or to discover things committed to the by
lettres sealed.
On the other side, in that he suppressed and kept secret the lettres of his
enemies, he gave a good lesson, what a great offense it is to open other
bodies lettres, or to cry at ye high cross, what thou have been put in
trust wtall by lettres under seal.

Phraates king of the Parthians requiryng of him by ambassadors to be
contented that the floodde Strabo in his work of geographie, that is to say,
of the descripcio^ of the earth, writes, that out of Niphates (an hille in
Armenia) spryngeth and issues Euphrates, a great, a deep and a swifte river,
not far from the river of Tigris. It is the great river of the Parthians,
and passing through Babylon i^ renneth into the red sea. In the first book
of Moses Euphrates is rekened one of the four rivers, whose fountains or
hedsprynges are in paradise.
Euphrates might be ye forthest mark for the bounds of the dominion of
Room, How Po^peius answered Phraates king of the Parthia^s requiryng that
Euphrates might be the bounds of ye dominion of Room.
nay, (quod he) this were a more meet request to be made, that justice may
disseuer the bounds of the Romans from the royalme of the Parthians.
Signifiyng, not to be any prescr^byng to the Romans, how far they ought to
extend their empier, It was no ^^^scribyng to ye Romans ^ow far they ought
to extend their empier.
from daily enlarg^yng whereof not hills and flooddes ought them to keep
back: but in such place and none other evermore to be appointed the limi^tes
and bounds of the Segniourie of Room, where right would not suffer them to
pass any ferther.

Lucius Lucullus after having a long space followed the trade of war, gave
himself at the later cast unto al sensualitee, Lucius Lucu^lus in his later
days gave himself altother to sensualitee.
ne would do any thing but spend and make good chere, and on a time called
Pompeius fool, for yt the same before he was of age conueniente had great
desire and mind to be enwrapped in many coumbreous affairs, What Po^peius
said o^ Lucullus reprouyng him for entreyng doings it^ the commenweale oue^
young of age.
and high doings, Iwys (quod Pompeius again) much more out of season it is
for an old manne to bestow himself altogether on sensual delices, then to be
an head governor in a commenweale. He grievously reproved the mind and
judgment of those persons, which thynken, that aged folks should have
noman^r thing at all to do, whereas it were a gaye thing for a man having the
rewle and governance of a commenweale to dye eue^ standing on his foot. And
as for riot and idleness is in young men folly, Riot and idleness in young
men folly, in old folks abhominacion.
in old folks abhomynacion.

Unto Pompeius lyyng sick, his physicia^ had prescribed yt his diete should
be nothing but black birds. And when the parties that had the charge to
purueie them said that there were none to be gotten (for it was not the
season of the year in which this kind of birds are wont to be taken) one
person there, put them in remembrreau^ce, that there might some be found
at Lucullus his house who used to keep of them alive all the year long. Why
(quod Pompei^s) is the wind in this door, yt except Lucullus were a man
given to delices, The manly b^rte of Po^peius in contemnyng sensual ^elices.
Pompeius might in no wise continue alive? And so the physician abandoned, he
took him to meats purueiable. O a manly heart of the right sort in deed,
which would not be bound to ough thanks unto delicate piekyng meats, no not
for to save his veraye life thereby.

in Room a great scarsitee of corn, Pompeius being declared in words and
in title the puru^iour of corn, but in veraye deed the lord both of sea and
land, sailled into Africa, Sardinia, and Sicilia: and a great quantitee of
corn shortly gotten together, he made haste to return to Room again. But
the maryners, by reason of a sore tempeste soodainly arisen, being loathe to
take ye seaes, Pompeius himself first of al entreed into the ship, and bid
the ancores to be waied or hoysed, cryyng in this manier: To adventure sailyng
necessitee constreigneth us, to live it does not. Declaryng that more regard
ought to be had of our country being in ieoperdie, More regard ought to be
had of our country, being in ieoperdie the^ of our own private safegarde.
then of our own private safegarde. For to spend our life in the cares of
succouryng and relieuyng the commenweale is a high honestee: but our country
in extreme peril to be desolated through our slothfulness or slackyng is the
foulest shame in the world: M^^ne be they never so high are with famyn made
^^me enough.
here be we put in remembreaunce, that not only brute beasts dooen leat
goo libertee, and come into servitude, but also sturdie and stifnecked men
are with famyn brought down and made to stoop. We be also taught that our
private safegarde is less to be tendreed then the wealth public.

Pompeius and Julius Caesar was come to light and openly known, and one
Narcellinus (as Plutarchus says, but by the judgment of others. Marcellus,)
one of ye nou^bre of those persons who^ Pompeius was thought to had set on
loft, had changed his mind from the same Pompeius unto Caesar, in so much yt
he was not afeard to speak many words against Pompeius, even in ye senate
house, Pompeius cooled and whyshed him in this wise: ^ow Po^pe^us put to
si^le^ce one Mar^ellinus ra^^l^ng on him in the senate house.
Art you not a shamed o Marcellinus (quod he) to raill on that person, by whose
benefit thou art made of a tounglesse body, eloquente, and of an hungre
sterued feloe, brought to such point that thou may not hold vomityng. He
laid sore to the parties charge ingratitude, The shameful ingratitude of many
persons.
who abused all that the dignitee, autoritee, and eloquence that he had, to the
displeasure of the same person who^ his bounden duty had been to thank for
the same. For this kind of ingratitude is of all others most unhonest, but
yet alas toto comenly used in the world.

Unto Cato right eagrely yallyng Po^peius, because that where he the said Cato
had often times before told that the power of Caesar from day to day
encreacyng, would in fine be no benefit at all to the public governance of
the city, but was rather enclynyng and growyng toward tyra^nie, yet Pompeius
that not withstandyng would needs enter familiaritee and be allied with him,
Pompeius made answer after this sort: Thy doings o Cato dooen more nere
approach unto the spirit of prohecie, but mine are much better standing with
fre^deship and amitee^ Menyng yt Cato talked at rouers, The end of casua^l
things in the world, no man does ne ^aye foreknowe.
forasmuch as no man living may foreknowe of certaintee ye end of casual
things in ye world to fall, and that he on his behalf took such ways as
the amitee and frendeship which was between him and Caesar at that prese^te
time required. It was a thing certain what of duty ought to be dooen for
ones friend, Humanitee (...) of a f^^de rather hope y^ best, the^ fore^eme y^
wurst.
but uncertain it was, whether one yt was now his friend would afterward in
time to come be his enemy. And of a friend it was more standing with
humanitee and gentleness to hope the best, the^ to foredeme the wurst.

What vau^te Pompeius would make of himself touching offices b^aryng in Room.
yt every public office that ever he had born in the city, he had both
obtained sooner the^ he for his part looked for, and also had sooner given up
again, the^ was of other persons looked for. That he had so tymely taken in
hand to bear rewle and office, or to be high capitain of an army, came
either of fortune or of manlynesse before the commen course of age werkyng in
him. That he gave up any office in due season again, came of a moderate mind,
having an yi^ and respect not unto tyra^nie, but unto the profit of the
commenweale.

After the battaill on ye dounes of Pharsalia foughten, he fled into Egypt.
And when he should come down out of his galie into a little fisher bote sent
purposely unto him by ye king of Egypt, This king of Egypt was called
Ptolomeus (as they were al for the most part) he had not long before been
driven out of his royalme, and came to Room for aid and succor and was by
Pompeius brought home again with an army, and set in poss^ssio^ of his croune,
and in fine he slew Po^peius (by whom he had be^ restored to his kingdom and
sent his hedde unto Ca^sar who as soon as he saw i^ wept.
turnyng himself back to his wife and his soonne, he said no more but these
words of Sophocles.

(...),
(...).
Whosoever gooeth, to dwell with a tyranne,
Though he came free, is made his bondeman.
It appears, yt his heart throbbed before, at his death approchyng, for as
soon as he was descendyng into the boat, receiuyng a stripe with a sweorde, he
gave but one sole groan, and wrappyng up his hedde in a thing he held it out to
be strieken of.

Pompeius because he could not, to dy^ for it, What Po^peius said of Ci^ero.
whose c^a^t^ng he could not ^byde.
away with y^ chattyng and contynual bableyng of Cicero said many atyme and
often among his familiare friends, I would with all my heart yt Cicero would
depart from us to our enemies, to the^de that he might be afeard of us.
Notyng the nature and facion of the same, of which by men's report he was to
his enemies full of crouchyng and lowely submission, and toward his friends
froward in opinion, (...) of his nature and facion to his e^nemies lowly and to
his friends froward.
and woondreous self-willed. This saying of Pompeius does Quintilian thus
rehearse, depart from us to C^esar, and then you wilt be afeard of me.

Pompeius after that he had had woondreous myssehappe in bataill against
Caesar, Pompeius brought to ^t^^r despair.
being brought unto utter despair, he came into his pauilio^ like unto a
ma^ne utterly amassed or a stonned and spoke not one word more, but only
this, why then straight into our camp too. And by and by dooyng on him a wede
aunswerable unto his present fortune, he fled away secretly.

The sedicio^ of Sicilie suppressed and appeased, and the citees which had
made ye insurreccion or rebellyon peasably and quietely received to grace
again, only the Mamertines required to be heard, allegeyng and recityng
certain laws many years before granted unto the^ by ye Romans, why (quod
Po^peius) will ye not surceasse to bring forth and read laws unto us having
your sweordes gyrded about you Signifiyng that in case they were disposed to be
ordreed by ye right of ye laws, Where y^ order of y^ law^ may serve, weapen
has no place.
they neded not to wear weapen about them.

The Same Pompeius when by lettres Sylla had by the sweorde usurped, What
Pompeius said when all that Sylla had usurped was by y^ co^sente of the people
of Room p^t^^ into his ha^^des.
to be by ye whole co^sente, agreement, and voices of ye universal people
committed unto his power and governance, he gave a great clappe on his thighe
with his hand, and said: oh peril and daungier never like to have end. How
much better had it been for me, to have been born a poor man's child, Pompeius
wished to had been borne a poor man's ^^ilde.
if I shall never obtein to retire from the cures of warfare, ne being clearly
dispeched of such mat^er and occasion of envy as to be mine own master,
that I may with my wife led a quiet life in the country. Great power and
autoritee, G^^at power an^ ^utoritee w^^ has not assaied, seeks: who so has
proved, hat^th^
who has not assaied it, makes high suite to have, who so has proved it,
hates dedly, but to leave it, is a matier of no small daungie^ and peril.

What Pompeius said to cer^ain persons supposyng that he could not be hable
to bear the maugre of Caesar.
Certain persons allegeyng ye they could not see how he should be hable to
sustein or bear the furour of Caesar, Pompeius with a merry countenance bid
them to take noma^ner thought ne care for that matier. For (says he) as
son as ever I shall have given but a thumpe with my foot on ye ground of
Italy, The stout ^ ma^ly heart of Pompeius.
there shall anon come leapyng forth whole swarms, of both horsemen and
footmen till we cry hoe again. A stout courage and a veraye man's heart,
if fourtune had been aunswerable in dooyng her part. Now if ye have not yet
your bealye full of this banquet, we shall add also out of the noumbre of the
orators two or three of the principalles and veraye best.

THE SAYINGS OF PHOCION
Phocion a noble Cou^saillour of Athenes, a man of high wisdom, singular
prudence, notable policy, most incorrupted maniers, in co^parable innocence
and integritee of life, marvelous clemency, most bou^teous liberalite and to
be short a rare myrrour to all Counsaillours. Yet all this not wtsta^dyng, he
was at le^g^h through envy and falsely surmised accusacions, guiltelesse
candemned and put to death by his own countreemen the Atheniens, and that so
cruelly, that not only he suffreed the accustomed peines of death, but also
after the execucion, was cast out into the feldes without sepulture or having
so much as one poor turf of earth to lie upon him. Such was partly the
ingratitude and partly the madne^se of the Atheniens in Phocion, Socrates,
Solon, Aristides, and many moo innocen^e persons by their whole consent and
agreement^ to persecute most high virtues instead of most heinous offe^ses,
and with most horrible injuries to requite benefits.

THen first and foremust shall ye have Phocion of country a man of Athenes,
but a veraye Lacedemonia^ as well in integritee of ma^ers, as also in knittyng
up his tal^ shortly at few words. Phocion a m^ne of few (...) in ^ellyng
his tale.
He was even Socrates up and down in this poincte and behalf, yt noman ever
saw him either laugh or weep, P^ocio^ was n^u^r s^en laugh (...) w^^e.
or change his mood, of so great constancy of mind he was.

Phocion sittyng in a great assemblee of ye people, a certain person said in
this manier: Phocion ye seem to be in a great muse or study. Right well
coniectured of you it is, quod he again: For I am musyng if I may cut of any
part of the words that I have to say among the Atheniens. Other persons
take great care and study, to tell their tale at length with all y^ may be
said, Phocion l^boured in few worde^ to comprise y^ effect of his matier.
to the end yt they may appear eloquente: but he did all his endeavor and
diligence to the contrary, that is to weete, how to comprise and knette up in
few words, such things as should directely serve to the effect and
purpose of his matier.

A voice being by reuelacion Atheniens, that in the same their city one
certain ma^ne there was, who evermore co^traried and again said the minds and
sentencies of all the universal multitude besides, and the people being in a
great rore willed enquierie and search to be made who it was, Phocion
discryed himself, saying: Even I am the manne, whom the oracle speaks of.
Phocio^ like^ nothing that the gross^ and rude multitude either did or said.
For, me only nothing pleases of al yt ever ye common people either does or
says. What may a body in this behalf first maruaill at? The heart of ^his
manne being void of all fear? orels the piety and compassion of him in that
he would not suffer this suspicion to light on the neck of one or other
innocente person? orels the singular wisdom, The multitude of ye people,
neither dooe^ ne saien any thing right.
by which h^ perfectely saw that ye rude and gross multitude (forasmuch as
they are led all by affeccions and pangues) neither do ne say any thing
standing with good reason or discrecio^?

Phocion making an oracio^ in presence of the people of Athenes pleased all
parties veraye well. And when he saw his tale to be well allowed and accepted
of the whole audience, he turned himself to his frendes^ and said: Phocio^ was
^ully persuaded that nothing procedyng of ^ right judgment might please ye
people.
What, have I (trow we) unawares spoken, any thing other wise then well? So
thoroughly was he persuaded, that nothing might content or please the gross
people, that proceeded of a right judgment.

Atheniens of a course made a gatheryng about of the citezens to contribute
each manne somewhat toward a sacrifice yt they prepaired and went about to
make, What Phocion said to certain Atheniens gatheryng money toward a
sacrifice.
and (other folks geuyng their devotion toward it) Phocio^ was more then a
doose^ times spoken to, It would be a shame for me (quod Phocion) if I should
with you make contribucion, and make to this manne here no restitucion,
(poinctyng to a creditour of his.) Right many there been that thynken highly
well employed all that is bestowed or spent on temples, and on sacrifices, or
on fea^tyng at church houses. But this far seeing manne, did the people to
understand, that a much more holy and godly thing it is, To repa^^ where a man
owes is an holy and a godly thing.
to rapaie whom to a body is endebted: and what is it like that he would now
judge (trow ye) of those persons, who (their wife and children defrauded)
dooen edify to the use of men of the clergy or spiritualtee, palaices meet
for kings, and to maintein the idle loytreyng of the same, dooen deburse and
lay out no small portion of their substance.

To Demosthenes the orator saying, Atheniens will put the to death one day
o Phocio^, if they shall ons begin to be mad, he answered in this manier:
Me in deed (as ye say) if they shall beegynne to be mad, but ye, if they
shall come to their right wits again. Demos^enes would speak all for to
please, and rat^er sweet words, then ^olsome.
For Demosthenes in open audience of the people spoke in manner all yt ever he
did forto please them, and to obtein fauou^ and would speak rather sweet
words, then wholesome.

Aristogiton a false accuser and brynger of men to trouble was now already
condemned, and in prieso^ there forto dye, and hertyly prayed Phocion to come
and see him and Phocions fre^des would not suffer yt he should goo to such a
vile b^ die: In priesen is the best place possible where to see co^tinu^all and
the same hai^ous ma^^factours.
And I pray yo^ (quod he) in what place should a man have better phancie to
speak unto Aristogiton? The argument of his friends he did most fynely wrest
to the contrary of their menyng^ signifiyng, that he would not goo thither to
be a supporter or bearer of a commen m^lefactour, but to take the fruicion of
his ius^ely deserved calamitee.

The Atheniens being sore moved Byzancians, Byzantiu^, a city of Thr^cia nigh
to y^ se^ssyde, first edified and bu^^ded by Pan^anias Capitain o^ king of the
Lacedemoni^^s, and of^erward ^nlarged by Co^stantinus Emperor of the Roma^nes,
and made ye hedde city of all the ^he empier, and named Constantinopolis which
name of Constantinoble it obteineth and keeps yet still unto this day, it was
also called noua Roma, new Room.
forthat the same would not receive one Charetes, whom ye said Atheniens had
sent with an army for aid and defe^se of their city against Philippus king
of Macedonie, when Phocio^ had said yt there was no cause why to take
displeasure with their friends for having such mystruste, but rather with the
capitaines that were men not to be trusted, he was chosen capitain himself.
And the Byzancians puttyng their affiaunce in him, he brought to pass that
Philippus departed thens as wise as he came without his purpose. The
mystrustfulnesse of the Byzancians he laid on the neck of the Charetes ye
capitain, who was such manner a man, yt it seemed an unsure thing for ye said
people to commit theimselfes to his proteccion. To mistrust an untrusty
person is a poinct of wisdom: To mystrust^ an vntrusti^ person, is ^
poincte of wisdom.
but to put theimselfes into the hands of Phocion being a man of honest
estimacion and credit they made nomaner stickyng nor no bones at all.

Alexander king of the Macedonians had sent an hundred talentes unto Phocion in
the way of a reward But Phocion demanded of them which brought the money,
how it happened, that, where there were Atheniens many moo the^ he, Alexander
would send such a reward to him alone. The messagiers in this wise
aunsweryng, because he judges the alone among them all to be an honest and a
good manne, well (quod Phocion) then leat him suffer me both so to be
reputed, Phocio^ refused a great sum of money sent unto him in reward by
Alexander.
and also to be such an one in deed. How proprely he took their reason out
of their mouths, and applied the same to an occasion of the refusyng the gift.
Now, what manne may in this matter any other then meruaill at the synceritee
of an heart which could not be corrupted? Phocion was a man in pouertee, and
yet was he nothing at all moved with the greatenesse of the reward. Those
persons throu^h whose hands the administracio^ of the comme^weale does
pass be naught if they take rewards.
And al under one did he notify, that such persons as having the
conueighau^ce and administracion of the commenweale, dooen yet for all that not
hold their hands from taking rewards, neither been good men, nor ought to
be accoumpted for any such.

When Alexander made instaunce Atheniens at their cost and charge, and the
people cried earnestely for Phocion by name to apere, What counsel Phocio^
gave to ye Athenie^s, co^sultyng whether they should send to Alexander any
galyes ^r not.
that he might declare what advise and cou^sail he would give: he arisyng up
out of his place, said: Then, mine advise and counsel is, that either ye
suppress with weapen such persons as been of power to ouermatche you and to
hold you in subieccio^, orels show amity and frendeship toward the same. The
stronge^ must be obeyed and have his will.
At few words he gave counsel that nothing was to be denied unto
Alexander on their behalf, unless they had assured trust and confidence, if
he would take peper in the nose, or stiere coals, to wring him to the wurse
with dynte of sweorde. Wherein if Alexander seemed the stronger o^ both,
Alexander ^ould in no wise a^yde to have any nay in his reque^^es.
that then it was no prouokyng of the young manne being all heart, and one
that to dye for it could not abide to have any nay in his requests.

Plutarchus in the life of Phocion says that one Asclepiades was the first
that told the news of the death of Alexande^ in Athenes. Unto whom Demades an
^ratour said yt there was no credence to be given, allegeyng, yt it could
none other wise be, but all the whole universal world to be replenished and
s^uffed with the odor of such a dedde body even y^ first day, i^ i^ had
been true that Alexander was dedde.
whose bryngyng up noman could tell) that Alexander was deceassed. Anon out
sterten y^ orators, exhortyng the Atheniens to make no ferther delaie ne
taryaunce, but incontinente with all haste to begin war. But Phocion willed
them, What Phocion said when the orators of Athenes gave the^ co^^^as^ to
make war upon a rumor of the death of Alexander.
not be over hasty until some more certain knowlage might be had. For,
(says he) if Alexander be dedde this day, he wilbee dedde the morrow too,
and the next day also. He gravely restreigned and stayed the heddie
vndiscretenesse of the orators.

When Leosthenes was a man at this time, of great authoritee and estimacion
in Athenes, who would not rest prouokyng the people to make war upon the
residue of Greece, until he had brought them in mind so to do. And himself
was Capitain in the same war, and fought a great field against Antipater and
the Beocians, and the Atheniens woonne the feld^ But Leosthenes was slain in
that battree. And whereas the Atheniens myndyng to continue war and perceiuyng
Phoci^^ to be altogether against it, had devised a wyle to have on^ Antiphilus
succeed Leosthenes, and to put Phocion by, les^ he would turn the war into
peace, Phocion commanded by proclamacion yt as many as were between the age of
sixteen years and seventy, should out of hand geat them to their hors^ and
harness, and prouidyng theimselfes vitailles for five daie^ to come and follow
him. This the people cried out upon, and they that were by reason of years
ympote^te or unable or otherwise by the law discharged of gooyng to war,
grutched a such an unreasonable proclamacion. To whom Phocio^ thu^ answered:
why what wrong do I unto you, sens that I must goo forth with you myself
being.lxxx. years old? Bu^ thus at the last he abated their have toward
war, and quieted the city to keep theimselfes at home in rest and peace.
Thi^ annotacion may serve for the perfect elucidacion of the.xvii^
apophthegme.
Leosthenes had persuaded Athenes to make war being set agog to think all
ye world otemele, and to imagine the recoueryng of an high name of freedom and
of principalitee or soueraintee, The woorde^ of Leosthenes Phocio^ likened to a
cypres tree goodly to see to, but in deed unfruitful.
Phocion affermed his words to be sembleable unto cypres trees, y^ which
although they be of a great highthe, and goodly to behold, yet have no fruit
ne goodness on them. Nothing could possible have been spoken to better
purpose of talk that promises many gaye good morowes, Uneth any tree more
goodly to behold afar of, the^ the cypres tree, nor in deed more barren.
and makes ioyly royal waranti^e of things in words, but without any
effect or coming to pass of deeds, even sembleably as the cypres tree The
Cypres tree (says Plinius in the.xxxiii. chapitur of the xvi. volume) is
elfishe and froward to spryng up, of a fruit^ that may well be spared, of
beries euilfauouredly wythered and shronken, of leaf bittur, of savor
rammyshe, and not so much as for geuyng shadow to be loved or set by, o^
boughs, branches and leaves no more but here and there on^ in manner even like
a little thynne shrubbe. etc.
shootyng up into the aier with a top of a great highthe, and growyng sharp
with a bushe great beneth and small above of a trymme facion, seems a far of
to make assured warau^tise of some especial gaye thing, and yet in deed there
is almost no tree more barren.

prosperous tidings thereof gave laud and thanks to the gods with sacrifice
^
and high solemnitee, Phocio^ being demanded whether he would not with his
good will have had yesame things so dooe^, The consta^cie of Phocio^ in not
repe^tyng his good cou^saill given, though the contrary happened well and
luckely.
said, yes veralye, my will was never other but to have all executed and
dooen eue^ as it has been now, but that not withstandyng, I am yet still of
this mind, that I would the other way had been decreed. Menyng, Things
indiscreetly purposed, dooen many times succeed well, but yet ye best ways are
evermore to be taken.
that things also without all wy^edome or good advise purposed, have at many
times prosperous and luckye hap, and that, as often as the same does so
chance, the parts of men is, to rejoice in the behalf of the commenweale
but yet that men ought not for any suc^e respect or cause, Not ye beginning
of ^hynges, but ye last end must declare whether thesam^ was well a^^e^pted or
not.
not to purpose evermore the best, and take ye best ways. Yea and par adventure
this ran in Phocions hedde, yt men ought not even at the first choppe to
put assured trust and confidence in the luckie chances that happen at the
first beginning of things, but that the later end of all the whole ma^ier
must be it that shall de^^s^e of what sort the first attemtyng ^
^ppo^^^emente of the same entreprise was.

When the Read of this in the apophthe^m^ and note next before going. And of ye
same matier^ read in ye xvi^ apophthegme of this Phocion.
Macedonians had by Attica, and destroyed the sea costs of the same round
about, Phocion took forth with him a coumpaignie of young men being in
their best lust and age, of whom soondrie persons hastyly approchyng unto
him, and (like as if they had been capitains) geuyng him cou^saill that he
should by preue^cion geat to a certain hillocke, that was even there in sight
of the Macedonians, and should in the same pitche his camp and there set his
footmen: This is ad^ded out of Plutarchus in ^he life of Phocion.
other some affermyng to be best that ^e should soodainly enui^on the said
Macedo^ians with his horsemen: and other ^ome taking upon them to teach him
to set upon his enemies, o^e out of one place, an other out of another place,
and one this way, and another yt way, oh god Hercules (quod Phocion) what a
mayny of capitaines I see here, Many Capitaines, and few^ good souldyours, quod
Phocion.
and good souldyours woondreous few. Notyng y^ unadvisedness ^ ^ndiscret^
facion of young folks, which was so pressed to take in hand to lead and teach
the capitain, whereas the duty and part of a souldyour is not to be a bu^sie
geuer of counsel, The due^ie and part of a good souldyour.
but when ye case requires, lustyly to bes^^ere him about his buisynesse. Yet
nevertheless battaill joined, he woonne the victory, and overcame Nicion the
capitain of the Macedonians. But ere long time after, the Athenieus being
clean ouercomed and subdued, were driven to take a garri^on of Antipater to be
over them i^ the castle of their ci^ee. The Atheniens in conclusion ouercomed
by Antipater and kept by his garri^on.


Menyllus the capitain of the garrison, Memyllus ^^pita^^ of An^^^^ter his
^^rrison in Athenes.
would (for love and good will) have given Phocion money, Phocion taking
great indignacio^ and foul skorne at ye matter, said yt neither he the said
Menyllus was better manne then Alexander, Phocio^ refused to take ^oney of
Me^yllus his gift.
and y^ cause to take any reward or gift of money now was wurse then at that
time when he refused to take money sent unto him by Alexander. This is touched
before in ye.viii. apoph.
O an heart that could not be coniured ne bought with money.

Antipater would many times say, yt whereas he had two fre^des in Athenes, he
could never in all his live persuade Phocion to take any money or other thing
of his gift, Ant^pater could never persuade Phocio^ to take any money, nor
fill Demades with geuyng.
nor never fille Demades with geuyng. Thissame was Demades the orator who was
excellent and passing good in making an oracion or setting out of a tal^ without
any study or unprovided, Demades had no feloe i^ making an oracion without
study, whereas Demostenes penned al his matiers before.
where as Demosthenes made none oracions but diligentely penned before.

Unto Antipater requiryng him to do for his sake some thing How Phocio^ made
au^swer to Antipater requiryng hi^ to do a certain thing contrary to
justice.
O Antipater thou cannest not have of Phocion a friend and a flaterer both to
gether. A friend is at commandment so far as conscience and honestee will
suffer, and no ferther. For in deed one friend ought in no wise to require of
an other friend a thing that is unjust. One friend ought not to require any
vni^ste thing of another.
But as for a flaterer, he is a ready and a serviceable paige for what soever
a body will have him do.

When the people of Athenes were Phocion should take an army with him into
Beotia, For ferther declaracion hereof read y^ annotacion of the.xi.
apophthegme of this Phocion.
and Phocion judged in his mind that so dooyng would be nothing for the
profit of the comme^weale, he made a proclamacion, yt as many as were in the
city between sixteen years of age and sixty should be in a readynesse and
come follow him. The aged me^ne in this case cryyng out against him, and
allegeyng for their excuse yt they were ympote^t and feeble for age, why (quod
Phocion) there is none unreasonable thing contained in my proclamacio^, How
Phocio^ stayed the Atheniens being in a sudden pangue ^o continue wa^^^ with the
Beo^ian^.
sens that I myself do make ready to goo forth with them as their capitain
being.lxxx. years of age. By this subtle means he appeaced and cooled ye
soodain heat of ye co^mens.

Antipater, the commenweale of the Atheniens being come again to such state
yt the people The philosophiers that dooen write of politic gouernau^c^
describen the state of commenweales to have been diverse in diverse places^
Somewher, kings governed, as in Persia and in Room at the beginning, and now
in England, which was called Monarchia, and this state al writers dooen agree
upon to be the best. Some commenweales have been governed by a certain ^oumbre
of magistrates and cou^saillours, as in Room, from the exterminacion of kings
until the time of Julius Caesar, and at this present day in Uenece, and this
was cal^^d Oligarchia, or Aristocratia. Somewhere all the people r^wled and were
echeman of eguall autoritee, as in Athenes until they were yoked by the thirty
tyrannes, and afterward conquered and subdued by Philippus, and after him
hold^^ in subi^ccion by Alexander, after him by Antipater, after whose ^^^^^ss^
they obtained again their first state, which was called ^^mo^^atia. And this
was of all other the wurst, as here may ri^ht well appear, for the people
being sembleable to a monstrious beast of many heddes did things heddyly
without due counsel, advise, deliberacion, discrecion or reason, as the
Atheniens being in furious raiges most wrongfully put to death many
innocente persons, high clerks and noble counsaillours, as before is noted in
the.v. apophthegme of thissame Phocion.
rewled, and were every manne like master, Phocio^ was at a commen assemblee
condemned to dye. Phocion being innoce^te condemned to death by the people of
Athenes.
And so it was, yt his other With Phocion were condemned to death Nicocles,
Thudippus, Hegemon and Rithocles. And besides these were condemned being absent
Demetrius Phalereus, Callimedon, Charicles and soondrie persons moo.
friends which had been condemned to death together with him at the same time,
went pieteously weeping and making lame^tacion when they were led to prieso^ but
Phocion went as still as a la^be not speaking a word. But one of his enemies
meetynge with him in the street, after many despiteous and raillyng words,
spette in his face. Then Phocion lookyng back upon the officers, said: The
patience of Phocion.
will noma^ chastise this feloe here uncomely demeanyng himself? This most
virtuous and godly ma^ne even when there was with him none other way but
death, Phocio^ when he was ca^^e to dye yet had care of good order to be kept
in the city.
had care of ye public good order to be kept. He made no complainte of that
so heinous a touch of vilanie, neither did he require auengemente against y^
party who contrary to ye laws was eagre to show crueltee unto a cast ma^ne:
he only willed the eiuill exaumple, yt was contrary to good manier and
behaueour to be repressed: and to that horrible cruel deed he gave no wurse
name but uncomely demeanure^

Phocion, How Phocio^ coumforted Thudippus being out of pac^^nce when he
should dye.
one manne especially among all the others, being woondrefull ympacient
bewailled his missehappe who^ Phocion coumforted after this sort: Is it not
enough for the O Euippus, (or as some readen Thudippus) to dye in cumpaignie with
Phocio^ Phocio^ was dooen to death, not only being without gilt but also being
one yt had dooen highly well for the commenweale. It may be a coumforte for
an innocente wrongfully to suffer with innocents.
It ought therefore to have been esteemed a great coumforte and reioycyng for
the party being innocente, wrongfully to be put to death with such an
innocente and good manne as Phocion was.

At his last hour, when ye bruage Of y^ manner of puttyng condemned persons to
death in Athenes, read before in ye annotacion of y^ liiii. apoph. of Socrates.
one demanded of him whether he were disposed anythyng to say unto his soonne,
(for the same was there present: (Dear soonne (quod Phocion) I both streightely
charge and command the, What Phocion said to his soonne at the hour of his
death.
and also right hertyly desire and pray the, never to bear toward the
Atheniens any grutche or malice for ye reme^breaunce of this matier. To other
persons when they suffer execucion the chief coumforte, that they commenly
have, is the hope of their death to be^ afterward avenged: The ^nti^^^^ele and
affeccio^ of Phocio^^ toward his cou^tr^e.
but Phocio^ did all that in him lay to provide that ye soonne should not
revenge ye wrongful murdreyng of his own father, and was more desireous that
ye same should bear tender zele and affeccion toward his country, then toward
his pare^te.

Nicocles making instaunt request for license to suppe of his part of the
poison before y^ Phocio^ should, well (quod Phocio^) though this be an hard
thing to obtein and much against my stomach, Phocio^ loved and favored
Nicocles singu^arly well.
yet must it needs be granted unto yt manne who^ I never said nay of any
thing in all my life time. Phocion had evermore borne singular love and
affeccio^ toward Nicocles the mos^ feithful and truest herted manne among all the friends he had, Nicocles the most trusty friend that Phocio^ had.
and for y^ co^sideracion it would have been a great greef to y^ heart of
Nicocles to see the other passing out of this world. Which greef to avoid, he
desired to drink first himself. And in this thing also did Phocion show
pleasure to his friend.

he alone had droonken, The price of an ounce of Hemlocke juice in Athenes.
and only Phocion was remainyng unserved (by reason that y^ poison had been
all consumed by the others) the hangma^ said plainly and swore yt he would not
serve him except there were laid down in his hand twelf good drachmes (little
under ^^.s. sterlyng,) for an ounce of hemlocke juice (he said) would cost
not a ferthing less. Phocio^ therefore to the^de that his death might not be
delaied or slacked through ye feloes brableyng, What Phocio^ said when the
hangman would not ministre the p^ison unto him without m^ney.
to one of his friends purposely called, spoke thus. Forasmuch as it is so
(said he) yt in ye city of Athenes a ma^ne cannot dye neither, but he must
pay for it, I beseech you hertyly, pay ye hangman here his askyng.

When Demosthenes was buisie Alexander being now at ye veraye poincte to win
and enter ye city of Thebes, Phocion took him up with this greek verse of
Homere, How Phocio^ rebuked Demostenes ca^tyng forth many ^ailling words
a^a^^^ Alexa^der^
out of the first book of the work entitleed Odyssea.

(...):
O weked creature, what fancy have thou,
Such a ^oure feloe, to provoke now?
THE SAYINGS OF MARCUS TVLLIVS CICERO.
Of Marcus Tullius Cicero to speak as his worthiness requires, w^r to write
an infinite volume couched and replenished with whole ^eapes of lauds and
praises^ But for this present pu^pose and place it shall be enough to say, y^ he
lyneally de^ce^ded from the house of Tullius an annciente ^yng of the Uolsces.
But (as the world and all things are full of chaunges) so in long process of
years the ioylit^e of that bloudde and name fell to d^c^ye and to ignobilitee.
Albeit eue^ in the time of Cicero the Tullies remained in the degree and
acceptacion of gentlemen, and Cicero even at his first coming to Rome enjoyed
the degree of a gentleman^ and like as he was under the estate of the Senators
^hiche we^ lords, so was he above the condition and degree of the yeomanrie or
comenaltie, his father was called Tullius, a man of no great name ne port,
his mothers name Olbia a rich woman. He was born in a town of ye Uolsces
called Arpinu^^ (free of Room to enjoy all mani^r frau^chesses, libertees,
privileges, and offices in the same). Nevertheless al such persons as never
had their parents dw^llyng in Room, ne bea^yng any magistrate or office
there, were called, no^^ homines, new men, that is to say come of straungi^rs
and men unknown to bear autoritee and rewle in the city. Tullius was at
last the father of all eloquence, a great writer of books in all kinds, and
a man (as Pli^ius of him saiyth for wit and eloquence out of all
comparison, he got up by little and little to bear offices in Room even to
the veraye ^onsulship, and that wi^h as much honor, a^torit^e, glory, and
renoume as ever manne did, in somuche that he was y^ first yt ever was called
in Room, parens patriae, the ^ather of his ^ountree, that is to say, the
only sauer and kepe^ of the country. Nevertheless, was he at lengt^ banyshed
and his house in despite, beaten and thrown down to the hard ground, but at
last he was fette home again of their own accord and received with such honor
as never was any ma^ne there before or sens, and had a new house builded for
him at the charges of the city twys s^ good and double so fair, as his own
was before. In fine he was by the permission and suffreaunce of Augustus Caesar
with all vilanie possible ^lain at the commandment of Marcus Antonius his
enemy, who caused his right hand with which he had written to be strieken
of, and his ^oung to be cut out of his hedde with which he had made many
noble oraci^s before the Se^nate and people of Room. And after that the said
Antonius had ^had his hedde presented i^ a dyshe at his table, and had ^aciated
his most^ ^r^ell yies with the contemplacion of it, he caused the same for
extreme contumely and despite to be nailled up in the place that was called
^ostra, where Tullius had before that time pro^ounced many a sore inuectiue
against him.

MArcus Tullius, Ma^cus Tullius much ie^ted at for the surname of Cicero.
(forasmuch as he was much tested on for the surname of As touching the
surname of Cicero, it is to be noted y^ this Marcus Tullius right well knowing
his own petigree and a^ncestrie, resumed the surname of the stock from which
he was descended. For the first Tullius was surnamed Cicero, of a little piece
of fleashe growyng in the side of his nose like to a cicer, which is a little
puitz much like to a pease, some there been that call it the fatche, but I
doubt whether truly or not. But in time of old antiquitee a commen thing it
was that families were surnamed of diverse such thynge^ (says Plinius in the
third chapitur of the.xviii. book) a^ the family of those which were in Room
called Pilumn^^ was first surnamed of the inue^tyng of Pilum, which is a
pe^stell such as things are braied withal in a morta^e, and in old^ time
they had none other way to grynde their corn. Also Pi^^sones were surnamed, a
pise^do, of gryndyng with a querne, because it was their inuencion. Those also
(says he) which were called Fabii, Lentuli, and Cicerones had their surnames
at the first of such things in the sowyng and housbandrie whereof they
e^celled others.
Cicero) being warned by his friends to choose and take unto him some other
surname, What Tullius said when his fre^des ad^ised him to take some other
surname instead of Cicero.
answered that he would ere he dyed make the name of Cicero more noble and
famous, then was the name either of the For the renoume of the Catons, of the
Catules, and the Sca^res, and of their families in the histories of Titus
Li^iu^ Florus, Plutarchus and Ualerius Maximus. For some more light to be
given to this present place, as touching Cato the first, I have thought good
to set the words of Plinius in the.xxvii Chapitur of the seventh book. In
other kinds of virtues (says he) many persons have many soondrie ways
excelled. But Cato the first of the house that was called in Rome gens portia,
has been thought to have in most high degree performed and showed the most
high things yt may be in any mortal creature, being the best orator that
ever was before his time, the best capitain of an army, and the best Senator.
And as for this was in Cato alone and never in any manne else, that he was upon
accusacions so were and ^owertie times brought to his answer before judges at
the bar, and never any manne moo times arrained, and yet ever quite. For this
Cato because he was a grave and a sage father, and a co^tynuall enemy and
pursuer of all vice, had the hatered of many persons, who of malice wrought to
bring him to confusion, but his innocence evermore delivered him. From this
Cato lyneally descended Cato Uticensis a veraye noble ma^ne also, as is before
in the saiy^ges of Augustus largely me^cioned and noted.
Catons, or of the Of Quintus Luctatius Catulus, it is written in the chronicles
of Room, that in ye first war yt the Romans made against the Cartaginiens
he with a navy of three hundred ships made six hundred ships of theirs
couche, and took their ^itailles and other ladyng, and the chief Capitain of
the same Himilcon. But the memory of these men's acts is now clen^ extincted,
the memory of Cicero by reason of his most noble books is ymmortall, and
shall never dye while the world shall stand. Of whom Plinius in the.xxx.
chapitur of the seventh volume among many high praises more says in this wise:
^ll haill Cicero the first manne that ever was called parens patriae, the
father of our country, and the first manne yt ever deserved a triumph and
never did on harness for the maier, and yet did as worthyly deserve to
have the garlande of a triumpher for thy ^oung, as ever had any other before
for the swearde. (Which he speaks of the suppressyng of y^ sedicious
coniuracion of Catiline, whom Cicero did peasably destroy and put to death
with all his accomplices and adherentes without blouddeshed of any of the true
citezens.) All haill the parente and chief founder of all eloquence of the
latin tongue and (as Julius Caesar the dictatour sometime thy great enemy
has left in writing of the) one that had achiued a garla^de of triumph so
far surmountyng the garlandes of all other men's triumphs, as it is more
highly to be esteemed to have so highly anaunced and extended through out all
parts of the world the bounds and limits of the wit which the Romans
have, then of their empier.
Catules, orels of the Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, in the time of his consulship
passing by chance along by Publius Decius then chief justice, when he saw
the same justice not to do his duty of obeisaunce, commanded the same to
arise from the benche, and then did Scaurus cut the garmente of Decius
(which was ^s great a dishonor and ignominy, as if a chief justice should
have his coyf pulled from his hedde here in England, and be^ disautorised or
deposed from his office) he cut the benche y^ Decius had sitten on, in token
of his deposicion or depriuacio^ and proclaimed that no person should any more
resort unto the same Decius for justice. Also, being consul he triumphed of
the Ligures and the Gantiskes. And at other seasons did many noble acts both
of buildings and otherwise. He was of so high autoritee in Room, y^ of his
own hedde without any other bodies cou^saill, he set Opius in harness
against Gracchus, and set Marius to war against Glaucia and Sa^u^ninus. In
his old age he was accused and appealed by Marius one of the tribunes for the
people, that he had enforced the friends of the Romans and all the country of
Latiu^ to battaill, for answer to which complainte and accusacion, thus he
said openly unto the people: Masters all, Uarius says that Aemilius Scaurus
enforced and drove such as are in League with this city to harness and
weapen, and Scaurus says it was nothing so, to whether of the two do ye
give credence? upon these words was he dimissed.
Scaures, For these houses were of especial fame and renoume among the
Romans, The houses of the Cato^s Catules and the Scaures were of great
renoume in Room.
whereas Tullius was a man but newly come to Room and as yet unknown there.
And as for the surname was a ready thing to be tested at, because it appeared
to have been derived of the most vile Poultz called cicer. Yea iwysse, as
though the family of those Romans which were called Fabii, The surnames of
those which were called fabii ^ Lentuli, where of they came up.
s^med not to have had that surname first of Benes (which are in latin
called, Fabae) and they that were called Lentuli, to have been surnamed of
another Poultz which the latin men dooen call, Lentem But to this present
purpose, of slendre nobilitee and renoume is that manne, Of sle^dre nobilitee
is that manne, who has nothing but the petigree of his aunces^ours and his
surname.
which has none other poincte of nobilitee in him besides the lineal descent
of his ancestors and his surname. The most honorable kind of nobilitee is
yt which every manne does purchase to himself by his own propre virtues and
good qualitees. The most laudable no^bilitee is that which every manne
achiueth by his own propre virtues.
Neither proved Marcus Tullius a false manne of his word, for ye name of
Cicero is at this present day more commen in each man's mouth, then are
three hundred such as the Catules, and ye Scaures with all their garlandes,
their images of honor and their petigrees.

Marcus Tullius would not forsake ye sur^ame of Cicero.
he had his The Romans for the most part, especially such as were of any
nobilitee and renoume, had three names, the first was called Praenomen, the
forename, as Marcus, which we do call the christian name: the secounde was
called nomen, the name, as Tullius, which was ^he commen name of the house
stock or family that they were descended of, and this we call our surname,
because we have not the third in use, (except it should be called out si^e
name that is to say ye name of our f^thers bloudde and auncestrie.) The third
was given upon some other external chance, cause or consideracion, as Cicero,
and semblea^ly in others.
forename, and his name stamped and set out in plain lettres, but for his
surname, Cicero, he engraued the figure and proporcion of a cicer. Not
shrynkyng an ynche for the interpretacion of capcious bourders.

Such orators or advocates Cicero avouched to be sembleable unto lame
creples, Clamouro^s and brallyng orators Cicero likened unto lame creples.
for yt such manier orators sembleably had al their refuge unto such
clamourous, yallyng, as lame bodies to their horses. Yea and eue^ at this
present day, a rief thing it is to see feloes enough of the self same suite,
which as often as they see them selfs to have the wurse end of the staff in
their cause, dooen make their recourse wholly unto furious brallyng, to the
end that where they are not of facultee and cunnyng with good arguments and
profou^de reasons to make their mat^er good, they may with malaperte facyng and
with fear, by hook or crook drieue it to their purpose.

When ^erres, a gentleman of Room, who being Praetor in Sicilie did much
pillage and extorcion there. Whereupon he was accused, and brought to his
answer in Room. Cicero made and pronounced against him certain inuectiues,
and in them so laid to his charge, and brought in witness upon the same, that
Uerres was condemned in a great sum of a rierage. And not many years after,
he was cast in a forfaicte of all his gooddes and lands by Marcus Antonius,
upon none other cause ne ground (says Plinius) but for that on a time
bragguyng and cockyng with Antonius, he craked and made vau^te that he would
drop plate of Corinthe metalle with him ounce for ounce and not be one piece
behind him.
Verres, who had a soonne Cicero under the name of a synneful abuser of his
body in abominacion, How Cicero ^aun^ed Uerr^s laiyng to his charge unchaste
living.
thou art ignorant (quod Cicero) yt a ma^ne ought to chyde his children
secretly within doors. Signifiyng that word of reproach not to take place
in him, but in the soonne of the fault fynder or quereler. And in deed to
parents it apperteineth to blame or chyde their children, Parents ought to
rebuke the^r children secretly within their houses.
but yet not without the circuit of their own houses, neither ought the same
words of rebuke to be notified forth of doors. But that person does no
less then publyshe it abroad, who lays to others abroad, that thing which
his children do perpetrat^ at home in his own house.

Metellus laiyng to ye charge of Cicero, that yesame had been the death of mo
persons by geuyng evidence against them, then ever he had saved by pleadyng
for the^, How Cicero answered Metellus laiyng to his charge yt he had been the
death of mo men by his evidence geuyng, then he had saved by pleadyng for
them.
yea marie (quod Cicero) for I have in me more truth of my word in bearyng
witness, then I have of eloquence to persuade. With a meruaillous witty
brain did he wrest the other parties word of reproach to his own laud and
praise. For in a geuer of evidence truth is to be regarded, in an advocate or
attorney, eloquence it is that does most avail.

Eftsons to the same Metellus demaundyng Cicero who was his father (as castyng
him in ye teethe with the bassenes of his birth) he said: How Cicero answered
Metellus demanding, who was his father.
thy mother is in the cause yt a right hard thing it is to make a direct
answer unto this question of thine. It is before noted that ye father of Cicero
was o^ no name.
For the mother of Metellus had a name that she was no very good wooman of her
body. The mother of Metellus unchaste of her body.
Yea and Metellus himself being of his mothers conditions was veraye Metellus
was so shuttlebrained that even in the mids of his tribuneship he left his
office in Room, and sailled to Po^peius into Syria, and by then he had been
with him a while, ^ame flyngyng home to Room again as wise as a capon.
light and mutable, and one yt could none other but follow every soodain guerie
or pangue that shot in his brain. Metellus light and inco^sta^t.
Cicero changed the contumely from the father to the mother. For then is the
father uncertain to be known, when the mother keeps not hirself to one sole
manne.

Metellus after the deceasse of Diodorus Diodorus alias Diodorus master unto
Metellus in rhetorike.
(whom he had to his master in rhetorike) had set for a memorial upon the
toumbe of yesame a crow of stone Cicero said: What Cicero said when Metellus
had set upon the tou^be of Diodorus a crow of stone.
Truly he is rewarded according to his deserts. For he has taught Metellus to
flygh and not to make oracions. Notyng the lightenesse and inconstauncie of
Metellus. The crow is a bird that has none other music, nor can none other
song ne tune but ka, ka. Plutarchus calls ye Rhetorician Philagres, and
says that the toumbe was of marble, and that Metellus caused the crow to be
graven in the marble stone, which thing in deed is the more likely.

Marcus ^Tullius had heard say that Vatinius (a mortal foo of his, and
besides that of himself) a person full of myschief) was dedde, What Cicero
said when one had told news yt Uatinius was dedde, and afterward the thing
was found otherwise.
shortly after when he had heard contrary word again, that the same was alive
and merry: eiuill chieuyng come to him (said Tullius) that eiuill lied.
Signifiyng that Uatinius was unworthy any longer to live. In deed every lie
is eiuill, but this lie was double ^iuill, because it had brought honest men
into a fools paradise. Yet nevertheless the saying was doubtefull, as the
which might have been spoken of such a person also, whom a body would not
with his good will have had dedde. As if some light feloe should bring us news
that some one of our kynne, or of our dear friends, or some learned manne were
departed this world, and the same news were afterward found untrue, we might and
would give him Christ's curse that had made such an eiuill lie to put us in
discoumforte and heaviness And in this poincte of speaking, ambiguously
rests the wittynesse of the apophthegme

When Marcus Tullius was making Plutarchus names this ma^ne Octa^ius
and a certain, person supposed of al me^ne to be born in Lybia spoke in this
manier, I hear not this tale (menyng by the same words, that he did no
poincte like ye matier which the orator treacted of. The use in Lybia was to
have their ears bored full of holes for to hang rings and precious stones
thereat.
) And yet (quod Cicero) ye have holes plentieth in your ears. For y^ nation of
a custom had their ears bored full of holes, to hang thereat rings and
precious stones, which we now of days do wear about our neck, or on our
fyngers. And how such holes are made, Celsus does teach.

Caius Popilius (who would in any wise seem to be an expert lawier, Now
Cicero mo^hed one Popilius bea^yng the countenance of a good lawier whereas in
deed he had no sight in it Albe^it Plutarchus, in y^ life of Cicero names
this manne Cotta in the apophth^gmes. C. Popilius.
whereas in deed he was but a boungleer and a veraye ass in knowelage of the
law) being on a time called forth to give evidence in a certain matier of
trauerse, answered, y^ he knew nothing in the matier, nor nothing could say.
Yea (quod Cicero) ye thynk perchance yt ye are now asked a question of some
poincte of ye law.

Hortensius the orator had received of Verres an image of Sphinx all of clean
silver in part of a reward to defend his cause against Cicero (at what time
he was accused as aforesaied). Plutarchus in the life of Cicero says, y^ this
Sphinx was all of clean Iuerie.
And when the same Hortensius upon a certain poincte somewhat coulourably aferre
of and mystically vttreed by Cicero, had thus said: I have not learned to
soil no riedles I, he said again: He may well ^oyle riedles (says Tullius)
y^ has Sphinx dwelling at home in his house with him.
And yet have you Sphinx dwelling at home in thy house with ye. The fable of ye
monstre Sphinx is well known, which with conditions of prices and rewards did
put forth riedles to men, Of this read before at large in y^.l. apophthegme
of Diogenes.
and of such persons as could not soil them the reward was death.

When he met one Voconius by What Cicero said when he met one Uoconius and
his three foul daughters.
he recited to his friends softely this little verse of greek.

(...).
In the dispite of Phoebus clean,
This feloe begotte his children.
Menyng, that Uoconius of likelihood went about the gettyng of children utterly
against the will, Children begotten toward the soo^ne arisyng are conceived
more perfect of lymme, shape and favor.
mind and disposicion of Apollo: either because Apollo is of y^ poets feigned
to be amiable and all full of beauty, orels for yt the folks thynken
children begotten toward ye soonne arisyng to be conceived more perfect of
form, shape, lymme and favor. Orels forthat Cicero thought in his merry
co^ceipte, y^ forasmuch as according to the proverb, The soonne sees all
thynge^ says the proverb.
Sol omnia uidet ac reuelat the soonne sees all things and disouereth all
things, and brings all to light, except Phoebus (which is ye soo^ne) had
oughed Uoconius a shame, he would never have suffreed him to begette such
foul babies and oule faced doudes as all the world should afterward woondre
at.

Faustus Sylla (the son of Sylla the dictatour) for to discharge the great
debte that he was in, had made an inventory of all his mouables to set
forth ye same to sale: yea marie (quod Cicero) this proscripcion I do much
better allow, then the proscripcion that your father used to make. He made a
merry ieste of ye double significacio^ of this word, proscripcio^. Of y^ double
significacion of this word proscribere, it is before declare^.
For things are said proprely in latin, proscribi, which are at an open
preisyng set to out ve^t or sale, and men also are said in latin, Of
Sylla it is largely noted before in soo^drie apophthegmes of Julius Caesar and
of Po^peius.
proscribi, that are proclaimed traitors to be slain of any manne y^ will
do it where soever they be found, after which cruel form and sort Lucius
Cornelius Sylla ye father had proscribed no small nou^bre of ye citeze^s of
Room in y^ time of his dictature.

Pompeius and Caesar being fallen at Cice said who^ to eschew I know veraye
well, What Cicero said, when Caesar and Po^peius were fallen at strife.
but whom to ensue I cannot tell. Menyng that both the said parties took the
sweorde in hand, Of the variau^ce between Iul. Caes. and Pompeius it is before
mentioned i^ their apophtegmes
not for ye libertiee or fredome of ye commenweale, but whether of them two
should have the soueraintee.

He found a great fault with Pompeius, Cicero blamed Pomp^ius for departing
away out of Rome.
for yt the same had abandoned the city and had in that his Themistocles, a man of great rewle and autoritee i^ Athenes (as is before noted) was at last
banyshed his country, and pursued in such wise, that he was constreigned to
take refuge unto Xerxes king of the Persians, against whom he has before kept
battaill, with whom at last he grew so far i^ favor and credit, that
Xerxes made him high capitain of his army against the Atheniens. But
Themistocles, when he saw^ his countreemen, took remorse of conscience, and
because he would neither deceive the king which had put him in trust ^or yet
be the destroyer of his own country, poisoned himself with drynkyng the
bloudde of a bulle. Themistocles was a man of no eloquence, favor nor
maiestee. But Pericles was a man beautiful, passing eloquente, wise,
polytike, in high estimacion and autoritee among the Atheniens, in so much
that he governed and rewled the commenweale of Athenes by the space of fowertie
years with all men's favor, benevolence and supportacion. And in like case
was Pompeius in the city of Room, so that his case was more like unto the
case of Pericles then of Themistocles. And in deed (as Cicero by the
testimony of Plu^archus writes) Pompeius his cause stood more with the
comme^weale then Caesar's, and all the aunciente, grave, wise and good men
favored Pompeius, and drew to him as Cato, Cicero, Lentulus, and such others
mo.
Themistocles rather then Pericles, seeing that the cases of Themistocles and
Pompeius were nothing like at all, and the cases of Pericles and Pompeius much
what of a rate in all behalfes. For Themistocles fled unto ye Persians, and
Pericles remained still resyaunt in Athenes.

Pompeius, and repented his folly of coming, being asked the question where he
had left Piso his soonne in law: What Cicero said to Pompeius demaundyng
where he had left Piso his son in law
mary (quod he) with your father in law. Speaking by Iulyus Caesar. Cicero even
like as though he had had half a rubuke, for that he had separated and divided
himself from Piso, who had married his daughter, Piso married y^ daughter of
Cicero, and took part with Caesar. Po^peius had married y^ daughter of Caesar
and yet warred against him.
gave Pompeius again taunte pour tau^te, for yt yesame kept war against his
own father in, law whose daughter he had married.

When a certain person having Caesar to Pompeius said, yt for great desire
to make haste, he had left his horse behynd him in Caesar's camp, marie (quod
Cicero) the^ have thou dooen better by thy horse, then by thy self. Estemyng yt
ye feloe should have dooen much better, if himself had tarried still with Caesar
too.

To a feloe bryngyng tidings Caesar's friends were all sad and in their
dumpes. Plutarchus says yt one Lentulus tol^ these news.
That is eue^ as much (quod Cicero) as to say, that they thynk a mischief on
him. He mocked the flateryng brynger of news, as though Caesar's men's hertes
were in their heles, and they sore afeard of Pompeius.

After the battaill foughten in Pharsalia when Pompeius was fled, one Nonius
said, Of this battaill is above me^cioned in ye sayings of Ca^sar and
Pompeius.
yt there were seven eagles yet left, and therefore encouraged ye souldyours to
be of good chere, and to take their hertes to them. Thy cheeryng were very
good O Nonius, What Cicero said when one Nonius would with seven ^egles cry a
new feld against Caesar at Phatsalium.
(said Cicero) if our war should be against Iaies. But Nonius, when he
said eagles, spak^ of ye ^omaines baners or sta^dardes which had evermore the
picture of an eagle displaied on them. The menyng of Cicero was yt for their
seven eagles, Caesar who had already vanquyshed them, and a^ains^ whem they
had to fight the n^we field, had ten, and yt he had in his army no dastardes
but expert souldyours, yea and better men of their hands then Pompeius had
any. In deed a iaie is nothing in the talauntes of an eagle, but an eagle to
an eagle is a full match, ten eagles to seven is an ouermatche.

Caesar being lord of all had with much honor set up in their places
again, What Cicero said when Caesar set up again the images of Pompeius in
their places.
the images of Pompeius which some body had in despite cast down, Cicero
said Caesar while he restores ye images of Pompeius to their old places,
does set up and stablyshe his own sure for ever. Dooyng to weete, that
Caesar did not the same for any favor yt his heart did bear toward Pompeius,
but to ye end that by the coulourable sembleau^ce of mercifulness, himself
might purchase favor among the citezens, and by such means might establyshe
his own reign and dominacion y^ longer to endure.

So careful was Marcus Tullius The carfulness of Marcus Tullius ^ study
that no word in his oracio^ might be amysse or out of frame.
yt where he had an oracio^ to make before ye benche of judges which were
called The people of Room were divided into thirty five tribes, a^ the city
of London is into twenty five wards. Out of every tribe were elected from time
to time, as cause required, three men to assemble for iudgeyng in sprciall
cases of controversy between party and party. Their judgments and
sittynges were called centumuiralia iudicia, the judgments of the hundred
persons. And the benche self, though they were an hundred and five persons in
all, yet were they of the greater and the more worthy no^mbre called
centumuiri, and not centum quinque uiri.
Centumuiri, and the day was come even at hand, he made free one Erote a
bondeman of his for only bryngyng him tidings that the sittyng was adiourned
and put of one day ferther the^ had been appoincted at ye first. Eros a
bondeman of Cicero, upon what cause he was made free.
This history also has some body put in emo^ges the apophthegmes, whereas
in deed it is none. And yet (as I have before noted any fact or exaumple that
may be to us anhoneste lesson or instruccion (thouh it contein no word at
all) may woorthely be esteemed to have the strength name and place of an^
apophthegme. And such good exaumple^ does not Plutarchus refuse ne abhor
to put in among his apophthegmes, as namely this present history of Cicero
his facion. And would Christ our grene prechers now of daie^ which have
neither shame ne fear to step in to pulpites ere they can well construe ye
gospel^ or epistle which they boldly take upon their to preach, were of
Cicero his modesty and care^fulnesse in this behalf.

Pompeius unto such as said, ah Cicero, ye are come tardie. No never a whitte
tardie (quod he again) for I see nothing here yet in a readynesse. He alluded
to such as come late to a dinner or supper. The mirth of the saying to come
tardie, is grounded upon the ^ouble menyng of ye word, tardie, for they come
tardie that come late to ye beginning, and they come tardie, that come when all
is past and dooen.

When Pompeius had admitted a How Cicero taunted Po^peius for making a Galle
free citezen of Room.
because yesame had forsaken Caesar for to come and to be on his side, A gaye
feloe in deed (quod Cicero) to promise aliens the city of other men, whereas
he is not hable to restore unto us our propre own.

After ye victory and conqueste Caesar, Cicero being asked the question, How
Cicero was beguiled to leave Caesar and cleu^ to Po^peius.
how he had so far missed the cushyn in chosyng of parts, said: In feith ye
gyrdyng of their gounes deceived me. Caesar went in his goune wanto^ly gir^
about him.
Menyng himself never to had trusted that ye victory would have gone on such a
nyce and effeminate persons side. With what words Sylla would often times,
warn^ Pompeius to beware of Caesar.
For Caesar used to goo after such sort girded in his goune that he would goo
(even as wanton or volupteous feloes dooen) traillyng after him the skyrtes of
his goune all pounced in cuttes and ^agges. Wherefore Sylla would many a time
and often give Pompeius warnyng t^ beware of the boy yt went so lewdely girte.

Cicero being at supper with one Damasippus, when the master of the feast
had set upon the table wine that was but easy and soso, and myndyng to
praise the same unto his geastes of the oldenesse of it, said, Masters drink
ye well of this wine, for it is fowertie years old: How Cicero au^swered one
Damasippus praisyng his wine of fowerti^ years ^lde.
By my feith (quod Cicero) it bears ye age right well. After such form of
words do we use to speak of a man, whose beauty and strength age does
not veraye much abat^ nor break. But it was a fond thing se^bleably to
commend wine for being toto old. This wine was called vinum falernum, The
wine fa^ernum.
of Falernus an hille in Campania wh^r it was made. This wine falernum (says
Plinius) was esteemed among all wynes y^ secou^de in dignitee. The Same neither
being veraye new no^ on the othersyde veraye old was thought wholesome for
amannes body, The wine fal^rnu^ if it be either to new or to old, is not
wholesome for man's body.
but being of a mean age (which mean age begins from.xv. years, and so
upward until it be sour, as I thynk Damasippus his wine was) and then it is
it oue^ old, so that when Cicero affermed it to bear it age well, he mened
that it was sterk sour, and that the soreness declare^ it to be over old
though Damasippus had said never a word. and where in a man to bear his
age fair is ^n high grace, Wine of.ii. hundred years old Pl. l. xiiii.C.iiii.
so wine to bear the age well (by ^n ironie) signifies the same to be sour
and sterk naught. Albeeit Plinius makes mention of wynes of two hundred years
old.

When he saw on a time Lentulus When Piso was ded, Cicero married his daughter
to Lentulus.
being a man of a veraye low stature girt with a veraye long sweorde by his
side, he said: who has tied my soonne in law to a sweorde? Who has tied my
son in law to ^ sweorde, quod Cicero.
For the manne seemed to be bound to the sweorde, and not the sweorde to the
ma^ne.

When he had espied in the province of Asia (where his brother Quintus Cicero
had before that time been governor, Quintus Cicero the brother of Marcus
Cicero.
) the image of the same Quintus made with his terguette (as y^ facion then was)
from ye middle upward, The one half of my brother is more the^ all his whole
body said Cicero.
much greater then the veraye true proporcio^ of his body was in deed,
whough (says he) half my brothers body is more the^ the whole. Quintus
Cicero a little man of statu^^.
For the said Quintus was but a little preatie body of stature.

Tullia the daughter of Cicero went with a more stieryng and fast pass the^
was comely for a woman, How Cicero with one saying rebuked his daughter for
gooyng to fast, and Piso forgooyng ^o soft.
and contrary wise Piso his soonne in law with a more slow and still pass
then besemed a man to do, he rebuked them both at ons with one saying, when
he spoke to his daughter in this manier, her housba^de Piso being present: for
shame use in your gooyng such a pass as your housba^de does.

Vatinius (who was Consul but a veraye short time) he iested in this wise.
While Uatinius was co^sul, there was neither winter, ne s^ryngtyme, ne soomer^
ne harueste.
In the year of Vatinius there befell a great woo^dre, that while he was
Consul, there was no winter, ne spryngtyme, no soomer ne harueste. For by these
four seasons ye whole year is divided, P^llio wrote chronicles in (...).
of which seasons every one contains ye complete term of three months. I
cannot certainly tell whether this be not the same thing ye Pollio otherwise
reherseth in the chronicle of Marinus the tyranne, In the time of one consul no man dyned, supped ne slept.

Canini^s Reuilus was co^sul, no more but six hours. Read the xxxi. apoph.


where he says thus The Co^sul yt had been Consul no more but ^ixe hours
beginning about yt mids of the day was eiuill araied with Cicero his
iestyng. We have had a Consul (says he) of such seueritee, and so
rigourous, yt during his office, noman made so much as one dinner, noma^ ones
supped, noma^ slept a wynke. Except percase this history seem rather to
pertein to Caninius Reuilus.

Eftsoon to Vatinius making a Cicero had disdeigned to come and visit him
while he lay sick of y^ gout and could not stiere: Of Uatinius being
diseased of the gout it is aforeme^cioned in the.xxix. apophthegme of Augustus
Caesar.
For south (quod Cicero) I was minded and on my way to come to you in your
consulship, but the night took me (ere I could reach to your house.) This
might well seem a repaiyng home again of a mock. For Vatinius before yt time
unto Cicero gloriyng and bragguyng that ye co^menweale had called him home
again from banyshemente, How Uatinius mocked Cicero gloryyng of his reuocacion
from banyshemente.
and had brought hi^ home again on their shulders, had given a cursed mock
saying: how the^ have thou come by the swellyng or broken veins in thy legs?
For ye malady of swellyng or broken veins (which is in latin called
Varices) are wont to fall in y^ legge^ not of persons sittyng at their ease,
but of me^ long sta^dyng orels trauillyng on ye way.

Caninius Reuilus was Consul no more but only one day. Caninius Reuilus was
co^sull no more but one day.
This Caninius when he had gone up into the place called Rostra Of Rostra is
before noted.
(where oracions were made to the people) he in one hour both entreed ye
dignitee of Consulship, Reuilus in one hour entreed y^ dignitee of co^sulship
and committed per^urie.
and also committed perjury, on whom gooeth about this saying of Cicero,
Caninius ye Consul is (...): yt is, a well advised speaker. On yesame Caninius
he cast out this saying too, The records were serched, said Cicero: in the
time of which co^suls Reuilus was consul.
Reuilus has had this one chance above all other men yt the records were
serched in the time of which Consuls he was Consul. For the noumbre of the
years was woonte in Room to be rekened and set out by ye names of ye
Consuls. (as here in England we reke^ the time by ye years of each kings
reign. The years were rekened in Room by the names of the consuls.
) But now Reuilus for his part both was Consul, and yet had never a year at
all to reken by. And this saying also had Cicero on yesame Caninius. We have a
good vigilaunt Consul as y^ which never slept one wynke during the time of his
Consulship. Reuilus a vigilau^te co^sul, for he neue^ slept wynke in his
consulship.
Plutarchus in the life of Julius Caesar tellethe that yesame Caesar when all
ye civil wars were one ended and all things brought to some stay of
quietenesse, What means Caesar used to establyshe hi^ power in the city of
Rome.
left nothing vndooen y^ might purchase unto him beneuole^ce, favor,
authoritee, power and rewle among the Romans. To his old enemies he showed
notable mercifulness, to his friends great bounty. He would often times ^^pe
open householde, he would diverse times divide wheat to y^ com^^^s house by
house. He was full of geuyng lands, fees, and rewards. ^o such as would be
suitors unto him to have this or that office, dignite, ^or wu^ship of the
city, he would readyly make promise and grant of their piticious, and serve
their turne^s in deed as soon as y^ time would s^ffre him, in so much, that
Marimus the Consul being deceassed, allthough there was but one sole day to
come of his year to be completed, yet did Caesar declare and create Caninius
Rebulus (who is here called Reuilus) Co^sul. To whom where many of y^ nobles
resorted in the way of gratulacion, and of keeping him coumpaignie, Cicero
said: My lords lea^ us make speed, y^ we may come to my lord before the
time of Consul^^ip be expired.

Caius Caesar had elected into the senate many perso^es unworthy to be of
that order and degree, and among all others one Laberius of a gentleman of
Room became a co^me^ gester. Of this laberius is aforemencioned in ye ^xvii.
apophthegme of Julius Caes^^.
And as this Laberius passed by Marcus Tullius in the senate house seeking a
place to sit in, I would take you in here (quod Cicero) and make you room
here besides me but that I sit in so narrow a room myself. All under one
both reiectyng ye party, and also making a ieste at ye new coumpaignie of
Senatoures, the noumbre of whom Caesar had encrecaed more then lawefull was.
And yet was Laberius even with him for it well enough again ere he went, thus
saying unto Cicero, How laberius p^^ed Cicero ^^m^ again with a ieste.
Imeruaill, if thou sit in a narrow room, which art wont to sit in two
seats at ons. Laiyng to his charge lightenesse and ficlenesse, yt being a
slipper manne to trust unto, he would be hangyng now of one side, now of an
other. For in deed Cicero was much noted of inconstancy, The lightenesse and
inconstancy of Cicero.
he was ones of great amitee and frendeship with Clodius, afterward his mortal
enemy, and like wise with Dolobella, with M. Crassus, and with diverse
others. Sembleably he was now friend to Pompeius, anon he repented the same, and
wyshed that he had followed Caesar, and that so manifestely, that (as Plu^archus
testifies) Po^pei^s well perceiuyng yesame, never would ne durst put him in
trust with any matier of great weight or ymportau^ce.

The Same Cicero being hertyly Publius Manlius with speed to help his wives
soo^ne to the office of a peticapitainship, Publius Ma^lius the host of Cicero.
made this au^swer (a great coumpaignie of the citezens standing thick about
him) If it shall be in the power and autoritee of Pompeius to call a Counsel
it wilbee no light matier. Notyng the facilitee of Caesar in assembleyng ye
Senate. For every man's pleasure, and for every light matier. Julius Caesar
would for every man's pleasure and for every light matier call a Senate.


Being saluted of a certain Laodician Andro, Laodicea a noble city in Asia,
nigh unto ye floud^^ Lycus, and thereof Laodicenus, a ma^ne of Laodicea.
when he had demanded the cause of his coming, and had well perceived that
yesame was come as an ambassador unto Caesar for the libertee of his country
of Laodicia, Cicero expressed in greek words the public servitude, How
Cicero expressed the public servitude under Ca^sar.
in this manier: (...). If ye speed well, and obtein your purpose, be an
ambassador for us of Room here also.

quoque, is a co^iu^^c^^ and souneth in englysh (also) Cocus is in latin for a
cook, and the vocative ^ase of it, is Coce. And so it was yt a certain person
standing in election for a public office in Room, (who was verayly supposed
to have come of a cook to his father) desired of an other manne in the
presence of Cicero to have his voice, to who^ Cicero thus said in latin: Ego
quoque tibi fauebo. Ego quoque ^^bi fauebo.
Which words might be taken two manier ways, the one. I will be thy
friend with my voice too, thou coo^e: the other, And I also wilbee thy friend
with my voice. Whereof it is gathered ye Coce the vocative of Cocus, Quoque the
conjunction, and ^^ce, the voca^iu^ of cocus, souned both like in Cicero ^is
tym^.
and quoque the coniunccion were in the time of Cicero either of one and the
selfsame soune in pronunciacion, orels veraye like.

When the accuser of Milo, by the Clodius a Romain of noble birth, but a veraye
vicious person and void of all grace. He was a sworn enemy unto Cicero, and
in his tribuneship found means and brought to pass that Cicero was banyshed
from Room, wherefore Cicero n^uer ^ould favor him after, and at length
procured that Milo should set upon him on the high way, and slay him, which
was dooen and Milo banyshed for the death of Clodius, ^ot withstandyng the
defense of Cicero, and all the frendeship (...) sides that he could make.
Milo to had purposely lain in awaite for Clodius, at every other word
demanded what time or season of the da^e Clodius was slain, How Cicero
answered ye accuser of Milo demau^dyng at what time Clodius was slain.
Cicero made answer thus: veraye late. Signif^yng by that word late, being
a word of double understanding that it should have been for the profit of
the commenweale, if Clodius had been slain much sooner. It might have been
understood also, yt the deed was dooen veraye late to wards the euenyng

Tidings being reported yt ^atinius was deceassed, where the first bringer up
of that brute was not certainly known, well (quod Cicero) yet will I take the
advantage of it while I may. What Cicero said when uncertain news were told
of the death of Uatinius.
Menyng, that he would take joy of the death of Uatinius while he might,
though it were but for a time, sembleably as one that has borrowed money
applies it to his own use and co^moditee, and has his own full pleasure of
it for ye time, even as though it were his propre own. So that Cicero mened to
take as much goodness of the news in the mean time till the contrary were
certainly known, as if they were true in veraye de^de.

Marcus Caelius more effectuously laiyng crimes to me^nes charges, then
defendyng the same, What Cicero said of Marcus Caelius who could better lay to
man's charges, then defend them.
he a^ouched to have a good right hand, and an eiuill left hand. Alludyng
herunto that at such time as we fight, in the right hand we hold our
sweorde, and in the lieft hand our bucler. With the sweorde we lay on, with
the bucler we bear of. Marcus Caelius an orator of excellent wit, and of
singular eloquence, to whom Cicero writes many epistles, and Caelius many to
him again so purely well endited that Cicero thought them worthy to be put in
among his own epistles, which honor he gives but unto few persons, and
Cicero in his epistles familiare, is not ashamed to confess himself to be
^^feriour to Caelius in wit and faceciousnesse.

Iubius Curtius lyyng like a dog of Cicero thus proved a liar: How Cicero
proved Iubius Curtius ^ liar.
why (says he) then at what season you and I were young scholares first and
exercised making of oracions together, ye were not borne.

Unto Fabia Dolobella saying hirself How Cicero mocked Fabia Dolobella
dissembleyng her age.
it is true, quod Cicero, for the same have I heard every day these twenty
years already. Her desire was to be thought you^ger the^ she was in deed.
Therefore Cicero mocked her to the hard teeth with sembleyng that he granted
her saying, and nevertheless signifiyng that she was fifty years old.

To such as made it a matier How Cice^^ avoided ye reproach of marryyng a
young maid in his old age.
he had married a young Cicero being an aged ma^ne divorced his wife Terentia,
with whom he had lived many years. The causes of deuorcemente were these. That she
had so slendrely regarded him, that when he should take his journey toward
warrefare, he was drieuen (...) goo veraye barely provided of all manier
necessary provision Besides this, after yt he was returned home again from
thens into Italy, he found his wife coumbresome, crabbed and snappyshe unto
him. Item whereas he made long abode at Brundusiu^, her self would not take
peines to come thither to him and yet when his daughter Tulliola should take
her journey thither Terentia le^t her go with a veraye slendre porcio^ of money
toward her charges. Over and besides all this, she had leat hi^ house fall
sore in decay, and had made the walls of it bare, ^ brought it sore behind
hand in debte. All these articles Terentia denied, but Cicero with a long
oracion proved every one of them to be true. Within few days after, he
marrye^ a young gi^rle, being rauyshed with her beauty (as Terenti^ aff^rmed)
but (as Tiro his late servant avouched) to thente^t^ that he might be hable
to pay and discharge his debte. For ye maiden had a great dourie and was a
veraye rich marryage. Not long after this new marryage the daughter of Cic^ro
dy^d, for whom he took woondrefull sorrow And because hi^ young wife seemed to
be glad of the death of Tulliola, Cicero forsook her to^, and put her
away from him by di^o^^^.
damyselle being a maid: well (quod he) to morrow she shall be a woman.
Declaryng by a merry word thatsame reproach to be^ a thing that would with a
tryce be washed away, for the next morrow following it could not be objected
unto him, that he had a maid to his wife.

The Same Cicero in this manier Curio How C^cer^ mocked Curio beginning his
oracio^s alwaye^ of his age.
(who at no time would faill to begin the preaumble of any oracion making of
his old age) that he affermed the same to have the proemes of his oracio^s
every one day more easy and light to make then other? By reason of age
growyng every day more and more upon him.

Yet ons again for a cast more Va^inius, Uatinius mo^ked of Cicero for saying
yt he had walke^ a couple of miles.
(who although he were sore diseased in his feet, and utterly lamed with the
gout, would needs yet nevertheless appear to be veraye well emended, and
said yt he was hable now to take a walk of a couple of miles at ons) yea, I
think well (quod Cicero) for ye days are a good deal longer then they were.
This apophthegme does Quint^lian attribute unto Cicero, and Macrobius unto
Augustus Caesar. It i^ before t^ the.xxx. apophthegme of Augustu^.
There gooeth another tale about at this day also even as ^ery as this, saving
yt it has not sembleable antiquitee ne auncientenesse to commend and set it
out withal. A certain lau^ce^ knight made his vau^te at a banquette where he
was, that he had a crossebowe so good of castyng, yt it would send a bolte or a
quarrel of such a fersenesse as no man alive could believe or think, and
named a certain space. Al ye coumpaignie, which sat at the table cryyng foh
at such a shameful lie, he abode by it that his own seruau^te had seen ye
thing dooen. The servant being called in, how say thou sirrah, (quod his
mai^ster) did not thou see such a thing, and such a thing dooen^ Then
said the servant. Yes sir ye tell a true tale, but at that time when ye
shot, the wind was with you. It had been much mery^r if he had said, yes sir
your quarrel flewe so far as y^ speak of in deed, but it was at two shottes.

Cicero after hearing the false ru^mour that was bruited of y^ death of
Vatinius, What Cicero said to Ouinius of bruit of Uatinius his death.
when he had enquiered of one Ouinius late servant with the same, Ouinius a
late servant of Uatinius, and by him manuissed.
whether all went well, and the party answered, yea veraye well: why is he
dedde in deed the^, quod Cicero? Signifiyng that all went not right if
Uatinius were still alive.

The Same Cicero being called Ennius an old ancient latin poet, and of
great autoritee, whom Cicero very often times cites in soondrie his works.
The defendaunte sued by Sextus Annalis, and this accuser still called buisyly
upon him in this manier, speak on o Marcus Tullius if thou can any thing
say of Sextus Annalis he begoonne by and by to recite versis out of the sixth
book of the work of Ennius entitleed Annals, What difference is between
histories and annals such as be learned may read in y^ ^viii chapitur of y^
v. book of Aulus Gellius^
in this manier. Quipotes ingentis causas euoluere belle. etc. For Ennius wrote
in verses a cronicle of ^ctes dooen from year to year, in order as they were
dooen and such are in latin called Annals, and thi^ latin word, sextus,
souneth in english the sixth. And the name of the accuser was, Sextus Annalis
A me^y conceipte to those that are of capte to take it, saving y^ it cannot in
english have eguall grace with the latin.

Accius being a wily pie and a feloe full o^ shifts, How Accius escaped y^
dau^gier of a cer^ain i^dgemente.

Of Sylla and Charybdis it is before no^ed in y^.cxvii apoph. of Diogenes.


when yesame was suspected in a certain matier, Cicero had a cast with this little
verse of latin out o^ some old poet, Nisi qua Ulysses rate euasit laertius.
That is, With ye selfsame ship, and none other thyng^
Wherewith Ulysses escaped scouryng.
Ulysses being subttle and crafty, Ulysses the son of Laertes who^ Homere
in all pla^es makes to be wily subtle, prouidente and full of ^ll shifte in
y^ world possible
escape^ safe with his ship from both Charybdis and Sylla: So Accius by his
wylynesse avoided and shifted himself from the peril o^ the judgment.

Upon an other certain persone^ who after being come to a good of the same
inheritance, he was reputed for the verayest fool in the world, Tullius
sembleably iested, saying: Cuius hereditas quam uocant sapientiam: that is,
whose liuelehood which they callen wisdom. In ye verse instead of
facilitas, he changed it and said, hereditas. For in the poet the verse is
thus written, Cuius facilitas quam uocant sapientiam: that is, whose facilitee
which they calle^ wisdom. The menyng of Cicero was to signify that lands
and gooddes had chanced unto the party ^nstede of wisdom and sapience, Who
has lands and gooddes enough shall soon have ye name of a wise manne.
and that for the respect of his liuelehood the same was now esteemed and taken
for a wise manne.

Seruilia ye mother of Marcus Bru^us tertia is the femine ^endre of the nowne
numerall, tertius, beto^enyng the third in noumbre or in order. Ther^ ^s also a
verb, deducor, which in one signifi^^cio^ is to be rebated out of anoumbre
or out of a sum, and in an other significacion it i^ to be conueighed or to
be brought as one conueigheth home to his house or chaumbre his wife or
paramour. Of deducor is derived a participle deductus, deducta deductum^
conueighed or brought. What Cice^o said when Seruilia had ^urchaced of Caesar
a ^ich^ piece of land ^or a litl^ mon^y.
When Seruilia the mother of Marcus Brutus had for a small dele of money gotten
away a rich piece of land out of the hands of Caesar (who made open sale of
many of ye citezens lands and gooddes) Cicero made this ieste on it. Yea
masters (quod he) and that ye may know this piece of land to have been the
better cheap purchaced, Seruilia has bought this land tertia deducta. Which
two words might two manner ways be enterpreted and taken, either the third
part of the price abated, by understanding, part, orels tertia ye woman taken
home into his chaumbre to him, so yt Cicero his ieste is grounded on ye
ambiguous sense of these two lataine words tertia deducta. And to one tha^
has good sight in y^ latin yt saying is preatie.

Cicero made a pleasant riedle in the way of ieste on the mother of
Pletorius, The riedle of Cicero upon ye mother of Pletorius.
(which Pletorius accused Fonteius,) saying, yt while she lived she had a
school and taught: and when she was dedde she had masters hirself. Notyng
that in her life time women of eiuill name were common resorters to her house,
and after her death her gooddes were preised and openly sold. The tale in
appearance, both is standing against all natural reason, and also sets the
carte be fore yt horses. For those persons who have a school, been masters
on their parties, and have scholares under their teaching and governance. And
masters are called, not only such persons as dooen teach, but also those
that have ye rewle and ordreyng of others.

He made also a ieste on ye name Verres, How Cicero iested on the name of
Uerres.
as though he had been so named of the latin verb Verro, (which is to swepe)
Notyng that Uerres wheresoever he came played swepestake, and left nothing
behind him, as being a taker and abrybyng feloe, and one for whom nothing was
to hot nor to heavy. After which sort of bourdyng one feloe whatsoever he
was, myndyng to signify yt Cicero was a bryber and a preuie thief, instead of
Tullius called him Tollius. Tollius for Tullius.
For tollere is in latin to take away, as thieves ^ piekers do take away by
embesleyng. And some there were that nickenamed an Emperor of Room calling him
Biberius instead of Tiberius. Biberius for Tiberius.
For bibere is latin to drink. And of Tiberius the successor of Augustus it
is written, Tiberius Caes. in his youth loved drynkyng and so did ^^usus after
him.
yt in his youth he was prove to drynkyng and bollyng, in so much, that in his
time was brought up a new found diete to drink wine in ye morning next the
heart. And Drusus because he loved drynkyng was for that by the commen voice of
the people said to had regenerate his father Tibe^ius and made him alive again.

Julius Caesar in this manier as foloeth: What Cice^ro said of Caesar's,
clemency and nicitee coupleed together.
As often as I consider the wylynesse and ambicion of this manne lyyng hidden
under the cloak and sembleaunce of humanitee and gentleness, I am afeard on
the behalf of ye commenweale, lest the same shall have a tyranne of him, and
again when I behold his hear hangyng down so nicely and so like a minyo^, and
himself scrattyng his hedde Vno digito caput scalpere, that is: To scratte y^
hedde with one finger, was a prouerbial speaking whereby to notify a wanton
feloe and a person effeminate, because such do take care and fear lest they
ruffle their trymme combed bushe, and set some one hear out of order. It is
thought that one Caluus a poet brought it first up on Pompeius, and thereof
the same to have been taken up in a prou^rbe. And yt the said ^es^ure was in
the old time accoumpted for an argument of unchasteness and of nicitee,
Seneca in his epistles bears witness: Of all things (says he) if they be
well marked, there been prive tokens, yea, and of the lest things yt be, may
a man gather arguments and presumpcions of men's maniers and conditions An
unchaste person or a vicious man of his body both his pass of gooyng does
show, and the mouyng of his hands, and at a time one sole au^swer, and one
finger put up to ye hedde and the castyng of his yies. etc.
with one finger, I can scacely think in my mind, yt ever he will conceive in
his heart such an high entreprise.

To soondrie men obiectyng How Cicero pourged himself of taking money of one
of his cliente^
with the which money he should purchase a stately mansion place. I will
confess yt I took such money in deed of my cliente (said Cicero) if I bye
the house hereafter And when he had bought it in deed, to the same men castyng
him in the teethe with his lyyng, It is a wise poicte of housba^drie to
dissemble, if one goo about to bye a thing, for fear lest his bergain should
be taken out of his ^ande.
why, (quod he) do ye not know it to be a poincte of a good housbande to
dissemble if he have purposed to bye athyng? This history does Aulus Gellius
much more pleasauntely and with more grace tell in the.xii. chapitur of
the.xii. book. Where he notes yt when a crime is laid to ones charge, which
he can by no means color ne avoid, one poor help and one poincte of
shifte it is, to make a ieste of it, and to turn it (if one may) to a matier
of laugh^er, This person accused, Gellius names Publius Sylla, and shows
that Cicero did but borowe the money of him.

Cicero and Crassus there was a prive malice. Between Cicero and Marcus Crassus
the orator, there was a prive grutche and malice.
And so when one of the two soonnes of Crassus, being not unlike of favor
unto one (whose name was Dignus) and by reason thereof, suspicion entreed into
the heddes of the people upon the wife of the said Crassus that she had had
ouermuche familiaritee and compaignie with the same Dignus) had made a gaye
oracio^ in the senate house, One of the soonnes of Marcus Crassus like of favor
to one Dignus.
Cicero being asked the question what manier a feloe he yt had made the
oracion seemed unto him, thus made answer in latin, Dignus Cra^so est.
Couertely alludyng to the name of Dignus. What Cicero said of one of ye
soonnes of Crassus having made a good oracio^ in the senate house.
For of those words, Dignus Crasso, might indiffe^rentely be taken, either
that he was a young manne aunswerable to ye eloquence of Marcus Crassus his
father, orels yt he ought of right to be called Dignus though he bear ye name
that Crassus was his father, for Dignus, is also latin^ for worthy. So that
the ieste shall be much more pleasant if ye frame the latin words
according to ye greek phrase and say, Dignus Crassiest. Understandyng that
there were in deed two of ye right and true name of Dignus, that is to weete
one the adultreer yt occupied ye wife of Marcus Crassus, and the other like of
favor to the same Dignus, though he were called the soonne of Crassus.

Cicero had been attorney to Munatius being arrained of a certain crime, and
Munatius thereby quytte. Afterward wh^^ the same Munatius sued one Sabinus a
friend of Cicero to the extremite^ of the law, How Cicero reproved Munatius of
ingra^i^ude.
Cicero thoroughly enkendleed in wrath, vpbraided to Munatius what he had dooen
for him: why Munatius (says he) did thou thyself escape judgment (when
it was) by thine own means, orels by the help of me, that did cast a great
miste over the benche where the judges sat? Cicero ^ould cast a miste over the
seats (...) judgment.


Marcus Crassus in ye place that was called Rostra, Cicero praised Marcus
Crassu^ in an oracion, and afterward dispraised the same again.
y^ people highly well allowyng his oracion: and afterward baited the self
same manne in the same place with many poynaunte and nippyng words of
reproach, what (quod Crassus) did not thou in manier even the last day
praise me and give me high commendacion in thissame self place? yes (quod
Cicero) I praised the in deed, but it was only for exercise to assaie what I
could do in a naughty matier. Rhetoricians are wont for exercise to take
f^igned arguments of matiers inopinable, and such are pr^prely called
declamacio^s^ and not oracions.
For rhetoricians are wont for exercise to handle matiers inopinable, as for
exaumple when they make an oracion in the praise of Busyris, a king of Egypt
for his most horrible crueltee detested of all nations in the world. For
there came unto him ^n a time a southsaier geuyng him counsel, that if he
would avoid sterilitee and barennesse, he should kill up as many strau^giers
as were within his royalme, which cou^sail Busyris followed, and executed,
beginning first of all with the southsaier self.
Busyris, or of the fever quertane, or when they praise ingratitude. So did
Homere write the battaill between the frogs and the myce, Erasmus wrote the
praise of foolyshnesse, an other the praise of baldenesse, an other of
drounkenship: and this last argument I hanleed for mine exercise being a young
studente, albeeit the same dec^a^acion now lies all woorme eaten, as right
worthy it is.

When the same Crassus in an oracion Crassus had lived in Rome past the age of
three score years, None of all ye Crasses lived in Rome past ye age of three
score years.
and then repentyng himself of ye word speaking, said in this manier, what
ailled me to speak such a word as this? Marcus Tullius in this wise
soodainly answered: Crassus could curryefauour ioylyly, as Plutarchus in his
life makes mention and was a ma^ne of great elo^^^nce.
Marie thou knew full well that the Romans would give ear to that tale with
all their hertes, and by such a way art thou come to bear rewle in the
commenweale. Signifiyng two things, that is to weete, both that the name of
the Crasses was odious unto ye Romans, and also yt this Crassus had been
auau^ced to honors not by virtue, but by favor curryeng. For when he said
by such a way art thou come. etc he mened, by speaking such things as might
be delectable and pleasant to the ears of the people.

Crassus allegeyng it to be one posicion or opinion of the Stoikes, yt It was
an opinion of the Sto^kes, that good men and virtuous men are rich, and an
other that a sapiente manne is lord of all things in the world, because that
only such persone^, are contented with that that they have, and if they have
gooddes, they can and also dooen bestow it well, and apply it to good uses: if
they have no substance, none they care for, but are contented with their
virtues and honest qualitees, as the which do persuade theimselfes, that he
can not be poor, who has the grace of God, and is not covetous. And of this
conclusion it is before men^ioned in the.xlviii. apophthegme of Diogenes. But
whereas the posicion or conclusion of the Stoikes mened that no man was rich
(though he had millions of talentes) except he were a good and a virtuous manne
withal. Crassus (because he was covetous) did interpret and take it to his
purpose, that no man was a good manne except he were rich, so that he would
his richesse to be a cloak of goodness, of virtue and of perfect honestee.
Therefore Cicero mocked him with an other opinion of the Stoikes, which was,
that in a sapiente manne all things are possessed, whereby Cicero by an ^^onie
exhorted Crassus to peruerte the sense thereof too, as he had dooen of ye other,
and to persuade him self, that if he could geatte all the world into his
possession, he should be a sapiente and a perfect good manne. Whereas the
mind of the S^oikes was clean contrary. But Crassus was so covetous, that he
would often times auouche no man to be worthy the name of a rich manne,
except he were hable with his yearly re^enues to k^pe an army, and to maintein
an host of men. Wherefore when he warred upon the Parthians, and was by
the same taken and slain in that war, they cut of his hedde and in despite
melted gold into his mouth, saying these words Aurum sitisti, Aurum bibe,
gold have thou thirsted, now drink gold enough.
a good manne is he that is rich. Nay (quod Cicero) see whether this be not
rather their opinion, that a wise manne is lord of all the world, or has all
things of the world in his possession. Couertely notyng the avarice of
Crassus, The excedyng avarice of Crassus.
to whom nothing was enough^ but all things seemed to little.

Crassus was toward a journey into Syria, being more desirous to leave Cicero
his friend then his foe, when he should be gone, he saluted Cicero diligently,
and said yt he would suppe at home with him that night. Whom Cicero with a
cherefull and glad countenance received and entreteined. Within a few days
after this, certain of his friends went in hand with him, and made means unto
him for to be at one with Vatinius also. What Cice^o said when his fre^des
labored to bring him and Uatinius at o^e.
Why (quod Cicero) is Vatinius disposed to have a supper at my house too?
Signifiyng that the same Uatinius did make means more to have a supper, then
to have his frendeship.

Yet one cast more he had at Vatinius, who had a swellyng in the throat (which
is in latin called, strumae, a disease like that is called the kings ^iuil,
if it be not ye veraye same) when ye said Vatinius made a plea for a cliente
of his in a certain cause. Oh (quod Tullius) we have here an orator gayly
puffed up. Cicero called Uatinius an orator gayly puffed up, because yesame
had a swellyng in hi^ throat.
In the latin it has a very good grace. For this word Tumidus, souneth in
english, swolle^, inflated or puffed up. Which terms as well the latin as
the english, by translacion are referred not only to swellyng in some part
of the body, but also in pride, bragguyng, and vainglorie. As the oratoures
Asiatique were called, Tumidi, swolle^, or inflated, be cause their sort and
facion of making oracions, was proud, solem^e, pompeous, The pomp^ous manice
of the Asi^tiques in making oracio^s^
bold, perte, and replenyshed with vauntyng bostyng, crakyng, bragguyng, and
vaingloriousnesse: As witnesses Plutarchus in the life of Antonius. And
thereunto did Cicero allude.

Julius Caesar had earnestely purposed Campania among his men of arms. This
thing both many others in ye senate took grievously, and especially one Lucius
Gellius being a man even with veraye age almost clean dooen said and swore,
that it should not so be, as long as he lived. What Cic^ro s^ied when Lucius
Gellius an aged man spoke of a thing that it should not (...) so long as he
lived.
Well (quod Cicero) leat us tarry so long hardyly, for it requires no long
delaie. Signifiyng that Gellius was even at the last cast, and in manier at
deaths door.

How Cicero checked a young feloe thretenyng to re^^e him.
when this young feloe being angreed even at ye heart root thretened in his
fury yt he would have a flyng at Cicero with words that should soune little
to his honestee, so had I rather you should (quod Cicero) then with
spiececakes. Under yt coulourable word of double interpretacion obiectyng
unto the feloe the murdreyng of his father.

Publius Sextius had taken Cicero together with certain advocates mo to assiste
him and to help defend him in a cause of his. How Ci^ero said to Publius
Sertius taking on him to make all his plea himself.
And when the same Sextius would needs declare his own matier, and have all ye
saying his oneself, and would not give any of his advocates place or leave to
speak a word, as soon as the matier was clear and out of parauentures yt
Sextus should be quitte and discharged by the judges: Take the time O Sextius
(quod Cicero) this day while thou may. For tomor^^^e thou shall be a
private man^^^ gain. Geuyng him half a check for that he had taken upon him in
ye matier to do all together himself alone at his own pleasure Whereas the
next day following he should have no public office of a patron or orator,
nor be adhibited to any such use, but be as other men were, that had
nothing to do with pleadyng in courts, as Cicero and the other public
orators had.

When Marcus Appius in the preamble How Cicero mocked Marcus Appius.
eloquence, and fidelitee in his clientes cause, at this word, spoke Cicero
and said: and have you such an heart of steel of thyn own, yt of so many
things which thy friend has desired the unto, you dooest never an one at all?
Menyng that in his oracion appeared not so much as any one poincte of
diligence, of el^quence, or yet of trustynesse.

Marcus Aquilius having two soo^nes in law, yt were housbandes to his two
daughters but both of them banyshed and exiled, Cicero called Adrastus.
Cicero gave unto Marcus Aquilius the name of Adrastus^
Be cause yt he alone kept his standing like a man and saved ^ym self upright
Alludyng to ye propre sign^ficacion of y^ greek vocable. For (...) signifies:
infected orels, one from who^ is no ster^yng away, nor escaping of a shrewd
turn. And thereof Nemesis (ye Goddess of taking ve^geau^ce on such as are
proud and disdeigne^ul in time of their prosperity) is called in greek (...)
because yt no such person may escape her hands. Nevertheless (under ye
correccion of Erasmus) I take that Cicero alluded to Adrastus king of the
Argiues, who had two daughters the one called Deiphile, and the other called
Argia. Deiphile was married to Tydeus the soonne of Oeneus king of Aetolia or
Calydonia, which Tydeus being a right valiau^^e and an hardy manne, when he
had unawares slain his brother Menalippus at an huntyng, fled from his
country, and came to Adrastus, and there married the said Deiphile, and there
lived a banyshed manne, and never w^nt again into his own country as shall
appear. The other daughter Argia was married unto Polynices ye soonne of
Oedipus king of Thebes and of Iocasta queen of the same, of whom and of his
brother Eteocles, (who would not according to his promise suffer Polynices to
reign in Thebe^ by course when his first year was expired,) it is upon the.l.
apophthegme of Diogenes in ^he first book largely noted, and sufficientely for
ye perfect declaracio^ of this place and purpose, that Polynices lived and
dyed a banyshed manne. And so it befell that Tydeus was sent ambassador from
Polynices unto E^^ocles, that ye same should remember his couenaunte and
promise, and according to the same should surrendre unto Polynices the kingdom
of Thebes there to reign by course one f^ll year as Eteocles had dooen. When
Eteocles had made him a plain resolute answer yt he would not suffer Polynices
^o reign there^ Tydeus sharply re^uked him of breakyng his feithfull
promise, and spoke many high and bold words. Whereat Eteocles taking great
indignacion, privily sent fifty stout me^ne of arms to lie secretly in a
wood, and soodainly to kill Tydeus in hi^ way homeward. These men myndyng
to execute and accomplish the commandment of their lord, set upon Tydeus
in the said wood, and Tydeus slew them every mothers soonne except one,
whom he saved purposely and sent back to bear tidings of that feast unto
Eteocles. Then Adrastus and Polynices made war on the The^anes. Where T^deus
after many noble acts of chieualrie at last was s^ain by one Menalippus a
Thebane, and yet after y^ receiuyng his deaths wound, he slew the same
Menalippus, and chopped of his hedde ^ gnawed it in pieces with his teeth. Thus
for our prese^te purpose it appears that the two soonnes in law of Adras^us
were both oute^ laws, and therefore did Cicero give Marcus Aquilius the name
of Adrastus.

Of the office of Cen^our is before (...).
In the time while Lucius Cotta was Censour, (who was taken for the greatest
swielbolle of wine in the world one of them, Lucius Cotta (...).
) where Cicero standing in eleccion for the co^sulship happened to be veraye
dry, and had drounk a draught of water environed and hidden from the Censours
sight on every side with friends, ^
he said: ye do well to fear lest I should have y^ Censour my heavy lord,
because I drink water. Cicero made as though he believed his friends for this
cause to stand thick about him, ^.
that the Censour might not see him drynkyng water. For like bears favor to
like. And unlike hates unlike. So y^ the Censour being such a gredie d^ynker
of wine, if he had seen Tullius drynkyng water, would have suspected him to
do it in co^tumelie and reproach of him.

Marcus Caelius (who was thought to be disce^ded of father and mother not free
but bond) had with a loud and a whole voice read a lettre before the Senate,
Cicero said: What Cicero said of Celius, who had a loud voice.
Maruaillye nothing her at my lords. For this is one of them yt has had a
good loud breast in his days. Signifiyng, ye Caelius had been a commen crier,
and that by long use it had come unto him to have a shrille voice. And in deed
bondeme^ that were to be sold, were wont to be made the best of, by the oyes
of the crier.

Unto one Memmius reprochyng Cato the Vticensian, and saying that he would be
drounk even whole nights through, yea (quod Cicero) but thou speak nothing
at all that all ye day time he would be plaiyng at dyce. How Cicero excused
Cato for making merry now and then in the night time.
Manerly excusing Cato, who bestowed all ye whole day upon the affairs of ye
commenweale, and would take an hour or two or three of the night to take some
recreacion of mind, Cato would be buisie in y^ day time, and merry in the
night.
and to refreshe his spirits. And in deed it is writ^en of Cato yt he would
now and then be merry

What Cicero said to Julius Caes. defen^yng the daughter of Nicomede^ king of
Bi^^ynia.
Unto Caius Caesar earnestly defendyng the cause of Nicomedes his daughter in
the senate house, and rehersyng ye benefits and great pleasures of the king
toward him, Cicero said: No more of this I beseech you, for it is not
unknown what he gave to you, and what ye gave to him. The pith and grace of
the saying depends of the double sense yt might be taken of y^ word. dare
For in latin he is proprely said, dare, to give, that conferreth a benefit:
and also a woman is said in latin, dare, that is gentle and kind of her
fleashe. Whereof the poet Martialis thus writes to a woman, uis dare, nec dare
uis, that is, ye will give and ye will not give. etc. Caesar had an eiuill
name, yt when he was in Bithynia in his youth at what time he fled from Room
for fear of Sylla, whereof is mentioned in the first apophthegme of the same
Julius Caesar) he was somewhat more at the commandment of king Nicomedes,
th^n the laws of chastitee do requere.

Marcus Callidius accused Gallus, and Marcus Tullius defended Gallus. And when
the accuser affermed that he would both by witnesses, by Gallus own handie
wrytynges, How Cicero defeacted the accusacion of Marcus Callidus against
Gallus.
and also by examinacions confessed before, make due proof that there had been
vennyme te^preed and made ready in a cup for him by the party arrained: but
yet al ye while pronounced such an heinous matier with an vnearnest
countenance, with a dedde voice, and with the residue of his iesture nothing
hot nor vehemente, Marcus Tullius said: O Marcus Callidius, if thou did
not feign this gear, would thou handle thy plea so faintely? Faint
ha^dleyng of a plea argues the cause to be weak and untrue.
Gatheryng, of his countenance and iesture that his words came not from the
heart.

The Same Cicero after this sort Isauricus: How Cicero iested one Isauricus who
had bee^ beaten with whippes of his father before.
I meruail what the matier is, yt thy father being always one manner a man,
has left ye unto us so diverse. A merry word depe^dyng of ambiguousnesse of
the vocable. For, Varius, in latin, and diverse, in english is called one
that is of a waueryng mind and nothing substancial, he is also called in
latin, Varius, in english diverse, that is marked with the prientes of
^trypes. And in deed it was commenly noysed that this Isauricus had been
scourged before of his father with whippes. And thereof came thatsame, not the
saying, but the deed of Marcus Caelius, whose chair of estate when Isauricus
being Consul had broken, he set up an other with whippes kerued in it,
without any words thretenyng thesaid Isauricus, How Marcus (...) ^^^ued (...)
for (...)
and also castyng in his teth, that he had ones been scourged with whippes of
his father.

THE SAYINGS OF DEMOSTHENES THE ORATOVR.
Plutarchus and other historiographers done write that Demosthenes had a poor
woman to his mother and a woman unknown, his father kept a cutlers shop and
sold knives, a good honest manne and meetely welthie, as the which when he
dyed leaft unto his soonne honest substance, but because Demosthenes was then
but a little child, he and his patrimony was committed to certain executours
or feoffers who beguiled Domosthenes so far, that they neither regarded to
set him to school, nor while he was at school to pay his schoolemaisters
duty. At last he became the most noble orator that ever was in Greece. And
then took in hand to be a dooer in the co^menweale, and spared not to set
against Philippus with most vehemente oracions inuectiues, and wore out
Philippus well enough and after him Alexander But Antipater sent certain of his
guard to slay him. Demonsthenes hearing thereof fled privily into a little Isle
named Calauria, and there kept himself secret. At la^t he was found out. And
when he saw that there was no remedy but that he should be had to Antipater,
he desired that he might have license first to write an epistle to the
Atheniens. And taking a pen in his hand he begoonne his epis^le thus:
Demosthenes to the Atheniens gretyng and well to fare. And even so brake of
writing and received poison which he had long time of a purpose kept under the
stone of his ryng, and so poisoned himself out of hand. Plutarchus joins the
life of Demosthenes and of Cicero both together, and compares them two
together as a veraye good match and well coupleed. For (says he) when god at
the first beginning fourmed Demosthenes and Cicero both after one pattern, he
seems to have put and enspired into their natures and disposicions many like
qualitees, as for example, that both the one and the other was ambicious,
both the one and the other a citezen francke, bold and plain in tellyng his
mind to the people, both of them to perilles, ieoperdies and wars not
veraye hardy me^ne. There were in their fortunes also many things ^ommune
as well to the one as to the other. For I cannot find any other two orators,
which being of sembleable low birth, grew to be so great men of
authoritee and dignite, and which durst adventure to wi^hstand kings and chief
governors, and lost their daughters, we^ banyshed their countrees, and
returned fette home again with honor, eftsons voidyng their citees came into
the hands of their enemies^ and finally which were extincted together with the
libertee of their country.

This Pytheas was in the time of Phocion and Demosthenes, a man newly come up
in Athenes of late, and by eleccion put in autoritee to have dooyng and saying
in the public affairs of the city, partly by gifts and rewards, and
partly by speaking fair unto the people. And when he was on^s gotten up to
bear some stroke in the city, he would have to do in every matier, and
weaxed a woondreous buisie m^dler in all causes, in so much that at commen
assemblees he would often times trouble all the whole coumpaigni^ with his
daily pratleyng, until Phocion at last said: will this feloe here never hold
his peace, that came but yersterdaye in manier out of the shelle, and one that
has bought the people of Athenes to b^e his own?
Pythias objected to Demosthenes that his arguments of rhetorike smelled all
of the ca^dle: H^w Demos^henes answered Pytheas ^aiyng to his change that his
oracions smelled ^f the candle.
signifiyng, that he pronounced none oracio^ but out of writing, and made with
great study by ca^dle in the night time. Which saying Demosthenes in such
wise reuersed back again, that he avouched himself and ye other party not to
be at equal charges for candle, Notyng y^ the other was a contynuall reueller
and gourmaunder by night, and bestowed more money on ryottous banquettyng, then
he on his behalf did ^n study.

Unto others obiectyng unto How Demosthenes pourged himself of y^ obieccio^ of
ouermuche study of el^quence.
the study of eloquence to declare a man that loves the people, and can be
contented to be feloe like with the people: and co^trariewyse to neglect the
study of eloquence, to be the guyse of such persons as sought to be lords
over the people, as the which went about not to persuade men by fine
vttreaunce of a matier, but to compel them parforce.

As often as Phocion should arise to say his mind in any asse^blee
Demosthenes would say of thesam^ Phocion to his friends yt sat next by him:
Phocion the are of Demosthenes his reasons.
now arises up the axe o^ all my reasons. For Phocio^ was brief in tellyng his
tale, Phocion and Demosthenes few times agreed^
but sharp as a^ axe^ And his custom was for y^ most part to be of a
contrary mind and opinion to Demosthenes.

Athenes ymportunely required Demosthenes to take upon him ye accusyng of a
certain person. What Demosthenes said when ye Athenie^s earnestely prayed him
to accuse a ^ertain per^one.
And when Demosthenes refused to do it, ye people begoo^ne to be up in a
rore against him, (as commenly they will in such a case) the^ Demosthenes
arisyng spoke in this manier: O ye men of Athenes, ye have of me a faithful
counsaillour and helper at all times of need whether ye will or not, but a
false accuser shall ye never have of me would ye never so fain.

Demosthenes had been one of the ^enne, whom the Atheniens had sent
^mbassadours unto Philippus king ^f Macedonie. Demosthenes one of the.x. whom
the Atheniens sent ambassadors to Philippus king of Mac^donie.
So after that Aeschines and Philocrates (which two Philip^us had especially
above ye residue familiarly embraced and made of) being come home again from
the said ambassade, gave the king much high praise, partly for many other
things, and especially for these three following, that he was full of favor
and beauty, Philippus king of Macedonie, was beautiful, eloquen^e and a good
drynker
that he had a goodly eloquente tongue, and yt he could drynk lustyly.
Demosthenes made this cauillacion, that he avouched in all those praises to be
not so much as one poincte comely for a king. To drink well is a proprete
mete for a spou^ge, but not for a man.
For ye first, he said, belonged to women, the secounde to sophistes or
rhetoricians, and the third to spounges, This ambassade was at the same time,
when Demochares said to Philippus that he might do to the Atheniens much
pleasure, if he would put his neck in an halter, and hang him self. Whereof
read the.xxxv. apoph. of the said Philippus.


Demosthenes had written upon hi^ shilde in lettres of gold (...) that is,
(...), written about Demost^^nes his bucler in l^tters of ^olde.
Good fortune. Yet nevertheless when it was come to handie strokes This was at
the battaill in Cherronea (whereof is before spo^^en i^ the.vii. apophthegme of
Philippus) in which battaill he subdued and conquiered all Greece. And of this
battaill De^osthenes was the chief procurer and setter on, in so much yt he
only persuaded the Thebanes and others thereunto, and was one of the chief
ryngleders and capitaines himself, in so much that the king of the Persians
wrote letters about to ^is nobles in all places, that they should aid
Demosthenes with money enough on all syde^ for the suppressyng of Philippus. The
battaill wa^ kept in Ch^rronea (the country of Plutarchus) at Thermodon.
Which Thermodon (as the report goo^th says Plutarchus) should be a little
preatie floudde ren^yng into the river of Cephisus. But the same Plutarchus
says that he knows no such flodde there about of y^ nam^ nor yet in any
place of al Cherronea. Nevertheless he believes that the floudde Haemo^
(which renneth along by Heraclium, where ye Greeks at yt time pitched their
ca^pe against Philippus) was at the first in old time called Thermodon, and
from that battaill foorthward the same to have taken the appelacio^ of Haemon,
because it was then filled up with dedde corpses and with bloudde. For (...),
is greek for bloudde. But this was such^ a sore battaill, that Philippus feared
Demosthenes all days of his life after, for that the same had persuaded the
Greeks to battaill.
Demosthenes even at ye first meetyng cast shilde and all away from him, and
togoo as fast as his legs might bear him. This poincte being cast in his
nose in the way of mockage and reproach, How Demosthenes a^oided y^ reproach
of rennyng a^waye in battaill.
that he had in battaill cast away his bucler, and taken him to his heels,
Plutarchus says yt Pytheas it was which thus mocked Demosthenes for his
mannely rennyng ^waye.
like a pretty ma^ne, he avoided it with a little verse commen in every bodies
mouth.

(...), (that is: I man tha^ ^leeth will renew battaill again) is a
prouerbiall verse (as Erasmus in his chili^des admonysheth) by which we are
warned not by and by to be brought in despair, if some thing hau^ not well
come to our pass. For though a man be now ouer^omed, he may at an other
time have better hap. Whereof Homere calls it (...), yt is now strong on ye
one side, and now on ye other. And Alexander (Pari^ the soonne of Priamus king
of Troie) thus speaks in Homere. (...). that is: Uictorie changes from
part ^o part. And the same Alexander in an other place again says: Menelaus
now, through Pallas has won
And so shall I at an other season.
So Dauus in Terence Hac non successit, alia aggrediendu^ est uia.
that is. This way it will not frame ne faie,
Therefore must we prove another way. So mened Demo^sthenes, that though he
had had missehappe at that season, ye^ an other more propice time should come,
when his chaunc^ should be to do his country better service. etc. And this
wa^ a meetely honest excuse.
(...).
That same manne, that renneth away,
May again fight, an other day.
Iudgeyng that it is more for ye benefit^ of ones country to run away in
battaill, then to lose his life. For a dedde manne can fight no more, but who
has saved himself alive by rennyng away, may in many battailles mo, do good
service to his cou^tr^ At least wise, if it be a poincte of good service, to
run away at al times when the coun^ree has most need of his help to
stick to it.

Alexander on this condition offreed peace unto ye Athenien^ if the same would
yield up into his hands eight of ye citezens, How Demosth^n^s escaped being
delivered into ye hands of A^^xa^der.
among who^ Demosthenes to be one: Demosthe^nes told unto them the tale of
the woulf, who upon this condition offreed peace unto the sheep, if y^ same
would yield and deliver him their dogs that kept him from the fold. Under the
name of the woulf betokenyng Alexander, by the dogs menyng those persons who
at that present season had the cure and charge of all ye public affairs, and
by the sheep signifiyng the commenaltie of the Atheniens. He added moreover an
other exaumple. As the mercatemenne (says he) do bring out a little modicum
of wheat or other corn in a treendishe for a saumple or show, Who betraieth
the governors and rewlers, betraieth the whole people and country.
desiryng by the same to sell whole great heaps: so ye, if ye betraie and
deliver up the eight citezens which are demanded of you, ye betraie and
deliver ye whole universal people every mothers child.

When Demosthenes being condemned Areopagites, Of Ar^opagus and the
Areopagites, it is before noted
had escaped out of prieson, and was rennyng The cause of the banyshemente of
Demosthenes was this. There was one Ha^palus (of who^ it is before mentioned)
who partly of remorse and conscience of eiuill handleyng himself in matiers
committed unto his fidelitee, and partly for that he saw Alexander begin to
weaxe veraye rigorous and sore to his friends, fled out of Asia and came to
Athenes. And when h^ had with certain ships and great substance of money
submitted himself to the pleasure and will of the people of Athenes, the other
orators counsailled the people to receive and pro^ecte him, but Demosthenes at
the first beginning gave them counsel in no wise to receive him, but to be
well aware, lest they should by reason of him areise battaill of an unjust and
unreasonable cause. Within few days after, when Harpalus (who by like had a
good insight in such matiers) espiyng and markyng Demosthenes to have an
earneste yie, and a great fancy unto a goodly cup of gold, that was of
excellent werkmanship^ caused the same to be weighed. Demosthenes much
woondreed at the weight of the cup, and demanded what the cup drawed
(menyng of weight in the balaunce) I wys quod Harpalus (smylyng upon him) it
shall draw you twenty talentes, and the next night following sent unto
Demosthen^s the said cup of gold secretly, and twenty talentes with all,
which Demosthenes received. And when Harpalus his caus^ within a day or two
after was had again in communicacion, Demosthenes came to the assemblee of the
people, with his neck all stuffed, lapped, and wrapped in wulle, furs, and
cloutes. He was bidden to say his mind, he refused to speak, alleg^yng that
he had a bone in his throat and could not speak. But the people perceived the
matier well enough that he had been corrupted with money by Harpalus. And
without any more business, first and foremust they expulsed Harpalus and bid
him void. And that dooen, forasmuch as they stood in fear and dread, left
the money which the orators had received, should be required of them by
Alexander, they serched the oratoures houses for all such money and iewelles.
Then Demosthenes being manifestly found culpable, would have pourged himself,
but y^ people would in no wise hear him speak^ No? (said one) will ye not give
ear unto him that has such^ a goodly golden cup? well, the people cried out
upon him. Demosthenes putt the matier up to the judgment and sentence of the
Areopagites, by whom he was condemned in a fine of fifty talentes, and
commanded to ward, until the fine should be satisfied and paid.
Demosthenes partly by reason of that extreme iudgeme^te for that he was feeble
and weak of body, nor hable to endure the enpriesonmente, broke away
privily, and fled into Arcadia, which is a region of Achaia.
away, and had met in the teeth not far from ye city, certain persons of
the contrary part, that were not his fre^des: first he would feign have hidden
himself. But when ye parties speaking to him, and calling him Demosthenes by
his name, bid him to be of good coumforte, The natural love and desire of
each ma^ne toward his native country.
and also offreed him money to help him on his way, he gave an heavy sigh
even from ye botome of his heart, saying: How can I possible forsake this
city, in which I have such enemies, as I shall not find friends of the like
sort in an other country?

It is reported that Demosthenes Pallas, What Demosthenes said to Pallas at
his departing out of Athenes.
and his hands lifted up unto heaven said: O Pallas lady of citees, why
set thou thy delight in three the most vnluckeful beasts of ye world, the
oulette, The Oulett^ dedicated unto Pallas.
the draguon, and the people? The oulette whereas she is of all birds the most
vnluckefull, The people ^ beast of many heddes.
yet is she dedicated unto Pallas, like as the same Pallas has a draguo^ also
which she bears about with her for her cognisaunce. The ingratitude of ye
people toward their benefact^uro.
And as for ye people is a monstreous beast of many heddes, accustomed with ye
most naughty unkindness possible to reward such persons as has dooen
them benefit, as they did Socrates, Phocio^, Of the ingratitude of the people
of Athenes toward So^rates and Phocion, it is before declared. As touching
Scipio there were four of the name in Room, one after an other, as nob^e
men, as wise counsaillours, and as valiaunte Capitaines, as ever were in
Room, and which did as much benefit in the commenweale, as uneath any pen
may write. And yet every one of them found at the hands of the people of
Room in^omparable ingratitude. The first of them woonne Carthage, and made it
tributarie unto Room, when it had so tie^ed Room with long wars, that it
was much more nigh to subdue Room, then to be subdued unto Room. This
Sci^^^ triumphed on Carthage, and had given unto him the surname of Africane
(because he subdued Carthage and thereby Afrike.) And yet was he at last
exiled, and did dye out of his country a banished manne. Scipio surnamed the
Asiatik^ (because he subdued king Antiochus unto Room, and besides him all
A^ia, of who^ he also triumphed) was afterward ^alsely arrained of robbyng the
treasourie of Room, and most wrongfully commanded to prieson. Scipio
Africane the secounde (to whom that surname was given because he beatte down
and destroyed both the city of Numantia, and also ye city of Carthage,
being with all their power and puissaunce ^ent and^ set against the city of
Room) was wekedly slain in his bed in ye night, and yet in all the city of
Room could not one be found that would see such an heinous murdre avenged or
punyshed. And this Scipio it is, that Erasmus here speaks of^ Scipio surnamed
Nasica (who saved the co^menweale from the violente oppression of Tiberius
Gracchus the Tribun^) was in his later days sent as half a banyshed ma^ne to
Pergamus, and there spent the residue of his life.
Scipio and right many others mo.

he used familiaritee, he would often times say, The affairs of a commenweale
are dau^gierou^ to med^e withal said Demosthenes.
that knowing as he now did, how much envy, fear, false surmuised querelyng,
and how much peril, a man coming to ye affairs of the commenweale has to
look for, if the one of two were to be chosen, he would rather goo to his
death, the^ up into a pulpite to make an oracion, orels up to the benche to
sit upon matiers of judgment.

At what time he lived in Arcadia Contencion between Pytheas and Demosthenes.
and Pytheas in the favor and behalf of ye Macedonians had said in this
manier, as we deem yt house to have some eiuil malady wtin it, into ye which
is carried milk for to be sold, so may we thynk yt city to be corrupted with
some eiuil disease, unto the which is sent any ambassade of ye Atheniens:
Demosthenes thus turned yt clause clean arsee versee. As milk (says he) is
brought into houses for to restore sick folks to their health again, so are
the Atheniens always ready for ye safegarde and preseruacion of other foren
citees. How Demosthenes was re^tored from banyshement.
As soon as the commenaltie of ye Atheniens had knowelage of this, they
foorthwithall sent for him to come home again from exile.

After this saying, the comenaltie of Athene^ which had before condemned him,
were soodainly stricken again in love with him, and said tha^ he was an honest
manne again, and loved the city, and many gaye good morowes. Whereupon Damon
Paeaniens ye neffewe of Demosthene^ made mocion unto the people that
Demosthenes might be restored to his former state and might come home to the
city again. The people made a decree upon it. And unto Aegina was sent a galie
for him to fette and bring him home again with honor. And when he was
approached nere to Athenes, all the magistrates of the city, all the ministres
and presidentes of the temples full and whole, and the other citezens by whole
^^ockes went to meet him, and received him (as ye would say) with general
processio^, and with all triumph, honor, and solemnitee. Yea, and the fine of
fifty talentes which he had before been condemned in, (because they might not
by justice or law releasse or forgive it) they ordained by a public decree to
co^uerte unto the altar of Minerua, and to be deducted of the money which
was to be leuie^ for the behouf of the same altar. For the Atheniens had a
use and custom at ^ certain feast (which they called the feast of Jupiter
the saueour) to make a comme^ box for y^ repairing, deckyng, and furnyshyng of
the altar of Minerua, and for the dooyng of this, they appoincted a gatheryng
of fifty talentes in the name of Minerua, to be converted and applied to y^
satisfiyng and paiyng of Demosthene^ his fine, for in so much a sum he was
condemned, as before is said.

When a ship was sent him Demosthene^ gloried in co^paryng his returnyng from
exile, with the returnyng of Alcibiades.
and many of the magistrates or public officers, and citeze^s had come forth
of the city to meet him, Demosthenes liftyng up his hands to heaven, said,
yt a more honorable returnyng had chanced unto him then unto Alcibiades, for
that Alcibiades being absente on warrefare was accused by one Thessalus, that
he ha^ a certain brethreed, which used to resort and g^ther together at his
house, and there to assemble like plaiers on a staige, to cou^tre^aicte the
sacres of Ceres (the goddess of corn^) and to represent ye mysteries of
the same sacres, which were wont to be celebrated and kept of the Atheniens
with great reverence and devotion. He added moreover, that Alcibiades and his
adherentes divided the executyng of all the offices apperteinyng to those
ceremonies, and that one Polytion was the ca^dlesticke bearer or torchebearer,
and one Theodo^us to be the chaunter, or clerk, and Alcibiades being the
e^ecutour and chief president of all the sacres to read a lecture unto al his
compaignie of all the said mysteries. etc. Alcibiades was gently required to
come home to Athenes for to make his (...) and declaracion in the premises, he
drew back and (...) not come to Athenes, and to one demaundyng whether ^e
mystrusted his own native country and city, he answered, that he trus^ed
his country veraye well, but as for the ha^^rdyng of his hedde and life he
thought not best to put in the hands of his veraye mother neither, lest she
might chance to bring and cast in a black stone instead of a white. Upon
this ^e fled, and would not come to Athenes. Whereupon he was condemned being
abse^te, and all his goodde^ forfaicted, and to the end that no poincte of
ignominy o should lack, all the minis^res of all the temples were hidden to
accurse Alcibiades as an impious person and a w^ked miscreaunt. They also by a
dec^ee condemned him to death as a traitor. Whereof when relacion was made unto
Alcibiades, he answered that the Atheniens should find him to be alive. Then
went he to their enemies, and did the Atheniens much scathe till at last they
were glad and sain to desire and pray him to come home and help them. The^
par^ely remorse of conscience, and partly the natural desire of his country
so pricked him, that even at the veraye plounge when the Lacedaemonians should
utterly forever hau^ confounded the Atheniens in battaill on the sea,
Alcibiades soodainly without the knowelage of either party came with certain
ships upon the Lacedaemonians behynd at their backs, and turned the victory
to the Atheniens, and so came home highly welcomed, although they had by
necessitee been forced to seek upon him.
Alcibiades had come home again, the citezens constreigned parforce to se^d for
him, and he on his party, ye citezens through peaceable and gentle persuasion
condesce^dyng and a greeyng thereunto.

After that Demosthenes for fear Antipater had fled into the Isle of
Calauria, Read the annotacion of y^ viii. apoph.
and kept himself in the temple of Neptunus, and Archias, This temple was a
sure place of refuge as a sanctuary.
of a plaier of tragidies now grown and come up to be a ma^ne of power
assaied and labored with honey sweet words to persuade Demosthenes that
the same should put himself in ye grace of Antipater, Archias first a plaier
of entreludes, and afterward a great manne of power with Antipater.
by who^ not only to have nomanier harm at all, but also to be honored with
most high and bounteous rewards: He said in this manier: O Archias thou
never did like me in thy life on ye staige being a plaier, nor shall
persuade me to thy purpose now at this present being an orator. But when
Archias being thoroughly out of patience thretened to pull him parforce out of
the temple: yea marie (quod Demosthenes) now at last thou have plainly opened
the The oracles of Macedonie, Demosthenes called the pleasure of Antipater king
of Macedonie. Menyng that Antipater had commanded Archias to bring Demosthenes
by fair means or foul. Demosthenes alluded to the propre significa^ion of an
oracle, menyng that Antipater took upon him in manier no less then if he had
been a god.
oracles of Macedonie. What an oracle is read in the.xv. saying of Alexander.
For until ye speaking of this word, thou did but countrefaicte and make
a feigned countenance according to ye guise and facion of entrelude plaiers.

Demosthenes is reported to have sailled on a time to ye city of Corinthe, Of
Corithus is aforenoted in y^ xxxiii. Apophtheg. of Diogenes.
enticed and allured with the fame of Lais a Courtisan there of great name,
Demosthenes sailled to Co^inthe to have his peasure of Lais.
to thentente yt he also among the mo might have his pleasure of the paramour
which all ye world spoke of. But when she by couenau^te required for one
night te^ne thousand drachmes, Lais a costely dame to lie with, of who^ read
the.xxxi saying of Aristippus.
Demosthenes feared with the greatenesse of ye price changed his mind, saying:
(...).
that is: I will not bye repentance so dear.
Signifiyng, that unto unhonest pleasure repentance is a pressed compaignion to
come after. Repentance evermore ensues of unhonest pleasure.
Yea and one propretee more it has, that the pleasure is small, and is gone in
a momente, the repentance great, and still enduryng as long as life
continues. Lais an harlot of Corinthe of excellent beauty, but so dear and
costely, that she was no morsel for mowyers. She was for none but lords and
gentlemenne that might well pay for it. Whereof came up a proverb, that it was
not for every manne to go unto Corinthe. This history of Demosthenes is
rehearsed of Ualerius Maximus, Aulus Gellius and others.


The saying of Pytheas is common Demosthenes smelled all of the candle, Read ye
first apophthegme of Demosthe.
for that the same did in the night season write and record such things as he
had to say to the people in the day time. So when an other feloe, which had
an eiuill name abroad for the suspicio^ of piekyng and brybyng, veraye
malapertely inueighed against ye same thing: I know it full well (quod
Demosthenes) yt we do work the much sorrow, in yt we light candles in the
night. Prive thieves love ye derke.
For prive stealers love ye derke.

Demades cryyng, oh, Demosthenes will take upon him to correct me, How
Demosthenes taunted Demades.
the sow will teach ^^wyne to teach Minerua, was a proverb against such, as
either being theimselfes of no knowlage ne wisedo^ at all, will take upon
them, to teach persons yt are excelle^tely skilled and passing expert, for
which we say in English to teach our dame to sp^nne: orels, yt will take
upon them to be doctors in those things in which theimselfes have no
skille at all, for which we say in English, to correct Magnificat before
he have learned Te Deum. For Minerua was thought the patroness of al wit and
of al ingenious arts (as is before said) and the swyne, by the tradicion and
writing of all the natural philosophi^rs is declared to be of al beasts the
most brutyshe, and lest apt to learn any thing.
Minerua, ye same Demosthenes said: Yea, but this Minerua (quod he) was taken
the last year in aduou^^ie. Minerua by the ficcion of the poets a perpetual
virgin.
He lated unto ye charge of Demades aduoutrie, where as the poets do make
Minerua to be a perpetual virgin.

Demosthenes withstood ye Atheniens ymportunely desiryng him to show his
advise, Demosthenes would not be at the beck of the people.
and said: (...).
that is, I am none of those which are brought, under coram. Signifiyng, that
he was not as a bondeseruaunte made to the beck of the people, but at his own
will and pleasure at all times to do what thing he had judged expediente to
be dooen.

A certain bond maiden had received How Demosthenes by a subtle ingen saved a
poor woman from paiyng one sum twys.
This dooen, anon came the secounde party unlooked for, and begoonne to
require that had been leafte in her custody. And where ye woman being in a
pecke of troubles was half in mind and purpose to hang hirself, Demosthenes
was so good unto her to become her advocate, who, as soon as he came to make
his plea in her behalf, went roundely to the demau^der of the money after this
sort: This woman (says he) is ready well and truly to discharge hirself of
the money which she was put in trust withal to keep, but onles thou bring
thy partener too, she may not do it, because that by thine own confession
and words, this was a plain composicio^ made between you, that the money
should in no wise be delivered to the one of you without the other. By this
subtle ingen he saved the poor seely woman, and clearly defeacted the
conspirisie of the two vilaines, who had drieue^ a drifte to receive double
paimente of one sum.

To a certain person demau^dyng hypocrisis, that is, accion or pronunciacion.
To yesame person eftsons askyng, what was y^ next poincte and what the
third, he still made none other answer but, accion, accion. Referryng so
much to pronunciacion, that he thought all together to consiste in the same.
And in deed y^ accion or pronunciacion comprehends many things mo then one,
that is to weete, the temperyng and qualifiyng of the voice, the earnest look
of the yies, the port of the counte^aunce, and the gesturyng or conueighaunce
of all the whole body.

When the fyngers of the Atheniens Harpalus, and were now already up toward
war against Alexander, soodainly was seen Philoxenus arrived in the country
of Attica, who^ Alexander had made his high amirall. At this sudden arrival of
the said Philoxenus when y^ people being with fear astouned were soodainly
whished and weaxed dumme: what would these men do (quod Demosthenes) if
they should see the soonne, which have not the power to look against a candle?
After such sort did he vpbraid to the people their rash and unadvised
stieryng of coals, and arisynges to war. By the soonne he mened Alexander, in
comparison of whom, this Philoxenus was scacely to be esteemed a ca^dle.

Demades had now given over to be such an haine, as he had been in time past:
Demades was covetous of money.
Yea marie (quod Demosthenes,) for now ye see him full paunched, as lions are
For Demades was covetous and gredie of money. And in deed the lions are more
gentle when their bealyes are well filled.

When he was by a certain person In reui^yng one an other^ who so ouercometh,
l^seth the victory.
I am now matched (quod he) to buccle in a strife, in which who so has in
fine the over hand, gets the wurse, and who so over comes, leseth the
victory.

The Same Demosthenes, when he Pilates voice, said: Not all that is great, Not
all yt is great is well but all that is well is great.
is well, but all that is well is great. This saying is ascribed to others
also. And some folks there been, that esteem feasts which are drawn of a
great length to sit all day, and are furnyshed with soondrie dishes or
courses of the most, One dishe alone to f^de on, is more wholesome for y^ body,
then variet^e of dishes.
to be royal deintie gear, whereas by the plain determinacion of all natural
philosophiers, and of all good physicians in the world, one good dishe alone to
f^de on is more natural and more wholesome for the body, then the varietee of
many costely dis^es at one repaste.

The end of the secounde book.
That thou may the sooner and easlyer find (most gentle reader) either the
name of any person or any other good mattier contained in this book, I have
here added a large and plain Table after the order of ye A.B.C. set out with
the noumbre of the leaf, where thou shall find any such thing as thou
desyrest to have therein.

The Table.
A.
ABas the.xij. king of the Argiues 166. Abstinence the Itatalians use for all
diseases 278. Achilles. 39. Academia, a place full of groves. 158. Acrisius had
a daughter called Danae. 166. Academiques. 237. Ac^ium the paeke of the
country of Epirus. 249. Ar^ius escaped the daungier of a judgment. 321.
Accio^ or pronounciacio^ is the chiefest poict in eloquence: 344. Adas, queen
of the Caria^s. 184. Adrastus, read the note. 330. Aeschines. 21.66.
Aesculapius. 30. Aegina the city. 58. Aged men, whereof they should smelle.
28. Aga^ho of Athenes. 29. Agesilaus. 96. Agame^no^ king of Mycena. 218 Agrippa
made many new co^duictes in Room. 258. Aid after the field is foughten,
comes to late. 116. Alcibiades of Athenes. 12. All manner of oracions will not
serve for all persons. 26. Ale^ander talked with Diogenes sittyng in his
tubbe. 83 Alexander had Diogenes in high estimacion. ibi. Alexander thought it
a greater thing to be Alexander then to be a king. ibi. All virtues consiste
in the mean between two vices. 87 Alipte, what they were. 121. Almose given to
beggars rather the^ to Philosophiers. 128 Alexa^ders ambicio^. 179.181.205
Alexander his haultnesse of courage. 181. Alexander was swift and nymble, ibi.
Alexander his army against Darius. 18^. Alexander his cooks. 185. Alexander
his a^^swer made to D^rius. 186. Alex^nder wounded with an arowe. 188.
Alexander enforced no person freborne. 190. Alexander, how he used the Greeks
which took wages of his enemies to fight against him. ibi. Alexander how he
used a captain that submitted himself unto him. 193. Alexander contemned
Hercules in respect of himself. ibi. Alexander ever reserved one ear for the
defenda^nt. 202. Alexander reproved Darius for the gorgeous deckyng of his
house. 204. Alexander abhorred effeminate delices. ibi. Alexanders animositee.
205. Alexander, what verse he allowed best of Homere. 206. Alexander was saluted
the soonne of Jupiter Ammo^. 207. Alexander taken by day with a dead sleep in
the ca^pe. 208. Alexander made fre of Corinthe. ibi. Alexander knowelaged him
self a mortal manne. 209. A^^^oneus the son of Antigonus slain in battle.
224. Alexanders courage and stomach. 230. Al^^biades accused of one Thess^^^us.
340. Ambicio^ of Diogenes. 73.99. Amphictionum concilium, what it is. 105.
Amphoteros. 164. Ammon was Jupiter. 188. Amicus alter ipse. 207. Ambicion of
Julius Caesar. 266.267. ^^^^^thenes the philosophier. 15 (...) Manhood. 29.
An^^sthenes would have no sch^lars. 69. A^^^umen^s the successor of (...)
^^^^^der. 131. A^^^sthenes was loathe to dye 156. Antip^^er high capitain vnde^
Philippus. 175. Antipater highly in favor with Alexander, but at the l^st
d^dly hated. 187. Antipater his ambicion. 189. An^^genes. 190. Antipater
surmised matiers against Olympias. 205. Antigonus sayings begin. 210.
Antigonus how he used certain of his souldy^urs. 211. Antigonus first cruel
and then m^^cifull. ibi. Antigonus d^sapoin^ted his soonne of his lodgeyng.
ibi. Antigonus his boldness and presumpcion. 219. Antigonus was tender
toward his souldyours. 220. Antigonus low of stature and having a flat nose.
222. Antigonus iested at the impediment of his own yies. 223.224. Antonius and
Dolobella fa^^e and well colored. 270. Antipater overcame the Atheniens. 298.
(...) a rock i^ the Indies. 19^ Appollodorus the poet how he visited
Socrates. ^^. Approuyng of good fare and to be offended with the cost. etc. 57.
Appellacion of a man is a fit name but for a few. 9^. Apparel to curyous,
argues wantonness. 108. Apollo otherwise called Pythius. 184. Apelles. 197.
Art of gouernyng a comm^^weale. ^. Ar^ogan^ie of Sophistes. 16. Archelaus king
of Macedodonie. 18. Art and profession of Phisiognomyers. 32. Aristippus
taught philosophy for money. 3^. Archelaus the son of Perdicca. 40.
Aristippus brauled and strove with Diogenes. 41. Aristippus one of the court
with Dionysi^s. ibi. Aristippus despised gold and silver. 43.57. Aristippus
was both galau^te and also sage. 43. Aristippus regarded honest at all times.
ibi. Aristippus feared no man. 44.63. Aristippus loved gaye apparel. ibi.
Aristippus weaxed pale. 48. Areta the daughter of Aristippus. 50. Aristippus
took money of his friends and why. 51.54. Aristippus spent not his money in
vain. 54. Aristippus kept compaignie with a struompet. ibi. Aristippus was a
customer of Lais the harlotte. 55. Aristippus spetted on the face of Simus. 56.
Aristippus wysshed to dye no woors^e then Socrates had dooen. ibi. Aristippus
cast his money into the seea. 57. Aristippus being chidde^ of Plato, what he
au^swered. 58. Aristippus rebuked Diogenes for compaigniyng with Phryne the
horlotte. 59. Aristippus a man of great possessions. 60. Aristippus was
nothing gre^ed to take a bla^ke in disputacion. 61. Aristippus refused not to
dau^ce in purple. 62. Aristippus had a passing ready wit. 63. Artaphernes.
ibi. Aristippus arested in Asia by Artaphernes. 63. Aristo the Philosophier.
64. Aristippus gathered much richesse. ibi. Aristippus did let his son ^onne
at ^ouers. 64. Aristip. being thelder manne submitted first to Aeschines. 67
Aristippus cast on land by shipwreck, ibi. Aristogiton. 115. Art, every
art is not me^e for a king. 178. Aristotle was master to Alexander^ 200.
Aristodemus. 215. Arius a philosophier of Alexandria. 226. Armenia a royalme in
Asia. 23^ Aristogiton a false accusar condemned. 293. Areopagus. 3^7. Archias
first a plaier of entreludes and afterward a great manne of power with
Antipater. 341. (...). 156. A true friend is an high treasure. 6. Athenes was
ruled by the commons. 39. Athenaeus the greek historigraphier. 60.199. A thing
public is ordained for the wealth of the private also. 69. Athlete, what they
be that are so called. 103. Athenes the foundament of all Greece. 219.
Athenodorus. 228. Atedius pollio, alias Vedius pollio. 269. Attica a country.
297. Aulus Gellius. 25. Augustus repro^ed the insaciable ambicio^ of Alexander.
229 Augustus Caesar made a law for adulterers. ibi. Augustus enterpreted the
doings of me^ne to the better part. 232. Augustus Aia^. 233. Augustus was
not desirous to be feared. ibi. Augustus answer to a feloe that asked a
pe^cio^ of him. 234. Augustus au^swer to Galla. 235. Augustus perdoned Cinna.
238. Augustus used to say nay to none that desired him to any (...). 239.
A^gust^s an high and mighty prince. 240. A^gustus deli^ed to ieste and also
would take iestyng. 243.244. Augustus bought diverse birds. 250. Augustus
ge^tlenesse in hearing complayntes. 250. Augustus how he served a Greek poet.
251. Augustus, what he said of Room. 255. Augustus put of two ympudent
^rauers. 256. Augustus preferred the dignite of a commenweale. 257. Augu. how
he used to co^me^d his son unto the people. 260. Autoritee, who so has not
said, seeks: who so has proved, ^ateth. 290. Auru^ sitisti, Auru^ bibe. 327
B
Battle between Alexander and Darius. 186. Beneficial to a whole multitude.
4. Bettre of birth yt a child is, the better ought his bryngyng up to be 9.
Between a beast and a man of brutishe conditions, there is no difference 11.
Bettre to dye an innocent, the^ an offender. 21 Beauty of the mind is to be
lo^ed. 31 Begoonne well, is half done. 31 Bettre to beg then to be without
learning. 46 Bettre ye money be cast away th^n ma^ne for moneys sake. 58
Beetes is an herb called in latin Beta. 106. Beast of many heddes is the
people. 109.3^8. Beasts yt are most harmful. 118. Bealyes of gluttons. etc.
119. Best time to wedde a wife. 124 Beautyfull strumpettes are like to dedly
^oyson. 137. Beneficence of Philippus. 170 Benevolence how it should be
purchased. 179. Beardes are an hinderaunce in battaill. 185. Bed of a person
that is in de^. etc. 242. Bias received a talent of Antigonus. 223. Biddelles
what their officies is. 240. Bliss of heaven, whereby it is obtained. 96.
Blushing is a toke^ of virtue. 125 Bondeseruaunte to the pleasures of the
body. 4. Boldness and trust on a man's well dooyng. 26. Bostyng of a man's
self is a foolyshe thing. 53 Boste of drynkyng is vain. ibi Bondeseruauntes
of glory. 102. Bondeseruauntes, how they are called in Greek. 148. Bounty of
Alexander. 184.195. Bounty and largess is befallyng for kings. 215 Bosom
sermons and oracio^s. 216. Breach of love between Aes^hines and Aristippus. 66.
Brasidas a Captain of the Lacedaemonians. 232. Brundusium a to^^e in the
kingdom of Naples. 268. Brutus and Cassius slew Julius Caesar. 270. Buiriyng
of Diogenes. 82. Bu^riyng of the Jews. ibi. Buiriyng is not to be cared for
(said Diogenes.) 36. Bucephalus and horse. 200.276. Busyris a king of Egypt.
326. Byza^ciu^ a city of Thracia. 294
C
CAlamitees universal. 37. Ca^tharis a little vermyn. 103 Callisthenes the
disciple of Aristotle. 107 Caiges for woomenne. 120. Caria a prouynce in Asia.
185. Callisthenes con^emned the facions of Alexander his court. 202. Casket,
deske or standyshe of Darius. 204. Cas^ius Seuerus. 235. Cares of a good
prince. 242. Cato killed himself at V^ica 242. 269.331. Caprae an Isle. 262.
Caesar hanged up ye pirates. 263 Caesar's excuse for not leuyng the
dictatourship. 27^. Capitain^s many, and good souldyoures but a few. 298.
Cato. 304. Caius Popilius. 308. Caesar went in his go^ne wantonly girt about
him. 313. Caninius Reuilus was consul but.vj. hours. 315. Cato would be
b^isily occupied in the day time and merry in the night. 331. Caelius had a
loud voice. 331. Ceramicus a place of buiriall in Athenes. 87. Centaures what
they were. 118. Censour a magistrate in Rome. 247. 284. Centumuiri, what they
were. 312 Chefest ^t^e of young men. 35 Children, what they get by going to
school. 50. Children, how they should be brought up. 75. Childrens dyete
assigned by Diogenes. 80. Chiliades of Erasmus. 91. Cherronea a r^gion nigh to
Hellespontus. 102.163. Charibdis and Scylla. 119. 321. Cheril^s a poet. 194.
Children begotten toward the soonne risyng. etc. 309 Cyniques sect and what
they were. 68. Ci^ce is there none without a law. 153. Ciuilitee of Philyppus.
163. Cinna sought to destroy Augustus. 238. Ciuica corona what it is. 255
Cilicians the people of Cilicia. 263. Cicero was lowely to his enemies, but to
his frend^s froward^. 289. Cicero, what it is. 304. Cicero made a Galle free
citezen. 313. Cicero, how he rebuked his ^ought^r for going to fast and his
son for going to slow. 314. Cicero his au^swer for Milo. 318 Cicero divorced
his wife Teren^^a. 319. Cicero mocked Curio. 320. Cicero his riedle. 323.
Cicero could cast a miste over the seats of judgment. 325. Cicers what they
are. 327. Cicero how he checked a young feloe. 328. Cicero drounke water. 330.
Cicero what he said to Julius Caesar. 331. Cicero defeacted the accusacion of
Marcus Callidius. 332. Cicero iestyng on Isauricus. 332 Cloystures were full of
pride. 23 Climate is a region or cost of a country. 216. Cleme^cie of
Augustus. 226.231. 256. 258. 260. Clemency of Pompeius. 284. Clamorous and
brallyng orators. 306. Clodius a Roman of noble birth. 318. Cneus Pompeius.
279. Corrupt manners of the Atheniens. 15. Compaignye of wise manne. 19
Covetousness often time beguileth the bellye. 56. Co^municacyon ought to be
fruitful. 71. Coueteous persons do most of all cry out on aua^ice. 77.
Co^modytees of philosophy. ^^. Corinthus a city in Achaia. 84. 341.
Comunicacion ought not to be vain. 7^. Coueteousnesse the root of al eiuill.
117. Corrupt and effemynate maniers of the Atheniens. 1^4. Co^mmunicacion
declares a man's mind. 145. Cooks of Alexander. ^^5. Continency or
chastitee of Alexander. 189. 197. Corduba a city in Spain. 260. Consuls of
Room. 173. Consid^us a Senator. 276. Constancy of Phocion. 297. Coce of
Cocus. 318. Conte^cion between Pythias and Demosthenes. 339. Critias and
Charicles, what they were. 10. Credence is not to be given to the ignorant.
20. Crabb^d wives compared to rough horses. 25. Craneum, what it is. 93. Crete
the Isle now called Candie. 97. Craterus desired Diogenes to dwell with him.
131. Craterus auaunced by Alexander. 194. Cruelnesse of Vidius. 259. Crassus
could curry favor. 326. Custom eases the ^ediousnesse of inco^moditees. 24.
Customs in diverse places, what they are. 34. Curtius a knight of Room. 245.
Cyzicus or Cyzicum an Isle in Propontis. 61. Cypres trees are elfishe and
froward to spryng. 296.
D.
DAnae the daughter of Acrisius 166. Darius his offer to Alexander. 185
Damasippus praised his wine of.xl. years old. 323. Deseases of late
ba^quettyng. 8. Death is co^me^ to al persons. 21. Death is like to a sound
sleep. 36. Desperate persons what they should do. 72. Demosthenes his tale
of an ass. 75. Death is no eiuill thing. 150. Death riddeth a body out of
peines. 156. Demaratus a Corinthian. 177. Demochares Parrhesiastes. 179 Delphos
a town in the regio^ of Phocis. 201. Demetrius the son of Antigonus. 217.
Death which is best. 270. Demosthenes spoke to please men. 293. Demades had
no feloe in making of an oracion. 299. Demosthenes what he was. 333.
Demosthenes his answer to Pythias. ibi. Demosthenes his excuse for the study
of eloquence. 334. Demosthe. one of the.x. whom the Atheniens sent ambassadors
to Philippus king of Macedonie. 335, Demosthenes mocked for flyyng from
battaill. ibi. Demosthenes escaped being in the h^des of Alexander. 336.
Demosthenes, why he was banyshed. 337. Demosthenes, what he said to Pallas.
338. Demosthenes a^ouched it a dangerous thing to meddle with the affairs of a
commen weal. 339. Demosthenes restored from banyshement. ibi. Demosthenes
compared his returnyng with the returnyng of Alcibiades. 340. Demost. tau^ted
Demades. 342. Demosthenes would not be at the beck of the people. 34^
Demosthenes, how he defended the cause of a poor wooman. 343. Demades was
covetous of money. 344. Diete temperate to be used. 3. Difference between a
carnal lover and a friend. 32. Difference between the learned and unlearned.
45.53. Difference between the solle of a philosophier and of a verlet. 48.
Dionysius offended with Plato. 61 Dionysius had his ears in his feet. 62.
Dionysius gave in reward to Aristippus money, and to Plato books. 65.
Dionysius would call Aristippus fool and all to naught. ibi. Diogenes was
Antisthenes his scholare 65. Diogen his zele to sapie^ce. 69. Diogenes dwel^ in
a tubbe. ibi. Diogenes had no house of his own. ibi. Diogenes confuted Zeno.
94. Diogenes nicknamed the schools of Euclides. 70. Diogenes gave him self to
(...) after philosophy. ibi. Diog^ was a veraye slouen. 73. Diogenes noted
Plato of verbo^^^^. 74. Diogen^s could find no good menne^ ibi. (...) willed
the people ^o (...) no vain things. 75 (...) ^^unted all men. 76. Di^^enes
reprou^d the Mu^^^ans. ibi. Diog^nes reprouyng the Orators, covetous persons
and comm^n people. 77. Diogenes rebukyng such as as did sacrifice for bodily
health. ibi. Diogenes hated gluttons and boundseruauntes. ibi. Diog^nes
praisyng diverse persons. 78. Diogenes, what he taught to ^eniades his sons.
79. Dioge. manier of ^eachyng. 80. Diogenes made an abridgeme^t of all
disciplines for his scholares. ibi. Diogene^, how he would be ^^uried. 82.
Diogenes talkyng with Alexander in his tubbe. 8^. Diogenes whipped of young
men. 84. Diogenes thought himself thank worthy for coming to a feast or a
supper when he was desired. 85. Diogenes fyndyng Demosthenes in a tavern. 86.
Diogenes how he poynted out Demosthenes. 86. Diogenes his au^swer to such as
said he was over earnest in philosophy. 87. Diogenes to whom he would be
sold. 89. Diogenes rebuked a wooman for liyng prostrate before the Gods. 91.
Diogenes consecrated to Aesculapius a gyau^t with a clubbe. ibi Diogenes, how
he matched, fortune, law and affections. 92.93. Dioge. sitty^g in his tubbe.
93. Diogenes avouched himself to be rycher then Alexander. 94 Diogenes what he
said espiyng a white leaf of paper. ibi. Diogenes confuted Zenon. ibi.
Diogenes mocked a Sophiste and one pratyng in Astronomy. 95 Diogenes anointed
his feet where others annoynte their heddes. 96. Diogenes was desired to be a
preaste. ibi. Diogenes, almost persuaded to give over his philosophical
trade. 97. Dioge. was called dogg^e. 97.108.127.136.137. Diogenes had a blow
with a long loggue. 98. Diogenes sekyng a man with a candell in the day
light. 99. Diogenes deluded a, feloe for spryngklyng water upon him for the
purging of sins. 101. Diogenes chale^ged for a spy by Philippus. 102. Dio.
threatened of Perdicca. 103 Diogenes rebuked a feloe for wearyng a lions
skin. 106. Dioge. called ora^ours thrice double men. 108. Dioge. commended
an harper yt al others dispraised. 110.111.144 Diogenes had cast in his teth
banyshement. 112.113. Dio. his manner of beggyng. 115. Diony^ius how he
entreated his friends. ibi. Diogenes, why he became a philosophier. 112. Didymi
what it is.119. and of Didymo read in the. 151. Diogenes, what he said to a
renneawaye. 120. Dioge. what he said to a feloe that came to the hot house.
121 Diogenes hated womenne. 122. Diogenes salutacio^ to one that robbed gra^es
and tou^bes. ibi. Diogenes had neither manne nor womanne servant. 122. Dioge.
asked his alms. 129.140 Diogenes banyshed for coynyng of money. 113.129.
Diogenes, why he used to ear in the open street. 131. Diogenes taunted Plato
for his course fare. 132. Diogenes his answer to the^ that derided him. ibi.
Diogenes demed men to be saved from misaue^tures by veraye chance, and not
by the grace of God. 133. Diagoras a philosophier. ibi. Diogenes his answer to
Alexander. 136.150. Dioge^ void of supersticio^. 137. Dioge. mocked a
wrastlear. 138. Diogenes, what country ma^ne he was. 140. Diog. drinkyng i^ a
tavern. 145 Diogenes asked a large alms of a prodigal spender. 148. Diogenes
what he said being in a schole house. 152. Diogenes, how he would be buiried.
154^ Dionysius an eiuill scholemaster. 156. Displeasure (...) Philippus with
Olympias Alexander. 177. Disshes made from Augustus his table. 245 Dictare
dis^ipulis. 272. Dimitius Corbulo. 278. Diadorus. 307 Difference b^^wene
histories and Annals 321. Dignus crass^ est. 325. Dolphin fys^hes, what their
propretee is. 53. Dolobella asked a golden chain of Augustus. 254. Domitius a
senator of Rome. ^8^ Drachme, what valor it is of. 42.217. Drinkyng much is
mete for a spou^ge but not for a ma^ne. 335. Durach^^m or Dirrachium a town in
Macedonia. 268. Diadem, what it is. 274.
E
Eating unmeasurable. 35. Eiuill, what it is. 126. Eloquence of Plato. 74.
Empier, a reign or Empier holden with love. etc. 155. Ennuchus. 95. English
men noted of excessi^e ea^^ng and Germans of drynkyng. 55. Enemi^s^ how a man should be a^enged on his enemy. 155 Enemies how they are to be
overcome. 278. Enn^^s an ancient poet. 321. Epaminondas what he was. 96
Epitaphie is a writing set on deed men's tombs. 156. Eris the goddess of
strife. 4^. Erasmus defense for taking g^fres. 146. Erudicio^ or learning, what
it profits? 151. ^^^^es put to death by Augustus for eating of a quail. 22^
Eros a bondema^ne of Cic^. 312. Euripides a philosophier. 16. Euthidemus the
friend of Socrates. 33. Eutichides the servant of Aristippus. 54 Euclides was
in the later days of Plato. 70. Eu^inus and Pontus are all one. 113 Eiuill,
what is eiuill. 126. Every body is best judge of his own facultee. 176.
Eurylothus. 190. Eudimonicus a philoso. 199. Excess not being used, makes all
things good chepe. 18 Exercise of the memory. 36. Excuse of sin. 46. Excuse
of some that profess the contempt of money. 55. External things make no man the better. 68. Exercise of Diogenes his scholares. 80. Excess of
drynkyng is abominable. 146. Exhortacio^s made by philippus to his son
Alexander. 171.17^. Exaumple of chastitee in Alexander. 18^.
F
FAme honest, how it is to be purchased. 5. Fassion yt the Atheniens used
with conde^pned men. ^^.2^ Fassio^ of staige players in old time. 5^. Face
of a man ought to be most clean. ^6. Favor, the favor of a stroumpet is
better lost then had. 14^ Familiare iestyng between A^^igonus and Antagoras.
^^^. Fabia Dolobella mocked of Cicero. ^^^. Fainte handleyng of a plea, argues
the cause to be weak. ^^^. Feed only to meynteyne life. 2^. Felicitee of
kings, what it is. 8^. Feelyng in a matier. 114. Felicitee makes men false
herted. 221. Felicitee and good fortune of Augustus. 230. Fi^gues we choose and
take of the best. etc. 112. Fla^cus a poet. 153. Foolyshe have and nedelesse.
16. Foolyshnesse of men. 71. Foolyshe shame to no purpose. 87.89. Folly of
the parents in chastisyng their children. 88. Fortune is not to be imputed to
every thing. 101.160. Fortresses do nothing auaill without hardye capitaines.
193. Forum has a double significacion. 236. Friends are an high treasour. 6.
Frugalitee of Socrates. 13. Friends yt are true are great possessions. 14.
Fruitelesse being in a strau^g country. 18. Fruit of philosophy. 43. Friends
should be ^ryed ere they be familyar. 61. Fredome of the mind is the right
fredome. 66 Frequent assembles of the people. 71. Friends, how men should not
put forth their hands to their friends. 79.151.155. Frugalitee of Diogenes.
90. Friends should not desire any unjust thing one of another. 299. Furniture
of the mind. 27.
G
GAza, a country where odours grow. 18^. Galba had a misshape^ body. 235.
Garlande Ciuike. 254. Gallius. 284. Geuyng a thing after it is ones asked, is
to late. 18. Geometry yt Socrates would have studied. 38. Germaynes noted of
much drynkyng and englysshmen of much eating. 55. Gentlemen are pleased with
their own doings. 152. Gifts not profitable, ought to be refused. 12.
Gifts, Socrates would none take. etc. 18. Gluttons. 20. Glory, is to many
persons more sweter then life. 192. God is to be foloed as nere as we may.
2. Good men rejoice when they are troubleed. 23. Good things are rejected
because of the lewd persons that abuse them. 56. Gold, w^y (...) looks
pale 120. Gold overcomes all things. 166. Good fortune written about the
bucler of Demosthe. 335. Gramarians what they were. 76. Graunde thieves lead the
petie thieves to prieson. 104. Gross meats make the body strong, but the
w^ites dulle 114. Granicus a floudde. 183. Great things are not always good,
but good things are always great. 345.
H
HAste makes waste. 38. Harmodius. 115. Harlottes. 155. Heinous transgressions
must be suppressed by due correccion. 168. Harp of Achilles and of Paris. 206.
Hesiodus his verses. 10. 16. Heraclitus a philosophier. 12. Hemina, what it is.
18. He that can abite a curste wife need not. etc. 25. Helicon Cyzi^enus a
philosophier. 61. He is not in pemi^ie, that may have when he needs. 66.
Hercules the soonne of Jupiter. 106. Hegesias a philosophier of the Epicures
sect. 112. Hercules, how he was wurshipped in old time. 116. Hecateros. 164.
Hephaestion highly in favor with Alexander. 187. Her^de killed his own
soonne. 237. H^ll^spontus. 206. Hephaestion taller manne the^ Alexander. 207.
Herenni^s. 234. (...) ^uice, the price of (...) ounce. 302. High cares of a
good pr^nce. 242. Ho^gre is the best sauce. 3.13.27 Honest name and fame, how
^o be purchaced. 5. Honest mattres to set forth, every manne is loothe. 8.
Homere his verses. 10. 122. 123. 146.149.188.302. Honest geastes take all fare
in good worth. 20. Holylye dyed Socrates. 31. Honest and virtuous love. 32.
How an eiuill husband may borowe money of himself. 40. Honest men may use
delycate fare. 45. Homeres Rapsodies what they are. 76. Horse unbroken, apt
to no service. 45. Housbande, the rule for the wife. 39. Hours best to eat
meat. 98. Honest and verteons men ar the true images of God. 11^ Honye
mouthed persons. 119. Hot houses. 121.12^. Honest men are not the wurse for
the infamy of any place that they resort unto. 142. Homere feigneth death and
sleep to be br^ther german. 154. Housholdyng is not maintained with syngyng.
157. Horacius the poet his sayings. 19.166. Homeres Ilias highly e^^emed of
Alexander. 204. Humilitee of Socrates. ^5.40. Husbandrye is profitable. 40.
Humanitee and patience of Philippus. 177. Humili^ee of ^ntigonus. 212.^^^.
Humbleness and modesty of Augustus. 229. Humanitee will hope the best of a
friend. 288. H^dria in foribus, expouned. 48. Hypocrisis the chief poyncte in
eloquence. 343.
I
IAmbique verses. 13. Idleness is evermore worthee blame. 10. Idees that Plato
devised. 123. Ignorance is the only eiuil thing of the world. 14. Immoderate
and gredye eating. 35. Inordinate living is more peinful, the^ to live
^tuously. 4. Inco^moditees of wedlock, and out of wedlock. 17. Insaciable
mind of Alexa^. 94 Inexpectato, a place of rhetoric. 110. Ingratitude of the
Atheniens toward Philippus. 163. Incommodities that come by plaiyng at dyce.
194. Insolency, a dangerous desease. 212. Ingratitude of many persons. 288
Ingratitude of the people of Athenes. 338. Italians use abstinence for all
deseases. 278. Judgment of the common people. 4 Judgment preposterous of the
common people. 14.88. Justice executed by Antigonus. 218. Iulia the daughter of
Augustus. 252.253. Iulia banisshed out of the court of Augustus. 261. Julius
Caesar most like infacions to Alexander the gre. 263 Julius Caesar. a man of a
woondreous hault courage. 265.268. Julius Caesar put away his wife Pompeia.
265. Julius Caesar's ambicio^. 266.267 Julius Caesar would yt high enterprises
should be dispeched without castyng perilles. 267. Julius Caesar matched
Pompeius. 269. Julius Caesar, what he said when he saw in Room strau^giers
carrye young puppes. 271 Julius Caesar, how he encouraged his soldiers. 272.
Julius Caesar said that Sylla was not half a good clerk. 27^ Julius Caesar
refused to be called a king. 274. Julius Caesar's ho^sse. 276. Julius Caesar
oppressed the co^monweale. 278. Julius Caesar's dream. 279. Julius Caesar and
Pompeius at variaunce. 310. Julius Caesar called Senates for every small
mattier. 317. Iubius Curtius proved a liar by Cicero. 319.
K
KNowelage of moral philosophy, what it profits. 10 We know no more then
is in our memory. 80. Kings may not show favor to all persons. 167.
Kings, how far they may extend favor. 168. Kings must use honest
persons and abuse the dishonest. ibi. kings learned, is an inestimable
treasure. 172. Kings are eiuill reported for well dooyng. 196 Kings are not
the rules of justice, but the ministres. 213.
L
LAercius a greek autour. 16 Lais an harlote of Corinth. 55^342. Lacedemonia^s
exercised their children in huntyng. 80. Lawyers contendyng. 125. Labouri^g for
good qualitees. 13^ Law, is there none without a city. 153. Lasanum and
Lasanophorus. 212. Law for such as killed their fathers. 256. Laberius a
plaier. 271.316. Laodicia a city in Asia. 317. Lenocini^m, what it is. 32.
Lettres or wrytynges help not the m^morie. 36. Lenticula, what it is. 90.
Learning is no shame. 37. Lessons for young princes. 166. Learned kings an
inestimable treasure. 172. Leonides the governor of Al^^ander. 182. Lex Iulia.
229.252. Lex Pompeia. 256. (...) 284. (...) a ma^ne of great ^^toritee i^
Athenes. 296. (...) gi^^ to a sw^ord. 314. (...) of the mind. 67. Li^ertee is
the state of bliss. 107.131.152. Liber pater, one of the names of Bac^hus.
141. Li^e and death both are peinfull to ty^annes. 157. Li^eralitee of
Philippus. 171. Like bears l^^e to like. 192. 330. Li^a the wi^e of Augustus.
238.25^.257. Licinius of a bondeseruaunte m^de free. 246. Liberalitee of
Augustus tow^rd learned men. 251. Li^ya a p^rte of Afrike. 281. Libians had
their ears bored full of h^les. 308. Love hon^st and virtuous. 32. Love
purchaced by virtue. ibi. Love, the occupacion of idle persons. 117. Lust must
be refreined. 3. Lupines a kind of poultz. 111. Lucius Lucullus. 286. Lucius
Cotta a great drynker of wine. 330. Living inordinately, is more peinfull then
to live verteously. 4^ Lysias an orator. 25.26.100^ Live, to live is no
miserable thing. 1^^. Lysippus. 197^
M.
MAny me^ne give greater waiges to their horsekepers, then to the teachers of
their children. ^^^ Many pretend the contempt^ of delicates. etc. 55.5^ Many
good things are rei^cted because of the lewd persons that use them. 56^
Manne is most sapiente and most folyshe. 7^. Man's wit apt to all
things. ibi^ Mathematici, what they were. 76^ Mastre that is wise, will be
advised by his servant. 82.88. Macedonians conquered Greece. ibi. Manne, what
it is. 82. Man's life stands not in carnal pleasures. 104. Manne of all
creatures the most miser. 108. Manes the servant of Diogenes 127. Many rebuke
in others, yt the^ eme^de not theimselues. 129.130 Masters given to
viciousness what they do. 148. Macedonians were plain feloes. 167. Machaetes
wrongfully condemned of Philippus. 173. Macedonie was ever to little for
Alexander. 200. Manacyng of great me^ne. 268. Mamertines a people in Sicilie.
281. Magnus the surname of Pompeius. 282. Manly heart of Pompeius. 286.291.
Many me^ne punyshe in others yt they offe^de in theimselues. 7 Marcellinus put
to silence by Pompeius. 287. Marcus Tu^lius Cicero. 203. Marcus Aemilius
Scaurus 305. Marcus Tullius would not forsake his surname. 305. Marcus Tullius
his great care and study. 312. Marcus Caelius an orato^r. 318 Marcus Crassus
an orator. 324. Marcus Appius mocked of Cicero. 329. Marcus Aquilius called of
Cicero Adrastus. 329. Meat and drink must be taken with reason. 3. Mecenas
of Room. 5. Medleyng to much in other men's matiers. 10. Men that desire
to live, must frame. etc. 14. Men that are good, do suffer slanders
gladly. 23. Merry sayings of Socrates. 24. 25.35. Men whereof they should smell.
28 Merry speaking of Aristippus. 46. Measure is in all things a treasure. 50.
Men may justly refuse their soonnes if. etc. 65. Men should have no vain
communicacion 72^ Men take peynes in vain things. 76. Men should not put
forth empty hands to their fre^des. 79 Me^nes words declare their minds.
81. Men, should wear sweet flowers in their bosoms, rather then on their
cappes. 96. Men there are but a few. 98. 99. 135. Megara, a town in the
country of Attica. 98. Megarians were rechelesse kepers of their children.
ibi. Medecin for good appetite. 116 Merry sayings of Diogenes 125. 138. 139.
149. Mercifulness of Antigonus. 214. Men taken prisoners in war, how they
were used. 223. Metellus withstode Caesar from taking money out of the
treasourie. 268.277.307. Men, be they never so high are with famyne made tame
enough. 287. Menillus a captain. 298. Miserable is the pouertee of the mind.
45. Myce how they resorted to Diogenes his tubbe. 97. Midias, how Diogenes
ha^dleed him. 99. Misery, what thing is most miserable in this world.
118.126. Misery of war. 166. Mise^us a circe. 184. Mithridates king of
Ponr^s. 218. Minerus by the ficcio^ of the poe^es a perpetual virgin. 342
Moderat^ ^xercitacio^s of the body. 35. Money brings a living. 45. Money,
the right use of it. 51. Moral philosophy, what it profited the philosophiers.
63. Diogenes, how he was mocked. 126. Mod^racio^ of Alexander. 191.196
Moderacion of Pompeius. 284. Myndu^ ^ tou^e in Asia. 130. (...) of man,
wherein it is showed. 145.
N.
NAme and fame honest, how to be purchaced. 5. Nature ^^the provided for us at
necessary household stuff. 90 New co^medie, what it is. 23. Neptunus,
Iuppiter and Plut^ were brethren. 59. Nemea a region in Arcadia. 113 Nicolas
Leonicenus. 4. Ni^en^sse and tendrenesse hurts men. 8. N^sa a town in
India. 203. N^^a^les the trusty seruau^te of P^ocion. 301. Not^yng more
sapiente then manne. etc. 71. Noblen^sse of birth, Diogenes called a cloak.
153. Nomencl^^^^es. 240. N^^mus^ how it is taken. 248.
O.
O^seruacio^ of sepulchers. 236 Octauius Augustus Caesar. 225. Oedipus. 91.92.
Office of a school maistre. 21. Office of kings, is to hear every manne.
178. Office of a biddell. 240. Olympia, games of rennyng a wrasileyng. 7.113.
Old supersticion. 101. Olympias, what she might do with Ale^ander. 205.
Omnis iacta sit al^a. 267. Oracion made by Lysias for Socrates. ^6. Orators,
Diogenes called them thrice double me^ne. 108. Oracle what it is. 188.341.
Oulette taken by a souldyer. 248 Ouinius the servant of Watinius. 321.
Oulette dedicate to Pallas. 338.
P.
Patience of Socrates. 11.12.19.22.24.25.34. Patience of Aristippus. 43.47
Parents folly in chastenyng their children. 88. Pa^ience of Diogenes. 47.99.
Parmenio, the only capitain of Philippus wars. 160. Parmenio excused
Philippus for slepyng in the day time. 176. Parrhesiastes. 179. Paedagogus,
what he is. 182. Parillus one of Alexander his friends. 183. Parrasites, what
they were. 199. Patroclus the friend of Achilles. 203. Paris, what he was.
42.207. Pacinnius Taurus. 133. Patience of Pho^ion. 300. Persons that ought
to be received into friendship 7. Persons that live in all ease and pleasure.
13. Persons yt live to be glutto^s. 20. Peynes of teaching, is worthy great
wages. 51. Penelope the daughter of Icarius. 63, Persons desperate, what they
should do. 72. Persons feeble and maimed who they be. 84. Penaltee of a
blow in the old time. 100. Perdicca, graund master under Alexander. 103.
Peloponnesians. 174. Perdicca one of Alexander his capitaines. 202. Pericles a
noble manne of Athenes. 271. Persons condemned to death. 22.301 Philosophy
alters nature. 33. Phthia. 39. Philosophy, what fruit it brings. 43.140.
Philosophiers would live well without laws. 44. Philosophiers haunte rich
men's houses. 45.47. Philosophiers are phisicia^s of the mind. 48.
Philosophy is above Rhetorike. 50. Philosophiers are more excellent then
oratoures. 52. Philosophiers know when to speak and when not ibi. Phryne an
herlotte. 59.136. Philosophiers are never in exstreme penurye. 65. Philosophy,
what co^modytees it brings. 83.145. Philosophiers, how they pay for their
meals. 86. Philosophy heals all diseases of the mind. 89. Philosophy
known, what it proffiteth. 10.63. Philosophiers have the ouerhande of men.
102. Philippus king of Macedonie. 102.159.335. Philippus challenged Diogenes for
^ spy. 102. Phala^giu^ a venomous spider. 103 Philosophiers beg not, but
require their own. 107 Philosophiers are best that need fewest things. 127.
Philosophiers are eaters of all manier of meats. 128. Philosophiers what are
their offices. 154. Philippus his prayer when he had so^dry good chau^ces. etc.
160. Philippus contemned a feloe that railled on him. 162. Philippus his
clemency and moderacion. ibi Philippus oughed most thanks to such as
railled at him. 163. Philippus called Athenes the staige of his glory. 165.
Philippus his judgment upon two flagicio^s feloes yt accused either other.
165. Philippus suffered no man yt gave him any thing, to pass vnrecompen^ed.
169. Philippus deposed a judge for diy^g his head. 172. Philippus guildren.
197. Philippus wounded in fightyng against the Trybalies. 206. Pharnaces king
of Po^tus. 269. Phra^tes king of the Parthians. 285. Phocion a counsaillour of
Athenes. 291. Phocio^ was never seen laugh ne weep. ibi. Phocio^ used few
words. 292 Phocion liked nothing yt the gross people either did or said.
292. Phocion refused money that Alexander offered him. 294.298 Phocion his
counsel to the Atheniens. 295. Phocion condemned to death by the Atheniens.
300. Pho^ion dyed an innocente. 301. Phocion, what he said to the hangmanne.
302. Phocion the are of Demosthenes his reasons. 334. Pirates. 201. Piso
married the daughter of Cicero. 311.314. Pleasure and pain foloen either
other. 30. Plato and Aristippus were in court with Dionysius. 44. Place makes
not the person of less dignitee. 52. Plato lo^ed money better tha^ Aristippus
did good fare. 58. Plato refused to dance in purple. 62. Plain speaking all
men cannot allow. 65. Plato a ma^ne of sobre diete. 72. Plato checked of
Diogenes. 73. Plato loved clenlynesse. ibi. Plato his eloquence. 74. Plato his
diffinicion of a man. 98 Possessions, none so good as a true friend. 14. Poison
that Socrates drank. 21.22.30. Pouertee of the mind is miserable. 45.
Polyaenus the Sophiste. 57. Poinctyng with the fyngers. 87. Pontus and Euxinus
are all one. 113^ Pouertee, a virtue soon learned. 158. Porus his answer to
Alexander. 195. Porus one of the kings of India. 196. Pompeius had the
benevolence of men. 230. Pollio Asinius. 259. Pontifices, what they were. 265.
Pompeius woonne the first field against Caesar. 26^ Pompeius could not skill
said Caesar, how to use a victory. 269. Pontius Aquila made no reverence to
Caesar. 273. Pomponius a lau^ce knight. 276 Pompeius refused honor till he had
deserved it. 282. Pompeius triumphed being but a young manne. 282.283. Pompeius
had more regard to the commenweale then to his own safegarde. 287. Pompeius
his vau^tes of him self. 288. Pompeius what he said of Cicero. 289. Pompeius
brought to utter despair. ibi. Pompeius wished to had been borne a poor
man's son. 290 Pompeius and Julius Caesar at variaunce. 310. Pollio wrote
Chronicles in Greek. 314. Prayers, of what sort they should be. 2. Pride may
be in sackclothe. 22 Pritanei, what it is. 26. Pride of Diogenes. 73. Princes
learned, the highest treasure to a co^menweale. 43. Prive ambicion in Diogenes.
73.99. Prayers preposterous. 104. Proverbs. 78. 106. 110. 116. 135. 155. 167.
185. 207. 257. 267. 309. 324.342. Profit, by a ma^s enemy. 163. Princes may
not take their full rest in time of war. 175. Pryn^es minds should not be
uttered in time of war. 211 Priesoners taken in battaill, how they were used.
223. Princes dooen perpetually care for their subjects. 225. Praesens, how it
may be taken. 243. Praetor. 266. Prive thieves love the d^rke. 342. Purchacyng
of lands ought to be moderate. 38. Purple, none wear but kings in old
time. 62. Purple, death and princelye desteiny. 130. Publius Manlius the host
of Cicero. 317. Publius Sextius mocked of Cicero. 328. Pythia. 85. Pyrrhus king
of the Epi^otes. 220. Pytheas, what he was. 334.34^
Q
QVintus Luctacius Catulus. 304. Quintus Cicero, the brother of Marcus Cicero.
314.
R
RAillyng against men without truth, touches them not. 23. Repastes,
measurably to be taken. 8. Reach not at those things that are above our
co^pa^e. 11. Rebukyng eiuill, and yet to committee the same. 35. Reason is a law
to a Philosophier. 44. Relative opposita. 132. Reign or Empier, saving for the
dignitee, is a mutual servitude. 225. Repentance foloeth of unhonest
pleasures. 342. Reuilyng one another, who so ouercometh, gets the wurse.
344. Rhapsodies of Homerus, what they are. 76. Rhymirales king of the
Thracians. 226. Rhetoricians for their exercise, are wont to take feigned
arguments. 326. Rich me^ne are more folyshe then others. 48. Right use of
money. 51. Rich persons void of learning, Diogenes called sheep with the
golden flyces. 109. Rich me^ne have need of many lessons. 158. Romans
had.iij. names 305. Room how it was divided. 312 Rostra. 315 325. Rule for the
wife is the housbande. 39. Rubycon a floude. 268. Riot and prodigalitee causes
penurye. 100. Riot is in young men folly. 286.
S.
SAcrifice to God, ought not to be ouersumptuous. 2. Sacrificyng meat and
drink. 30 Sapien^e and learned princes. 43. Sapience diffined. 47. Sapience
comes not by fortune. 62. Sapient, nothing more then manne. 71. Sapient men
have al things. 91. Samos ^n ysle in the sea. 133. Satiri. 141 Sacrifice^,
which are best. 293 Science the only good thing of the world. 14.
Scholemaisters and their office. 21 Scoldyng of bro^helles. 24. Scipio a noble
captain in Room. 269. Scylla and Charib^is. 119.321. Servants how to be
bought. 8 Sextarius. 18. Seneca. i^i. Sect of the Ciniques. 12. Secret
hydynge an civil thing. etc. 86. Serapis or Apis. 141. Sensualitee brings
wretchedness. 150. Senerus Cassius 215. Sertorius. 284.285. Sextus Julius
Frontinus. 279. Seruilia the mother of Marcus. 322. Shame is it none to learn.
37. Sheep with golden flyces were in Colchos. 109. Sirenes, what they were. 40.
Sinopa a city in Pontus. 68. Sillogisme, what it is. 90.95. Sinopa a baren
region. 11^. Sickness puts us in remembrance not to be proud. 21^.
Silenus the fosterfather of Bacchus. 22^. Slender fare is to much for eiuill
geastes. ^. Sleep is an image of death. 203. Small varyaunces grow to scabbes.
66. Sophistes what they are. 14. Socrates refused to take gifts. 18. Socrates
made stone images. 19 Socrates had two wives at once. 24. Socrates dyed in
perfect securitee. ^1. Socrates, whereunto he was inclined. 35. Socrates
familyer gooste. ibi. Socrates thought it eiuil dooe^ to teach for money.
ibi. Solle of man, how it passes away. 36. Solle of man, what it is. ibi.
Solle of man shall return again. 37. Socrates had a vision at his death.
39. Sophocles his verses. 66. Solle and body, what they differ. 89.
Sophisticacions are not to be soyled. 94. Sostratus an Alexandrine. 237.
So^ldyours aunswers to Augustus. 247.248. Sol omnia uidet ac reuelat. 309.
Spuesippus. 158. Sphinx the monstre. 92.309. State of blissfulness. 41. Staige
to serve, what it is. 78. Stones hurled at a gibette. 105. Stroumpettes. 140.
Sthemus Lord of the Mamertines. 281. Strabo. 285. Supersticion of old time.
101. Supersticious fear that many folks have. 112. Suppositii partus. 139.
Suyceners. 276. Sulpitius a Tribune. 277. Sweet sauoures more meet for women
then for men. 28. Sweet sauoures defended by Aristippus. 68. Swoerde of
lead, out of an iuereye sheath. 145. Sweet sauoures, what they do. 147.
T
TAlkyng shows what a man is. 28.29. Taxiles one of the kings of India.
192. Tarraconia a country in Spain. 153. Terence. 35. Tegea a cit^e of
Arcadia. 138. Things made ripe by art are bought to dear. 16. Thanks that
Diogenes gave to Plato. 74. Thersites, whose description ye may read. 179.
The Thebanes rebelled against Alexander. 191. Thrasillus a Cinique. 216.
Theocritus the Chian. 224. Tharsus the chief city in Cilicia. 227. The
Tarraconians flattered Augustus. 253. Themistocles a ma^ne of great autoritee
in Athenes. 310. Title that Diogenes was sold bye. 79. Tiros an ysle where the
best purple is made. 240. Timagines for hatered of Augustus burned the books
that he had written of his chronicle. 258. Tiberius succeeded Augustus. 260.
Tigurines, a people of Germany. 276. Tiberius for Biberius. 323. To give place
to a ruler. 47. Tollius for Tullius. 323. True libertee is of the mind. 67.
Tria nummum millia, how much it is. 88. Tranquillitee of man. 93. Tragical
execracions met with Diogenes. 91. Treasure, where it is surest kept. 198.
Triballes, a people nigh to Hungary. 206. Tragedy of Augustus called Ajax.
232. Tribunes of Room. 273. Triumphyng, what it is. 283. Turonius Flaccus his
answer to Augustus. 249. Tullia the daughter of Ci^ero. 314. Tullius his
iestyng. 322. Time well spent, is a good possession. 15.
V
UArie^ee of learning makes not a learned man. 49. Vain sophisticacions are
not to be soyled. 94. Valerius Maximus. 160. Vat^nius had the gout. 241.
Varinius the enemy of Cicero. 308. 314.315.318.320.327. Varius, has a double
significacion. 332. Virtue and temperate dyete to be used. 3. Vertuo^s living
is profitable. 4. Verses of hesiodus. 10.16. Verses of Homere. 10.122.123.
140.146.149. Virtue must be sought for. 17.85 Virtue is learned of a few.
27.85. Virtue purchaceth love. 32. Virtue in young men is commendable. 35.
Virtue auoydeth^ naughty pleasures. ^9. Verses recited by Plato. 62. Verses
recited by Aristippus. ibi. Verses out of a tragedy of Sophocles. 6.289.
Ve^ues co^siste in the mean. 87 Verses recited by Diogenes. 127.130.157.
Verses of publius Mimus. 139. Verses of the poet Marciall. 147. Virtuous
persons love shamefastness. 153. Verses cited by Alexander. 202 Ve^tius brake
up his fathers grave. 236. Vedius Pollio, alias A^edi^^^ ^ollio. 259. Veries
cited by Augustus. 262. Verses out of a tragedy of Euripides. 279. Verres a
gentlemanne of Room. 306.323 Verses cited by Cicero. 309. Verses cited by
Demosthenes^ 335. Vinum Chium. 1^. Vitruuins. 68. Vices of the mind are only
eiuill things. 95. Ulysses the soonne of Laertes. 321. Unfruitful doings
is idleness. 10. Unfruitful being in strange ^ountrees. 18. Vnwrathfull
speaking. 2^.23.62 Vni^ersall calamites. 37. Unlearned men are called stones.
50. Unmeasurable laud and praise is to be reproved. 143. Unseasonable
housbandrie. 189. V^o digito caput scalpere. 324. Voconius and his.iij. foul
daughters. 309. Use assuageth greefes. 114.
W
Ways to still unquiet persons. 109. Wastefull lauessers of their goods.
134. Way to win victory. 270. Weapon needs not, where law may serve.
290. Whether one body may be in many places at once. 60. William Warrham
archbisshop of Caunturburie. 5. Wisdom, when it should be used. 72. Wise men
esteem things for the necessite of them. 88. Wise princes make proffitable
instruments as well of the good persons as of the eiuill. 168. Woma^kynde is
apt to learn all things. 29. Words spoken by Menedemus to his soonne. 65.
Words foolyshly spoken, bring men to trouble. 72. Words declare the
mind. 81. Woomenne, how they should be woonne. 125. Wy^es are to be borne
withal for their children sakes. 24. Wyttye speaking of Aristippus. 62.64.
Wine, which is best. 126. Wives in the old time lay aparte from their
husbands. 182. Wits excellent, marred by eiuill masters. 9.200. Wine of
Falernum. 313. Wine of two hundred years old. 314.
X
XAntippa, Socrates his wife. ^0. Xantippa threw a p^ssebolle on Socrates his
head. 24. Xantippes cancardnesse. 34. Xenophon became scholare to Socrates. 27.
Xenophon his book entitleed the banquet. 28. Xeniades. ^9. Xeniades sons
were taught of Diogenes. ibi. Xenocrates refused to take money of Alexander.
195. Xenophantus. 209.
Y
Images are bought at high prices. 88. Images, the true images of God. 117.
Young men's chiefest virtue. 35. Young folks to vie^e them selves in a
glass. 19. Young age, most apt to learn. 64. Young rufflers rebuked of
Diogenes. 125.
Z
ZEnon confuted by Diogegenes. 94. Zele of Alexander toward Homere. 198.
The end of the Table.
^EX FRVCTIBVS EORVM COGNOSCETIS EOS


LONDINI. In officina Richardi Graftoni.

Anno post natum Christum, M.D.XLII.

Mense Septembri.

(...)


