BELLVM ERASMI translated into english.

LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THO. BERTHELETI. AN. M.D.XXXIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

Dulce bellum inexpertis.
IT IS BOTH an elegante proverb, and among al other, by the writings of
many excellent auctours, full often and solempnely used, Dulce bellu^
inexpertis, that is to say, War is sweet to them that know it not. There be
some things among mortal men's businesses, in the which how great danger and
hurt there is, a man can not perceive tylle he make a proof. The love and
frendshyppe of a great man is sweet to them that be not expert: he that has
had thereof experience, is aferde. It seems to be a gay and a glorious thing,
to iette up and down among the nobles of the court, and to be occupied in
the kings busynes: but old men, to whom that thing by long experience is well
known, do gladly absteyne them self from such felicity. It seems a
pleasant thing to be in love with a young dammo sell: but that is unto them,
that have not yet perceived how much grefe and bytternes is in such love. So
after this manner of facion, this proverb may be applied to every busynes,
that is adjoined with great peril and with many euyls: the which no man will
take on hand, but he that is young and wants experience of things.

Aristotle in his book of Rhetorike, shows the cause, why youth is more
bolder, and contrary wise old age more fearful: for unto young men lack of
experience is cause of great boldness, and to the other, experience of many
grefes ingendreth fear and doubting. Then if there be any thing in the
world, that should be taken in hand with fear and doubting, ye that ought
by all manner means to be fled, to be withsta^de with prayer, and to be
clean avoided, verily it is war: than which nothing is either more wicked,
or more wretched, or that more farther of distroyeth, or that nere hand cle^eth
sorer to, or does more hurt, or is more horrible, and brefely to speak,
nothing does worse become a man (I wol not say a christen man) then war. And
yet it is a wonder to speak of, how now a days in every place, how
lightly, and how for every trifelynge mattier, it is taken on hand, how
outragiously and barbarously it is gested and done, not only of hethen
people, but also of christen men, not only of seculer men, but also of pristes
and bishops: not only of young men, and of them that have none experience, but
also of old men, and of those that so often have had experience, not only of
the commons and moeuable vulgar people, but most specially of the princis,
whose duty had been, by wisdom and reason to set in a good order, and to
pacify the light and hasty mouinges of the folishe multitude. Nor there lack
neither lawyers, nor yet divines, the which put to their fire brandes, to
kendel these things so abomynable, and they encorage them that else were cold,
and they privily provoke those to it, that were weary thereof. And by these
means it is come to that pass, that war is a thing now so well accepted,
that men wonder at him, that is not pleased therewith. It is so much approved,
that it is counted a wicked thing (and I had almost said herisie) to reprove
this one thing, the which as it is above al other things most mischiefful,
so it is most wretched. But how more justly should this be wondered at, what
evil spirit, what pestilence, what mischief, and what madness put first in
man's mind a thing so beyond measure beastly, that this most pleasant, and
reasonable creature man, the which nature has brought forth to piece and
benevolence, which one alone she has brought forth to the help and succor
of al other: should with so wild woodnes, with so mad rages, run heedlonge
one to distroye an other? At the which thing he shall also much more
marvel, who so ever would withdraw his mind from the opinions of the common
people, and woll turn it to behold the very pure strength and nature of
things: and woll aparte behold well with philosophical^ies the image of man on
the tone side, and the picture of war on the the other side.

Then first of al if one would consider well but the behauour and shap of ma^s
body shall he not forthewith perceive, that Nature, or rather god, has shaped
this creature, not to war, but to frendshyppe, not to destruction, but to
health, not to wrong, but to kyndenes and benevolence? For where as nature
has armed al other bestis with their own armure, as the violence of the
bullis she has armed with horns, the ramping lion with claws, to the bore
she has given the gnashi^g tuskes, she has armid the elepha^t with a long
tru^pe snoute, beside his great huge body and hardness of the skin: she has
fensed the Locodrill with a skin as hard as a plate: to the Delphin fyshe
she has given fynnes in ^tede of a dart: The Porcopin she defends with
thorns: the ray and thornebacke with sharp prickels: to the cock she has
given strong spurs. Some she fenseth with a shel, some with a hard hyde, as
it were thycke lether, or bark of a tree. Some she provides to save by
swyftnes of flight, as douues. And to some she has given venom instede of a
weapon. To some she has given a much horrible and owgly look, she has given
terrible eyes and grountynge voice. And she has also set among some of them
continual discention and debate. Man alone she has brought forth all naked,
weke, tender, and without any armure, with most softest flesh and smothe
skin. There is nothing at all in all his members that may seem to be
ordained to war, or to any violence, I wolle not seye at this time, that
where all other be^stis, anon as they are brought forth, they are able of
them self to get their food: Man alone comes so forth, that a long
season after he is borne, he depends all together on the help of other. He
can neither speak nor goo, nor yet take meat, he desires help alonely by
his infant crieng: so that a man may at the leest way, by this coniect, that
this creature alone was borne al to love and amity, which specially
increases and is fast knytte together by good turns done eftesones of one to
an other. And for this cause Nature would, that a man should not so much thank
her, for the gift of life, which she has given unto him, as he should
thank kyndnes and benevolence, whereby he might evidently understand him
self, that he was all to gether dedicate and bounden to the goddis of gracis:
that is to say to kyndnes, benevolence, and amity. And beside this nature has
given unto man, a countinance not terrible and lothly, as unto other brute
bestis: but meke and demure, representynge the very tokens of love and
benevolence. She has given him amiable eyes, and in them assured marks of
the inward mind. She has ordained him arms to clyp and enbrace. She has
given him the wit and understanding to kiss: whereby the very minds and
hearts of men should be coupled to gether, even as though they touched each
other. Unto man alone she has given laughyng, a token of good chere and
gladness. To man alone she has given weeping tears, as it were a wedde or
token of mekenes and mercy. Ye and she has given him a voice not thretnyng
and horrible, as unto other brute be^tes, but amiable and pleasant. Nature not
yet content with all this, she has given unto man alone the commodity of
speech and raysonynge: the which things verily may specially both get and
noryshe benevolence, so that nothing at all should be done among men by
violence. She has indewed man with hatred of solitarynes, and with love of
company. She has utterly sown in man the very seeds of Benevolence. She has
so done, that the self same thing, that is most wholesome, should be moo^te
^wete and delectable. For what is more delectable than a friend? And again,
what thing is more necessary? Moreover, if a man might lead all his life
most profytably without any medlynge with other men, yet nothing would seem
pleasant without a fellow: except a man would cast of al humanity, and
forsakyng his own kind would become a beast.

Beside all this, Nature has indewed man with knowledge of li^eral sciences, and
a fervent desire of knowledge: which thing as it does most specially
withdraw man's wit from all beastly wyldnes: so has it a special grace to get
and knyt to gether love and frendshyp. For I dare boldly sey, that another
affinity nor yet kynrede, does bind the minds of men to gether with ^trayter
and surer bandis of amity, than does the felowshyppe of them that be learned
in good letters and honest studies. And above all this, nature has divided
among men by a merueylous variety the gifts, as well of the soul as of the
body, to the intent truly that every man might find in every synguler person
one thing or other, which they should other love or preise for the excellency
thereof: or else greatly desire and make much of it, for the need and profit
that comes thereof. Finally she has endowed man with a spark of a godly mind:
so that though he see no reward, yet of his own courage he delyteth to do
every man good. For unto god it is most propre and naturalle, by his
benefyte to do every body good. Else what means it, that we rejoice and
conceive in our minds no little pleasure, when we perceive that any creature
is by our means preserved.

More over god has ordained man in this world, as it were the very image of
him self, to the intent, that he, as it were a god in earth, should provide for
the welthe of al creatures. And this thing the very brute bestis, do also
perceive, for we may se, that not only the tame bestis, but also the liberdis,
lions, and other more fierce and wild, when they be in any great ieoperdie,
they flee to man for succor. So man is, when all thyngis fail, the last
refuge to all manner creatures. He is unto them all the very assured altar and
seynctuarie.

I have here peynted out to you the image of man as well as I can: On the
other side (if it like you) ageynste the figure of man, let us purtraire the
facion and shap of war.

Now then imagine in thy mind, that thou doste behold two hoo^tis of
barbarous people, of whom the look is fierce and cruelle, and the voice
horrible, the terrible and ferefull rustelynge and glysteryng of their harnes
and weapons, the unlovely mourmour of so howge a multitude, the eyes sternely
menassyng, the blody blastis and terrible soundes of trumpettis and clarions,
the thondryng of the gonnes, no less fearful than thonder in deed, but much
more hurtefulle, the wood cry and clamor, the furious and mad runnyng to
gether, the outrageous slaughter, the cruel chances of them that slay, and of
those that are stryken down and slain, the heaps of slaughters, the feldes
overflowed with bloudde, the ryuers dyed red with man's bloudde. And it
chauncethe often times among, that the brother fyghteth with the brother, one
kynsman with an other, friend against friend: and in that common furious
woodnes often times one thrusts his weapon quyte through the body of an other,
that never gave him so much as a foul word. Verily this tragidie contains
so many mischeues, that it would abhor any man's heart to speak thereof. I will
let pass to speak of the hurtes, which are in c^mparison of the other but
light and commune, as the tredynge down and distroying of the corn al about,
the burning of towns, the villages fired, the dryuynge aweye of cattle, the
rauysshynge of maidens, the old men led forth in captivity, the robbynge
of churches, and al things confounded and full of theftes, pillages, and
violence. Another I woll not speak now of those things, which are wont to
follow the most happy and most just war of all.

The poor commons pilled, the nobles over charged, so many old men of their
children bereued, ye and slain also in the sl^ughter of their chylderne, so
many old women destitute, whom sorrow more cruelly sleeth then the weapon it
self, so many honest wives become wydowes, so many children fatherles, so many
lamentable howses, so many rich men brought to extreme poverty. And what
needs it here to speak of the destruction of good manners, sith there is no
man, but he knows right well, that the universal pestilence of al mischeuous
living proceeds at ones of war. Thereof comes despysynge of virtue and
godly living: hereof comes, that the laws are neglected, and not regarded,
hereof comes a prompte and a ready stomach, boldly to do every mischeuous deed.
Out of this fountain springs so houge great companyes of thenes, robbers,
sacrilegers, and mourderers^ And that is most greuouse of all, this
mischievous pestilence can not keep her self ^ithi^ her bounds: but after it
is begone in ^^m one corner, it does not only (as a contag^ous disease) sprede
abroad and enfecte the cou^treyes nere adioynynge to hit, but also it draws
in to that commune rumble and troublous business the countries that be very
far of, either for need, or by reason of affinity, or else by occasion of
some leage made. Ye and more over, one war springs of an other: of a
dissembled war there comith war in deed, and of a very small, a right great
war has risen. Nor it chancethe often times none other wise in these
things, then hit is feyned of the monst^^, which lay in the lake or
po^ddell called Lerna.

For these causes I trow, the old poe^is, the which most sagely perceived
the power and nature of things, and with most mete feyninges, covertly
shadowid the same: have left in writing, that war was sent out of hell: and
that by the labor of the furies of hell: nor every one of the furies was not
mete and convenient to bring about this busynes, but the most pestilent and
mischieuoust of them all, was chosen out for the nones, which has a
thousand names, and a thousand craftis to do hurt. She being armed with a
thousand serpentis, blowith before her fendly trumpette. Pan with furious
ruffelynge accombreth every place. Bellona, shakethe her furious flayle. And
then the wicked furiousnes him self, when he has undone all knottis and
broken all bonds, russheth out with blouddye mouth horrible to behold.

The grammarians perceived right well these things, of the which, some will,
that war have his name by contrary meaning of the word Bellum, that is to
seye fair, because it has nothing good nor feyre. Nor bellum, that is for
to sey war, is none other wise called Bellum, that is to seye fair: than the
furies are called Eumenides, that is to seye meke: by cause they are wood and
contrary to all mekenes. And sum gran maryans think rather, that Bellum
war, should be deryuied out of this word Belua, that is for to say, a brute
beast: for so much as hit belongs to brute beastis, and not unto men to
run to gether, each to distroye other. But it seems to me to pass far all
wild and all brute beastlynes, to fight to gether with weapons.

First for there are many of the brute beastis, each in his kind, that agree
and live in a gentylle facion to gether, and they go to gether in hirdes and
flockes^ and each helps to defend other. Nor it is not the nature of all
wild beasts to fight. For some are harmeles, as doois and haaris. But they
that are the most fierce of all, as lions, wolfes, and tigers: do not make
war among them self as we do. One dog eatethe not an another. The lions,
though they be fierce and cruelle, yet they fight not among them self.

One dragon is in peace with an other. And there is agreement among poisons.
But unto man there is no wild or cruel beast more hurtful, than man.

Again, when the brute beastis fight, they fight with their own natural
armor: we men, above nature, to the destruction of men, arm our self with
armor, invented by craft of the dyuell. Nor the wild beastis are not cruel
for every cause: but either when hunger makes them fierce, or else when they
perceive them self to be hunted and pursued to the death, or else when they
fere lest their yonglynges should take any harm or be stolen from them. But
(oh good lord) for what tryflynge causes what tragidies of war do we styre
vp^ For most vain titles, for chyldyshe wra^he, for a wenche, ye and for
causes much more scornful then these, we be inflamed to fight.

More over, when the brute beastis fight, their war is one for one, ye and
that is very short. And when the battle is soorest foughten, yet is there
not paste one or two, that goes away sore wounded. When was it ever hard,
that an hundred thousand brute beastis were slain at one time fyghtyng and
tearing one an other: which thing men do full oste and in many places? And
beside this, where as some wild beasts have natural debate with some other,
that be of a contrary kind: So again there be some, with which they louyngly
agree in a sure amity. But man with man, and each with other, have among them
continual war: nor there is no leage sure enough among any men. So that
what so ever it be, that has gone out of kind, it has gone out of kind into
a worse facion: then though nature her self had inge^dred therein a malice at
the beginning.

Will ye se how beastly, how foul, and how unworthy a thing war is for
man? Did ye never behold a lion let loose unto a bear? What gapynges, what
rorynges, what grisely gnesshynge, what tearing of their flesh is there? He
trembles, that be boldeth them, yea though he stand sure and safe enough
from them. But how much more grisely a sight is it, how much more
outrageous and cruel, to behold man, to fight with man, arrayed with so much
armor, and with so many weapons? I beseech you, who would believe, that they
were men, and it were not because war is a thing so much in custom, that no
man meruayleth at it? Their eyes glowe like fire, their faces be paale, their
marchynge forth is like men in a fury, their voice skrytshynge and gruntynge,
their cry and clamor wood, all is iron, their harnes and weapons gynglen and
clutteren, and the gounnes thondren. It might have been better suffered, if man
for lack of meat and drink, should have fought with man, to the intent he
might devour his flesh and drink his bloudde: All be it, it is come also now
to that pass, that sum there be, that do it more of hatrede, then either for
hunger or for thyrste. But now this same thing is done more cruelly, with
weapons enuenomed, and with diuilyshe ingins. So that no where may be perceived
any token of man. Trow ye that nature could here know the same thing, that
she sometime had wrought with her own hands? And if any man would enfourme
her, that it were man, that she beheld in such array: might she not well,
with great wonderynge, say these words?

What new manner pageant is this that I behold? what dyuell of hell has
brought us forth this monstre? There be some that call me a stepmother,
because that among so great heaps of things of my making I have brought
forth some venomous things: and yet have I ordained the self same venomous
things, for man's behofe. And because I have made sum beasts very fires and
peryllous: and yet is there no be so wild nor so peryllous, but that by
craft and diligence he may be made tame and gentle. By man's diligente
labor the lions been made tame, the dragons meke, and the bears obedient. But
what is this, that wors is thanne any steppemother, which has brought us
forth, this new unreasonable brute beast, the pestilence and mischief of
all this world? One beast alone I brought forth holly dedicate to be
beneuolente, pleasante, frendely, and health of all other? What has chanced,
that this creature is changed into such a brute beast? I perceive nothing
of the creature man^ which I my self made. What evil spirit has thus
defiled my warke? What Wytche has bewitched the mind of man, and transformed
it into so beastysshe? What sorceresse has thus turned him out of his
kyndely shappe? I command and would the wretched creature should behold him
self in a glass. But alas what shall the eyes se, where the mind is awey? Yet
behold thy self (if thou can) thou furious warrior, and se if thou may
by any means recover thy self aga^ne. From whe^se haste thou that t^retnynge
creste upon thy heed? From whens haste thou that shynynge helmette? from
whens are those iron horns? Whens comes it, that thine elbowes are so sharp
and piked? Where had thou those scales? Where had thou those brazen
teethe? Of whence are those hard platis? Whence are those ^eedly weapons? F^o
whens comes to the this voice more horrible then of a wild beast? What a
look and countin^nce have thou more terrible, tha^ of a brute beast? Where
haste thou gotten this thonder and l^ghtnynge, b^th more fearful and
hurtefu^le then is the very thonder and lightening i^ self? I fourmed the a
goodly creature, what came in thy mind, that thou wold^^^e thus tr^n^^ourme
thy self in to so (...) and so b^astly facion, that there is no ^rute ^eas^e
so unreasonable in comparyson unto man?

These words, and many other such like I suppose, she d^me nature, the worker
of al things, would say. T^en since man is such, as is showed before that he
is: and that war is such a thing, like as to often we have felt and known,
it seems to me no small wonder, what ill spirit, what disese, or what
myshappe, first put into man's mind, that he would bathe his mortalle weapon in
the bloudde of man. It must needs be, that me^ mounted up to so greatte madness
by diverse degrees. For there was never man yet (as Iuuenall says) that was
suddenly most ungracious of all. And always things most worste, have crept in
among men's manners of living, under the shadow and shappe of goodness. For
sometime those men that were in the beginning of the world, led their lines
in wodes, they went naked, they had no walled towns, nor howses to put their
heedes in: it happed other while that they were sore grieved and distroyed with
wild beastis. Wherefore with them first of all, me^ made war, and he was
esteemed a mighty strong man, and a captain, that could best defend mankind
from the violence of wild beastis. Yea and it seemed to them a thing most
egall, to strangle the stranglers, and to slay the sleers, namely when the
wild beast, not provoked by us for any hurt to them done, would wylfully
set upon us. And so by reason that this was counted a thing most worthy
of preyse (for hereof it rose that Hercules was made a god, the lufty stomacked
young men, began all about to hunte and chase the wild beasts, and as a
token of their valyant victory, the skynnes of such beastis as they slew,
were set up in such places, as the people might behold them. Besides this
they were not contented to slay the wild beasts, but they used to wear their
skynnes to keep them from the cold in winter. These were the first slaughters
that men used: These were their spoils and robberies. After this, they went so
ferforth, that they were bold to do a thing, which Pythagoras thought to be
very wicked: and it might seem to us also a thing monsterous, if custom
were not, which has so great strength in every place: that by custom it was
reputed in some countries a much charitable deed, if a man would, when his
father were very old, first sore beat him, and after thruste him heedlonge
into a pytte, and so bereue him of his life, by whom it chanced him to have
the gift of life. It was counted a holy thing, a man to feed on the flesh of
his own kyns men and friends. They thought it a goodly thing, that a virgin
should be made common to the people in the temple of Venns. And many other
things, more abominable the^ these: of which if a man should now but only
speak, every manne would abhor to here him. Surely there is nothing so
ungracious, nor nothing so cruelle, but men woll hold therewith, if it be ones
approved by custom. The will ye here, what a deed they durst at the last do?
They were not abashed to eat the carcases of the wild beastis that were
slain: to tear the unsavory flesh with their tethe, to drink the bloudde,
to suck out the matter of them: and (as Ouide says) to hide the beasts
bowels within their own. And although that at that time seemed, to be an
outrageous deed, unto them, that were of a more mylde and gentle courage: yet
was it generally allowed, and all by reason of custom and commodity. Yet were
they not so content. For they went from the sleinge of noysom wild beasts, to
kylle the harmeles beasts, and such as did none hurt at all. They waxed
cruel every where upon the poor sheep, a beast without fraud or gyle. They
slew the haare, for none other offense, but because he was a good fat dysshe
of meat to feed upon. Nor they forbear not to kyl the tame ox, which had
a long season, with his soore labor nourysshed the unkind householde. They
spared no kind of beastis, of fowls, nor of fysshes. Yea and the tyranny of
glottony went so ferforth, that there was no beast any where, that could be
sure from the cruelty of man. Yea and custom persuaded this also, that it
seemed no cruelnes at all to sice any manner of beast, what so ever it was, so
they a^steyned from manslaughter. Now perauenture it lies in our power to keep
out (...), that they enter not upon the manners of men, in like manner as it
lies in our power to keep out the sea, that it break not in upon vs^ But wha^
the sea is ones broken in, it passes our power to restreyn it within any
bou^d^s. So either of them both ones let in, they will not be ruled, as we
would, but ronnne forth heedlonge whither so ever their own rag^ cari^^h
them. And so after that men had been exercised with such begynnynges to
slaughter, wrath anon entysed man to set upon man, either with staff, or with
stone, ^^^lles with his fyste. For as yet, I think they used none other
weapons. And now had they learned by the killing of beasts, that man also
might sone and easily be slain with little labor. But this cruelnes rema^ned
betwy^te singular persons, so that yet was there no great nombre of men, that
fought to gether, but as it chanced one man ageynste an other. And beside this,
there was no small color of equity, if a man slew his ennemie: ye and
shortly after, it was a great preyse to a man, so slay a violent and a
mischeuous manne, and to rydde him out of the world, such dyuelysshe and
cruelle caytyues, as men say Cacus and Busiris were. For we see plainly, that
for such causes, Hercules was greatly preysed. And in process of time, many
assembled to take part to gether, either as affinity, or as neyghbourheed, or
kynred bound them. And that that is now robberye, was then war. And they
sought then with stones, or with stakes, a little burned at the ends. A
little river, a rock, or such other like thing, chaunsynge to be between
them, made an end of their battle.

In the mean seson, whiles fiersnes by use increases, whiles wrath is grown
great, and ambition hot and vehement: by ingenious craft, they arm their
furious violence. They divise harneys, such as it is, to fense them with. They
inuente weapons to distroy their enemies with. Thus now by few and few,
now with greatter company, and now armed they begin to fight. Nor to this
manifest madness they forgette not to give honor. For they call it Bellum, that
is to sey, a fair thing: ye and they repute it a virtuous deed, if a man with
the ieoperdie of his own life, manlye resist and defend from the violence of
his enmies, his wife, children, beastis, and householde. And by little and
little, malice grew so great, with the high estemyng of other things, that
one city began to send defiance and make war to an other, countreye
ageynste country, and royalme ageynste royalme. And though the thing of it
self was the^ most cruel: yet all this while there remained in the^ certain
tokens, whereby they might be known for men. For such goodis as by violence
were taken awey: were asked and required again by an heralde at arms, the
goddis were called to wytnes, ye and when they were ranged in battle, they
would reason the matter, er they fought. And in the battaylle they used but
homely weapons, nor they used neither gyle nor disceyte, but only strength. It
was not lefull for a man to stryke his ennemie, till the sign of battle was
given. Nor it was not lefull to fight after the sownynge of the retreat. And
for conclusion, they fought more to show their manlynes, and for preyse, than
they coueted to slay. Nor all this while they armed them not, but ageynste
strangers, the which they called hosts, as they had been hospites, their
guestis. Of this rose empires, of the which there was never none yet in any
nation, but it was gotten with the greatte shedynge of man's bloudde. And since
that time there has followed continual course of war, whiles one eftesones
labors to put an other out of his empire, and to set him self in.

After all this, when the empyres camme ones in to their hands, that were most
ungracious of all other: they made war upon who so ever pleased them: nor
they were not in greattest peril and danger of war, that had most deserved
to be punys^hed, but they that by fortune had gotten great riches. And now
they made not war to get preyse and fame, but to get the vile mucke of
the world, or else some other thing far worse then that.

I think not the contrary, but that the greatte wise manne Pythagoras, meant
these things: when he by a propre divise of philosophy, feared the unlearned
multitude of people from the sleinge of sely bea^tis. For he perceived, hit
should at length come to pass, that he which (by none injury provoked) was
accustomed to spille the blood of a harmeles beast, would in his anger, being
provoked by injury, not fear to slay a man.

War, what other thing else is it, than a common manslaughter of many men to
g^ther, and a robbery? the which, the farther it sprawleth abroad, the more
mischeuous it is. But many gross gentylmen now a days laugh merrily at these
things, as though they were the dreams and dotynges of schole men, the which
saving the shappe, have no p^ynte of manhood, yet seem they in their own
conceyte to be goodis. And yet of those begynnynges, we see we be rounne so
far in madness, that we do naught else all our life days. We war
continuallye, nation with nation, royalme with royalme, city with city,
Prince with prince, people with people, ye and (hit that the heathen people
confess to be a wyckedde thing) cousyne with cousyne, alyaunce, with
alyaunce, brother with brother, the son with the father, ye and that I esteem
more cruelle thanne all these things, a Christen manne ageynste an other
manne. And yet farthermore, I wolle say, that I am very loathe to do, which
is a thing most cruel of all, one christen man with an other christen manne.
Oh blyndenesse of man's mind, at those things no man marueyleth, no man
abhorrethe them. There be some that rejoice at them, and preyse them above
the moon: and the thing which is more then dy^yllyshe, they call a holy
thing. Old men crooked for age, make war, pryestes make war, monks gone
forth to war, yea and with a thing so dyuyllysshe we myngle Christ. The
batayles raunged, they encountre the one the other, bearing before them the
sign of the Cross, whythe thing alone might at the l^a^te wise admonysshe
us, by what means it should become christen men to ouercomme.

But we run heedlonge each to dystroye oher, even from that heavenly sacrifyce
of the auter, whereby is represented that perfect, and ineffable knyt^ynge to
gether of al christen men. And of so wicked a thing, we make Christ both
auctour and wyttenes. Where is the kyngedome of the dyuelle, if hit be not in
War? Why draw we Christ into war? with whom a brothell house agrees
more then war? Sayncte Paul disdayneth, that there should be any so great
discord among christen men, that they should need any judge to discuss the
matter between them. What and he should come and behold us now through all
the world, warrynge for every light and trifelynge cause, stryuyng more
cruelly then ever did any hethen people, and more cruelly then any barbarous
people. Yea and ye shall see it done by the authority, exhortations, and
furtheringes of those, that represent Christ, the prince of peace, and very
bishop, that all things knytteth together by peace: and those that salute
the people with good luck of peace. Nor it is not unknown to me, what these
unlearned people, will say (a good while sens) against me in this matter, the
whose wynnynges arise of the common yuels. They say thus. We make war
ageynste our wylles: for we be constrained by the ungracious deeds of other. We
make war but for our right. And if there come any hurt thereof, thank them
that be causers of it. But let these men hold their tongues a while, and I
shall after in place convenient, a^oyde all their cauilations: and pluck of
that false visour, wherewith we hyde all our malice.

But first as I have above compared man with war, that is to say, the
creature most demure, with a thing most outrageous, to the intent that
cruelnes might the better be perceived: So will I compare war and peace to
gether, the thing most wretched, and mo^te myschieffull, with the best and
most welthy thing that is: And so at last shall appear, how greatte madness
it is, with so greatte ruffelynge, with so great labors, with such
intolerable expenses, with so many dangers and extreme perils, with so many
calamities, affectionately to desire war: where as agreement might be bought
with a far less price.

First of all, what in all this world is more sweter or better then amity or
love? Truly nothing. And I pray you, what other thing is peace then amity
and love among many men? like as war on the other side is naught else but
discention and debate of many men together. And surely the propretie of good
things is such, that the brother they been spredde, the more profit and
commodity comes of them. Farther if the love of one singular person with an
other be so sweet and delectable: how great should the felicity be, if realm
with realm, and nation with nation were coupled together, with the band of
amity and love? On the the other side, ^he nature of yuelle things is such,
that the farther they sprawle abroad, the more worthy they are to be called
yuell, as they be in ded. Then if it be a wreched thing, if it be an ungracious
thing, that one man armed should fight with an other, how much more miserable,
how much more mischiuous is it, that the self same thing should be done with
^o many thousands to gether? By love and peace the small things increa^e and
way great, by discord and debate the great things decay and come to naught.
Peace is the mother and nource of all good things. War suddenly and at ones
overthrows, destroys, and utterly fordoth every thing that is pleasant and
fair, and brings in among men a monstre of all mischeuous things.

In the time of peace (none other wise than as vere, the lusty spryngynge time,
should show and shine in men's busynesses) the feldes are tylled, the gardeyns
and orchardes fresshely florysshe, the beasts pasture meryly, gaye manours in
the contreye are edyfyed, the towns are builded, where as need is, reparations
are done, the buildings are highted, and augmented, riches increaceth,
plesures are nourished, the laws are executed, the common welthe flourysheth,
religion is feruente, right rayneth, gentylnesse is used, craftis men are
busylye exercised, the poor men's gaynes is more plentiful, the welthynes of
the rich men is more gay and goodly, the studies of most honest lernynges
florishen, youth is well taught, the aged folks have quiette and rest,
maidens are luckely married, mothers are praised for brynginge forth of children
like to their progenitors, the good men prospere and do well, and the yuell
men do less offense.

But as soon as the cruel tempest of war comes on us, what m(...)chief
co(...)meth of war.
good lord, how greatte a flood of mischeues, occupies, ouerfloweth and
drowneth all to gether. The fair hirdes of beasts are driven a way, the
goodly corn is trodden down and distroyed, the good husband men are slain,
the villages are burned up, the most welthy cities, that have flourished so
many wynters, with that one storm are overthrown, distroyed, and brought to
naught: so much more redyer and prompter men are to do hurt th^^ good. The
good citezens are robbed and spoiled of their goods by cursed thieves and
mourtherers. Every place is full of fear, of waylynge, complaining, and
lamenting. The crafts men stand idell: the poor men must either dye for
hunger, or fall to stealing. The rich men either they stand and sorrow for
their goods, that be pluckte and snatched from them, orels they stand in
great doubt to lose such goods as they have left them: so that they be on
every side woe begone. The maidens, either they be not married at all, or else
if they be married, their marriages are sorrowful and lamentatable. Wives being
destitute of their husbands, lie at home without any fruit of children, the
laws are laid aside, gentylnes is laughed to scorn, right is clean exiled,
religion is set at naught, hallowed and unhallowed things al is one, youth is
corrupted with all manner of vices, the old folk they wayle and weep, and
wysshe them self out of the world, there is no honor given unto the study of
good letters. Finally there is no tongue can tell, the harm and mischief that
we feel in war.

Perchance war might be the better suffered, if it made us but only wretched
and nedy, but it makes us ungracious, and also full of unhappiness: and I think
Peace like wise should be much made of, and it were but only because it
makes us more welthy and better in our living. Alas there be to many all
ready, ye and mo then to many mischiues and yuelles, with the which the
wretched life of man (whether he will or no) is continuallye vexed, turmented,
and utterly consumed.

It is nere hand two thousand year sith the physicians had knowledge of three
hundred diverse notable sickenesses by name, beside other small sickenesses and
new, as daily spring among us, and be side aege also, which is of it self
a sikenes inevitable.

We read, that in one place whole cities have been destroyed with earth quakes.
We read also, that in an other place there have been cities al to gether burnt
with lightning: how in an other place whole regions have been swallowed up with
openyng of the earth, towns by vndermyninge have fallen to the ground: so that
I need not here to remember what a great multitude of men are daily destroyed
by diverse chances, which be not regarded, by cause they hap so often: as
sudden breaking out of the sea, and of greatte flouddes, falling down of
hills and houses, poison, wild beasts, meat, drink, and sleep. One has been strangled with drinking of a hear in a draughte of milk, an other has been choked with a littel grape stone, an other with a fish bone styckynge in
his throat. There has been, that sodeyne joy has killed out of hand: for it
is less wonder of them that dye for vehement sorrow. Beside all this, what
mortal pestilence se we in every place. There is no part of the world, that
is not subject to peril and danger of man's life, which life of it self also
is most fugitive. So manyfolde mischaunces and yuels assail man on every
side, that not without cause Homer did say: Man was the most wretched of al
creatures living.

But for as much these myschaunces can not lightly be eschewed, nor they hap
not through our fault, they make us but only wreched, and not ungracious
withal. What a pleasure is it than for them that be subject all ready to so
many miserable chances, willyngely to seek and procure them self a another
myschefe more than they had before, as though they yet wanted myserye? Ye
they procure not a light yuell, but such an yuell that is worse than all the
other, so mischiffull, that it alone passethe all the other: so aboundante,
that in it self alone is comprehended all ungraciousness? so pestilente, that
it makes us all a like wicked as wreched, it makes us full of all misery, and
yet not worthy to be pitied.

Now go farther, and with all these things consider, that the commodites of
Peace spreaden them self most far and wide, and pertayne unto many men. In
war if there happen any thing luckely (but o good lord, what may we say
happeth well and luckely in war?) hit perteyneth to very few: and to them,
that are unworthy to have it. The prosperity of one is the destruction of an
other. The inrychyng of one, is the spoil and robbynge of an other. The
triumph of one, is the lamentable mourning of an other, so that as the
infelicite is bytte^ and sharp, the felicite is cruel and bloody. How be it
other while both parties wepen according to the proverb, Victoria Cadmaea,
Cadmus uictorie, where boothe parties repented. And I wotte not whether it came
ever so happily to pass in war, that he that had victory, did not repent
him of his enterprise, if he were a good man.

Than saying Peace is the thing above all other most best and most pleasant,
and contrariewyse war, the thing most ungracious and wretched of all other:
shall we think those men to be in their right minds, the which when they
may opteyne Peace with little busynes and labor, wol rather procure wa^re
with so great labor, and most diffycultye?

First of all consider, how lothelye a thing the rumor of war is, when
hit is first spoken of. Then how envious a thing hit is unto a prince, whiles
with often demes and taxes he pilleth his subjects. What a business has he
to make and entreteyne friends to help him, what a business to procure bendes
of strangers, and to hyre sowdyars?

^harges (...) war.
What expenses and labors must he make in setting forth his Nauey of ships,
in buildynge and repayrynge of castelles and fortresses, in prepayrynge and
apparaylyng of his tents and pauillions, in framynge, making, and caryenge of
ingyns, gounnes, armor, weapons, baggage, carts, and vitayle? what great
labor is spente, in making of bulwarks, in casting of dyches, in dyggynge
of mines, in keeping of watches, in keeping of arrayes, and in exercysynge of
wepons? I pass over the fear they be in, I speak not of the iminent danger
and peril that hangs over their heedes (for wh^t thing in war is not to
be feared?) what is he that can reken all the incommodious life, that the
most folyshe sowdiours suffern in the field? And for that worthy to endure
worse, Sodiou^ life.
in that they woll suffer it wyllyngely. Their meat is so ill, that an ox of
Cypres would be loath to eat hit: they have but little sleep, nor yet that at
their own pleasure. Their tents on every side are open on the wind. What a
tent? no no, they must all the day long, be it hot or cold, wete or dry,
stand in the open air, sleep on the bare ground, stand in their harneis.
They must suffer hunger, thruste, cold, hete, duste, shoures, they must be
obedient to their capitaynes, sometimes they be clapped on the pate with a warder
or a trouncheon, so that there is no bondage so vile as the bondage of sodiours.

Be side all this, at the sorrowful sign given to fight, they must run
hedlonge to death: for either they must flee cruellye, or be slain
wrechedly. So many sorrowful labors must they take in hand, that they may
bring to pass that thing, which is most wretched of al other. With so
many great miseries we must first afflicte and grieve our own self, that we
mow afflicte and grieve other.

Now if we would call this matter to accumpte^ and justly reken, how much
war woll cost, and how much peace, surely we shall find that peace may be
got and opteyned with the tenthe part of the cares, labors, greffes,
perils, expenses, and spillynge of bloudde, with which the war is procured.
So great a company of men, to their extreme perilles, ye lead out of the
realm to overthrow and distroye some one town: and with the labor of the
self same men, and without any peril at all, an other town much more nobler
and goodly, might be new edified and builded. But you say, you will ho^rt and
grieve your ennemy: lo even that doing is against humanytie. Nevertheless this I
would ye should consider, that ye can not hurt and grieve your ennemies, but ye
must first greatly hurt your own people. And it seems a point of a mad man,
to enterprise where he is sure and certain of so great hurt and damage, and
is uncertain, which way the chance of war will turn.

But admytte, that either folyshenesse, or wrath, or ambition, or covetousness,
or outrageous cruelty, or else (which I think more like) the furies sent
from hell, should rauyshe and draw the hethen people to this madness. Yet from
whence comes it in to our minds, that one christen man should draw his
weapon to bathe it in an other christen man's bloudde? It is called Parricide,
Parrici^^ is more abhor the^ sim^^^ man's slaught^^^
if the one brother slay the other. And yet is a christen man narre joined to
an other, then is one brother to another: except the bonds of nature be
stronger then the bonds of Christ. What abominable thing than is it to se
them almost continually fighting among them self, the which are the
inhabytantes of one house the church, which rejoice and say, that they all
be the members of one body, and that have one heed, which trewelye is Christ,
they have al one father in heaven, they are all taught and comforted by one
^olye spirit: they profess the relygion of Christ all under one manner: they
are all ^edemed with Christ's blood: they are al new borne at the holy font,
they use al like sacramentis, they be al soudiours under one captain, they
are all fed with one heavenly bread: they drink all of one spiritual cup,
they have one common ennemy the dyuell: finally they be all called to one
enheritance? Where be they so many sacraments of perfect concord? Where be
the innumerable teachynges of peace? There is one special precepte, which
Christ called his, that is Charity. ^haritie.
And what thing is so repugnante to Charity as war? Christ saluted his
disciples with the blessed luck of peace. Unto his disciples he gave nothing
save peace, saving peace he left them nothing. In those holy prayers, he
specially prayed the father of heaven, that in like manner as he was one with the
father, so al his, that is to say christen men, should be one with him. Lo
here you may perceye a thing more then peace, more then amity, more than
concord.

Solomon bare the figure of Christ: for Solomon in the hebrewe tongue sowneth
peasible or pacyfull. Him god would have to build his temple.

At the birth of Christ the angels proclaimed another war nor tryumphes, but
peace they sange. And before his birth the prophet David prophesied thus af
him: Et factus est in Pace locus eius, that is to say, His dwelling place is
made in peace.

Search all the hole life of Christ, The ly^^ of Chri^^^
and ye shall never find thing, that brethe not of peace, that sowneth not
amity, that sauoureth not of charytye. And because he perceived peace could
not well be kept, except men would utterly despise all tho things, for which
the world so gredelye fyghteth, he commanded, that we should of him learn to
be meke. He calls them blessed and happy, that sets naught by riches, for
those he calls poor in spirit. Blessed be they, that despise the pleasures
of this world, the which he calls mourners. And them blessed he calls,
that patiently suffer them felfe, to be put out of their possessions, knowinge
that here in this world they are but as outlawes: and the very true country
and possession of godly creatures is in heaven. He calls them blessed, which
deseruynge well of all men, are wrongefully blamed, and ill afflicted. He
forbade that any man should resyste yuell. Brefelye, as all his doctrine
commands sufferaunce and love, so all his life teaches nothing else but
mekenes. So he reigned, so he warred, so he ouercam, so he triumphed.

Nor the appostols, that had sucked in to them the pure spirit of Christ,
and were blessedly drunk with that new must of the holy gooste, preched
nothing but meekness and peace. What do all the epistols of Paul sound in
every place but peac^, but longaminite, but Charity? What speaks saynct
John^, what reherseth he so often, but love? What other thing did Peter? What
other thing did all the true christen writers? From whens then comes all this ruffling of wars among the children of peace? Think ye it a fable,
that Christ calls him self a vine tree, and hisen the branches? Who did
ever see one branche fight with an other? Is it in vain: that Paul so often
wrote, The church to be none other thing, than one body compacte to gether of
dyners members, cleuynge to one heed, Christ? Who ever saw the eye fight with
ye hand, or the bealy with the foot? In this universal body, compacte of all
those unlike things, there is a gremente. In the body of a beast, one membre
is in peace with an other, and each membre uses not the property thereto
given, ^or it self alone, but for the profit of all the other members. So that
if there come any good to any one member alone, it helps all the holle body.
And may the compaction or knyttynge of Nature do more in the body of a beast,
that shortly must perish, than the couplynge of the holy go^te in the
mystical and immortal body of the church? Do we frustrately bid this prayer
taught us by Christ: Mat. 6.
Good lord even as thy will is fulfilled in heaven, so let it be fulfilled in
the earth. In that city of heaven is concord and peace most perfect. And
Christ would his church to be none other, then a heavenly people in earth, as
nere as might be after the manner of them that are in heaven, ever laboring and
making haast to go thither, and all ways having their mind thereon.

Now go to, let us imagen, that there should come some new guest out of
the Lunarie cities, where Empedocles dwells, orels out of the innumerable
worlds, that Democritus forged, in to this world, desiring to know what the
inhabitants do here. And when he were instructed of every thing, it should at
last be ^olde him, that besides al other, there is one creature maruaylousely
mingled, of body like to brute bestis, and of soul like unto god. And it should
also be told him, that this creture is so noble, that tough he be here an
outlawe out of his own country, yet are all other beasts at his
commandment, the which creature through his heavenly begynnyg inclyneth
always to things heavenly and immortal. And that god eternal loved this
creature so well, that where as he could neither by the gifts of nature, nor
by ye strong reaso^es of philosophy atteine unto that which he so fervently
desired, he sent hither his only begotten son, to the intent to teach
this creature a new kind of learning. Then as soon as this new guest had
perceived well the hole manner of Christ's life and precepts, would desire to
stand in some high place, from whence he might behold that that he had
hard. And when he should se al other creatures soberly live according to
their kind, and being led by the laws and course of nature, desired nothing
but even as nature would: and should se this one special creature man given
ryottously to tavern hauntynge, to vile lucre, to byinge and selling,
choppynge and chaungynge, to braulyng and fighting one with another, trow ye
that he would not think that any of the other creatures were man, of whom he
hard so much of before, rather than he that is in deed man? Than if he that
had instructed him before, would show him, which creature is man: now would
he look about to se if he could spy the christen flock and company, the
which following the ordinance of that heavenly techer Christ, should
exhibit to him a figure or shappe of the aungelycall city. Think ye he would
not rather judge christians to dwell in any other place, then in those
countrayes, wherein we se so great superfluite, riotte, voluptuousenesse, pride,
tyranny, discord, braulynges, fyghtynges, wars, ruffelynges, ye and
breffelye to speak, a greater puddell of al those things that Christ
reproves: then among Turks or Saracens? From whence then crepeth this
pestilence in among christen people? Doutles this mischefe also is come in by
lyttel and littel, like as many mo other be, ere men be ware of them. For
trewlye every mischief crepeth by lyttel and little upon the good manners of
men, or else under the colowr of goodness hit is sodeynlye received.

So then first of all learning and counnynge Erudi^^
crepte in as a thing very mete to confound heretykes, which defend their
opinions with the doctrine of philosophers, poetis, and orators. And surely at
the beginning of our faith, christen men did not learn those things, but
such as parauenture had learned them, before they knew what Christ meant,
they turned the thing that they had learned all ready, in to good use.

Elouqence of tongue was at the beginning dissembled more tha^ despised, but at
length it was openly approved. After that under color of confoundynge
heretics, came in an ambicious pleasure of braulynge dispitions, which has
brought in to the church of Chri^te no small mischife. At length the matter
went so far forth, that Aristotell was al to gether resceiued into the
middel of divinity, and so received, that his authority is almost reputed
holyer than the authority of Christ. For if Christ spoke any thing that
did little agree with our life, by interpretation of Aristotell it was lefull
to make it serve their purpose. But if any do never so little repugne against
the high dyuinytie of Aristoteli, he is quickelye with clappynge of hands
driven out of the place. For of him we have learned, that the felycytie of man
is imperfect, except he have both the good gifts of body and of fortune.
Of him we have learned, that no common weal may florishe, in which all things
are commune. And we endeavor our self to glewe fast to gether the decretes of
^his man and the doctrine of Christ: which is as likely a thing as to myngle
fire and water together. And a gobbet we have received of the ciuell laws,
because of the equity, that seems to be in them: And to the end they should the
better serve our purpose, we have as nere as may be, writhed and plied the
doctrine of the gospel to them. Now by the civil law it is leful for a man
to defend violence with violence, and each to pursue for his right. Those
laws approve bienge and selling: they allow usury, so it be measurable, they
praise war as a noble thing, so it be just. Finally all the doctrine of
Christ is so defiled with the learning of Logiciens, sophi^ters, astronomers,
orators, poetis, philosophers, laweyrs, and gentyles, that a man shall spend
the most part of his life, ere he may have any leisure to search holy
scripture, to the which when a man at last comes, he must come infecte with
so many worldly opinions, that either he must be offended with Christ's
doctrynes, or else he must apply them to the mind and doctrine of them that
he has learned before. And this thing is so much approved, that it is now a
heinous deed, if a man presume to study holy scripture, which has not
nosilled him self up to the hard ears in those trifils, or rather sophestries
of Aristotle. As though Christis doctrine were such, that it were not lefull
for all men to know hit, orels that it could by any means agree with the
wisdom of philosophers. Beside this we admitted at the beginning of our
feyth some honor, which afterward we claymed as of duite. Than we resceyued
riches, but that was to distrybute to releue poor men, which afterward we
turned to our own use. And why not, since we have learned by the law civil,
that the very order of chari^e is, that every man must first provide for him
self? Nor there lack no colors to cloak this mischief: first hit is a good
deed to provide for our children: and it is right that we forsee how to live in
age. Finally, why should we, say they, give our goods away, if we come by
them without fraud? By these grices hit is by little and little come to
pass, that he is taken for the most best man, that has most riches: nor
never was there more honor given to riches among the hethen people, then is
at this day among the christen people. For what thing is there either
spiritual or temporal, that is not done with greatte show of riches? And hit
semedde a thing agreeable with those ornamentis, if christen men had some
great iurisdicion under them. Nor there wanted not such, as gladly submitted
them lelse. Albeit at the beginning it was against their wylles, and scantly
would they receive hit. And yet with much work, they resceyued it so, that
they were content with the name and title only: the profit thereof they gladly
gave unto other men. At the last by little and little it came to pass, that
a bishop thought him self no bishop, except he had some temporal lordship
withal. An abbot thought him self of small auctorite, if he had not where with to
play the lordly sire. And in conclusion, we blushed never a dele at the matter,
we wyped awey al shamfastnes, and shoft a side all the harres of comlynes. And
what ever abusion was used among the hethen people, were it covetousness,
ambition, riotte, pomp, or pride, or tyranny, the same we follow, in the same
we match them, ye and far pass them. And to pass over the lyghter
things for the while, I pray you, was there ever war among the hethen people
so long continually, or more cruellye, than among christen people? What stormy
romblynges, what violente braydes of wars, what tearing of leages, and what
pitious slaughters of men have we seen our self within these few years? What
nation has not fought and skyrmoushed with an other? And then we go and curse
the Turk, and what can be a more plesante syghte to the Turks, then to
behold us daily each sleynge other?

^erxes doted, when he led out of his own countreye that huge multitude of
people to make war upon the Greeks. Trow ye, he was not mad, when he wrote
letters to the mountain called Atho, thretnynge that the hylle should repent
it, except he obeyed his luste^ And the same ^erxes commanded also the sea to
be beaten, because it was somewhat rough when he should have sailed over.

Who wol deny but Alexander the great was mad also? He the young god wished,
that there were many worlds, the which he might conquer. So greatte a fe^er
of vain glory had enbraced his young lustye courage. And yet these same men,
the which Seneca doubted not to call mad thieves, warred after a gentyller
facion then we do, they were more feythfull of their promise in war, nor they
used not so mischiuo^s ingins in war, nor such crafts and subtelties, nor
they warred not for so light causes as we christen men do. They reioysed to
au^unce and enryche such prouynces as they had conquered by war, and the
rude people, that lived like wild beastis without laws, learning, or good
manners, they taught them boothe ciuyle conditions, and craftis, where by they
might live like men. In countries that were not inhabited with people, they
builded cities, and made them both fair and profitable. And the places that
were not very sure, they fensed for sauegarde of the people with bridges,
banks, bulwarks, and with a thousand such other commodities they help the
life of man. So that then it was right expedient to be over come. Ye and how
many things read we, that were either wisely done, or soberly spoken of them
in the mids of their wars. As for those things, that are done in christen
men's wars they are more fylthy and cruel than is conueniente here to
rehearse. More ^uer look what was worst in the hethen peoples wars, in that we
follow them, ye we pass them.

But now it is a world to here, by what means we meyntayne this our so great
madness. Thus they reason. If it had not ben leful by no means to make war,
surely god would never ^aue benne the auctour to the Jews to make war
against their ennemes. Well said, but we must add hereunto, that the Jews
never made war among them self, but ageynste strangers and wicked men. We,
christen men, fight with christen men. Diversity of relygio^ caused the Jews
to fight against their enemies: for their enemies worshypte not god as they
did. We make war often times for a littell chyldyshe anger, or for hunger of
money, or for thyrste of glory, orels for fylthy mede. The Jews fought by the
commandment of god, we make war to avenge the grefe and displeasure of our
mind. And netheles if men wol so much lean to the example of the Jews, why
do we not tha^ in like manner use circumcision? Why do we not sacrifice with the
blood of sheep and other beas^is? Why do we not absteyne from swynes flesh?
Why does not each of us wedde many wy^es? Sith we abhor those things, why
does the example of war please us ^o much? Why do we here follow the bare
lettre that kylleth? It was permitted the Jews to make war, but so like wise
as they were suffered to depart from their wives, doubtless because of their
hard and froward manners. But after Christ commanded the sword to be put up,
it is unlawful for christen men, to make any other war but that which is the
most fairest war of al, with the most egre and fierce enemies of the church,
with affection of money, with wrath, with ambition, with dread of death. These
be our philisteins, these beour Nabughodosor, these be our Moabitis and
Ammonitis, with the which it behooves us to have no truce. With these we must
continuallye fight, until (our ennemies being utterly vanquished) we may be
in quiette, for except we may overcome them, there is no man that may atteine
to any true peace, another with him self, nor yet with none other. For this war
alone is cause of true peace. He that ouercometh in this battle, woll make
war with no man living. Nor I regard not the interp^tacio^, yt some men make
of the two swords to signify either power spiritual and temporal. Wha^ Christ
suffered Peter to err purposely, yt after he was comanded to put up his sword,
no man should doubt, but yt war was forboden, which before seemed to be
lefull. But Peter (say they) fought. True it is, Peter fought, he was yet but
a Jew, and had not the spirit of a very christen man. He fought not for his
lands, or for any such tytles of lands as we do, nor yet for his own life,
but for his masters life. And finally, he fought, the which within a while
after forsook his master. Now if men woll needs follow the example of Peter
that fought, why mow they not as well follow the example of him forsakyng his
master? And though Peter through ^ympell affection erred, yet did his
master rebuke him. For else, if Christ did allow such manner of defense, as
some most fol^^^ely do interpretate, why does both all the life and
doctrine of Christ preach none other thing but suffraunce? Why sent he forth
his disciples ageynste tyrants armed with nothing else but with a walkyng
staff and a scrippe. If that sword, which Christ commanded his disciples
to selle their ^otes to bie, be moderat defense against persecutours, like as
some men do not only wyckedlye but also blyndlye interpretate, why did the
martyrs never use that defense? But (say they) the law of nature commands,
it is approved by the laws, and allowed by custom, that we ought to put of
from us violence by violence, and that each of us should defend his life, and
eke his money, when the money (as Hesiodus says) is as leese as the life. All
this I grant, but yet grace, the law of Christ, that is of more effect
than all these things, commands us, that we should not speak ill to them,
that speak shrewedly to us: that we should do well to them, that do ill to us,
and to them that take aweye part of our possessions, we should give the
whole: and that we should also pray for them, that imagine our death. But these
things (sey they) apperteyne to the apostolles, ye they apperteine to the
universal people of Christ, and to the hole body of Christ's church, that
must needs be a whole and a perfect body, all though in their gifts one
membre i^ more excellent than an other. To them the doctrine of Christ
apperteyneth not, that hope not to have reward with Christ. Let them fight
for money and lordshyps, that lawghe to scorn the saying of Christ: Blessed be
the poor men in spirit: that is to say, be they poor or rich, blessed be
they, that coueted no riches in this world. They that put all their felicite
in these richessis, they fight gladly to defend their life, but they be those
that understand not this life to be rather a death, nor they perceive not, that
everlasting life is prepared for good men. Now they lay against us, diverse
bishops of Rome, the which have been both auctours and aydours of warring. True
it is, some such there have be^, but they were of late, and in such time as the
doctrine of Christ waxed cold. Ye and they be very few in comparison of the
holy fathers that were before them, which with their writings persuade us to
flee war. Why are these few examples most in mind? Why turn we our eyes from
Christ to men? And why had we rather follow the uncertain examples, tha^ the
auctorite that is sure and certain? For doubtless the bishops of Rome were me^.
And it may be right well, that they were either foolys, or ungracious
caytiues. And yet we ^inde not that any of them approved, that we should still
continually war after this facio^ as we do. Which thing I could with argumentis
prove, if I lifted to digress and tarry thervpo^.

Sayncte Barnarde preysed warriors, but he so praised them, that he condemned
all the manner of our warfare. And yet why should the saying of saint
Barnarde, or the dyspitio^ of Thomas of Alquine mo^e me rather then the
doctrine of Christ, which commands, that we should in no wise resyste
iuell, specially under such manner as the common people do resist?

But it is lefull (say they) that a trangressour be punished and put to death
according to the laws: then is it not lefull for a hole country or city to
be revenged by war? What may be answered in this place, is longer than is
conueniente to reply. But this much wol I say, there is a great difference.
For the yuel doer found fauty and conuicte, is by authority of the laws put
to death. In war there is another part with out fault. Where as one singular
man doothe offend, the punysheme^t falls only on him self: and the example
of the punyshement does good unto all other. In war the most part of the
punyshemente and harms fall upon them that least deserved to be punynyshed:
that is upon husband men, old men, honest wives, young children, and virgins.
But if there may any commodite at al be gethered of this most myscheffull
thing, that all to gether goth to the behoue of a certain most vengeable
thieves, hired soudiours, and strong robbers, and parhappes to a ^ewe
capitaynes, by whose craft war was raised for that intent, and with which
the matter gothe never better, then when the common weal is in most high
ieoperdie and peril to be lost. There as one is for his offense grievously
punished, it is the welthy warning of all other: where as in war to the end
to revenge the quarrel of one, or else para^enture of a few, we cruellye
afflicte and grieve so many thousands of them that nothing deserved. It were
better lea^e the offense of a few unpunished, then whiles we seek occasion to
punish one or two, to bring in to assured peril and danger, both our
neighbors and innocent enemies (we call them our ennemies, though they never
did us hurt) and yet are we uncertain, whether hit shall fall on them or
not, that we would have punished. It is better to let a wound a lone, that
can not be cured without grievous hourte and danger of all the holle body, then
go about to heal it.

Now if any man will cry out and say: It were ageynste all right, that he
that offends, should not be punished. Here unto I answer, that it is much
more against all right and reason, that so many thousands of innocents
should be brought into extreme calamite and mischief without dese^^ynge.
Albeit now adays we se, that almost all wars spring up I can not tell of
what tytles, and of leages between princes, that whiles they go about to
subdue to their dominion some one town, they put in ieoperdye all their holle
empire. And yet within a while after they sell or give a way the same a town
again, that they got with shedynge of so much bloudde.

Perauenture some man woll sey: woldes^ not have princis fight for there
right? I know right well, it is not mete for such a man as I am, to dispute
over boldylye of princis matters, and thought I might do it without any
danger, yet is it longer then is convenient for this place. But this much wol
I say, If each what so ever title be a cause convenient to go in hand with
war: there is no man that in so greatte alteracions of men's affairs, and in
so great variete, and cha^ges, can want a title. What nacyon is there that has
not sometime be put out of their own country, and also have put other out?
How often have people gone from one country to an other? How often have holle
empires be^ translat from one to an other either by chance or by leage? Let
the citisens of Padu^ claim now again a gods name the country of Troy
for theyrs, because Antenor was sometimes a T^oyan. Let the Romans now
hardly clayne again Affrycke and Spain, because those pro^ynces were sometime
under the Romans. We call that a dominion, which is but an administration.
The power and authority over men, which be free by Nature, and over brute
beasts, is not all one. What power and souerayn^e so ever you have, you have
it by the consent of the people. And if I be not deceived, he that has
auctorite to give, has authority to take away again. Will ye se how small
a matter it is that we make all this rufflynge fore. The strife is not, whether
this city or that should be obeysant to a good prince, and not in bondage of a
Tyrante, but whether Ferdinande or Sigismunde has the better title to it:
whether that city ought to pay tribute to Philyp or to king Jews. This is
that noble right, for the which all the world is thus vexed and troubled
with wars and manslaughter.

Yet go to, suppose that this right or title be as strong, and of as great
authority as may be, suppose also there be no difference between a private
field and a wholle city: and admit there be no difference between the
beasts that you have bought with your money and men, which be not only fre,
but also true christians: yet is it a point of a wise man to cast in his
mind, whether the thing that you wol war fore, be of so great valor, that
it will recompense the exceeding great harms and loss of your own people. If
ye can not do in every point as be comes a prince, yet at the least ways
do as the merchant man does: he sets naught by that loss, which he well
perceyueth can not be aduoided without a greatter lo^se, and he rekeneth it a
wynnyng, that fortune has been ageynste him with his so little loss. Orels at
the least wise follow him, of whom there is a merry tale commonly told.

There were two kinsmen at varience about dividing of certain goods, and when
they could by no means agree, they must go to law to gether, that in
conclusion the matter might be ended by sentence of the iuges. They got them
atturneys, the plees were drawn, men of law had the matter in hand, they
came before the judges, the complaynte was entered, the cause was pletid, and so
was the war begone betwen^ them.

Anon one of them remembynge him self, called aside his adversary to him and
said on this wise. First it were a greatte shame, that a lyttel money should
deseuer us twain, whom nature has knytte so nere to gether. Secondly the end
of our strife is uncertain, no less then of war. It is in our hands to
begin when we wol, but not to make an end. All our strife is but for an
hundred crowns, and we shall spend the double thereof upon notaries, upon
promoters, upon advocates, upon attourneys, upon inges, and upon inges
friends, if we try the law to the vttermooste. We must wait upon these men,
we must flatter and speak them fair, we must give them rewards. And yet I
speak not of the care and thought, nor of the great labor and travail, that
we must take to run about here and there to make friends, and whether of us
boothe that wynnth the victory, shall be sure of more incommodite then proite.
Wherefore if we wise be, let us rather se to our own profit, and the money
that shall be iuell bestowed upon these bribers, let us divide it between us
twain. And forgive you the half of that ye think should be your duite, and I
will forgive as much of mine. And so shall we keep and preserve our frendshyp,
which else is like to perish, and we shall also eschew this great business,
cost, and charge. If you be not content to forgo any thing of your part, I
commit the whole matter in to your own hands, do with it as you will. For I
had leauer my friend had this money, then those insatiable thieves. Me think I
have gained inoughe, if I may save my good name, keep my friend, and avoyde
this unquiet and chargeable business. Thus partly the tellyng of the troth,
and partlye the merye conceyte of his kynseman, moved the other man to agree.
So they ended the matter between them self, to the great displeasure of the
judges and seriantes, for they like a sort of gapynge rauons, were deluded and
put beside their pray.

Let a prince therefore follow the wisdom of these two men, specially in a
matof much more danger. Nor let him not regard what thing it is, that he
would opteine, but what great loss of good things he shall have, in what great
ieoperdies he shall be, and what miseries he must endure, to come thereby. Now
if a man wol wey, as it were in a pair of balance the commodities of wa^ on
the one side, and the incommodities on the other side, he shall find that
vninste peace is far better then rightous war. Why had we rather have war
then peace?

Who but a mad man wolle angle with a golden fyshe hoke? If ye se that the
charges and expenses shall amount far above your gain, ye though all
things go according to your mind, is it not better that ye forgo part of
your right, than to bie so lyttel commodite with so innumerable mischieues? I
had lever that any other man had the title, then I should win it with so
great effusio^ of Christian men's blood. He (what so ever he be) has now ben
many years in possession. He is accustomed to rule, his subjects know him, he
behaueth him like a prince, and one shall come forth, which fynding an old
title in some historyes, or in some blind evidence woll turn clean up set
down the quiet ^tate and good order of that commen well. What avails it
with so great ruffeling to change any title, which in short space by one chance
or other must go to an other man? Specially since we mow se, that there is
nothing in this world, that does continue still in one state, but at the
scorneful pleasure of fortune they roll to and fro, as the waves of ye see.
Finally if Christen men can not despise and set at naught these so light
things, yet whereto needs it by and by to run to harne^s? Since there be so
many bishops, men of great grauite and learning: since there be so many
venerable abbottes: since there be so many noble men of great ancientie, whom
long use and experience of things has made right wise. Why are not these
trifelynge and childishe quarrels of princis pacified and set in order by the
wisdom and discretion of these men? But they seem to make a very honest
reason of war, which pre^end as they would defend the Church. As though
the people were not the church, or as though the church of Christ was be^un,
augmented, and stab^ished with wars and slaughters, and not rather in
spillynge of the blood of martirs, sufferance, and despisynge of this life, or
as though the holle dignite o^ the church re^ted in the riches of the pristis.
Nor to me truly it seems not so alowable, that we should so often make war
upon the Turks. Doubtless it were not well with christen religion, if the only
safegarde thereof should depend on such succors. Nor it is not likely, that
they should be good christians, that by these means are brought thereto at the
first. For that thing that is got by war, is again an other time lost by
war. Woll ye bring the Turks to the faith of Christ? Let us not make a
show of our gay riches, nor of our great nombre of soudiours, nor of our great
strength. Let them se in us none of these solemn titles, but the assured
tokens of christen men, a pure innocent life, a fervent desire to do well, yea
to our very ennemes, the despisynge of money, the neglecting of glory, a
poor simple life. Let them here the heavenly doctrine agre^ble to such a manner
life. These are the b^st armours to subdue the Turks to Christ. Now often
times we being ill, fight with the yuel. Ye and I shall sey an other thing
(Which I would to god were more boldly spoken then truly) if we set a side
the title and sign of the Cross, we fight Turks ageynste Turks. If our
religion were first stablisshed by the might and strength of men of war, if
hit were confyrmed by dente of sword, if it were augmented by war, then let
us maynteyne it by the same means and ways. But if all things in our feyth
were brought to pass by other means. Why do, we the^ (as we mistrusted the
help of Christ) seek such succoure as the hethen people use. But why should
we not (say they) kill them that would kill us? So think they it a great
dishonor, if other should be more michiuous then they. Why do ye not then
rob those, that have robbed you before? Why do ye not skolde and chide at
them that rail at you? Why do ye not hate them that hate you? Trow ye it is a
good christen ma^s deed to slay a Turk? For be the Turks never so wicked, yet
are they men, for whose salvation Chri^te suffered death. And killing Turks we
offer to the dyuell most pleasant sacrifice, and with that one deed we please
our ennemy the dyuell twyse, first because a man is slain, and again,
because a christen man slew him. There be many, which desiring to seem good
christen men, study to hurt and grieve the Turks all that ever they may: and
where they be not able to do nothing, they curse and ban, and bid a mischife
upon them. Now by the same one point a man may perceive, that they be far
from good christen men. Succor the Tourkes, and where they be wicked, make
them good if ye can, if ye can not, wyshe and desire of god they may have grace
to turn to goodness. And he that thus does, I woll say does like a christen
man. But of all these things I shall entreat more largely, when I set
forth my book intytled Antipolemus, which whilom when I was at Rome I wrote
to July bishop of Rome, the second of that name, at the same time, when he
was counseled to make war on the Venetians.

But there is one thing, which is more to be lamented then reasoned: That if
a man would diligently discuss the matter, he shall find, that all the wars
among us christen men do spring either of folishenes, or else of malice. Some
young men without experience, inflamed with the yuell exam^les of their fore
fathers, that they find by redynge of histories, written of some folyshe
auctours, and beside this being mo^ed with the exhortations of flaterers, with
the instigatio^ of lawiers, and assenting thereto of the di^ynes, the bishops
wynkynge thereat, or perauenture in^ycynge thereunto: have rather of
foolehardynes then of malice, goone in hand with war: And with the great
hurt and damage of all this world they learn, that war is a thing, that
should be by all means and ways fled and eschewed. Some other are moved by
pri^y hatred, Ambition causes some, and some are stirred by fyrcenes of mind
to make war. For truly there is almost now none other thing in our cities
and commonweals, then is contained in Homers warke Ilias, The wrath of
indiscreet princis and people.

There be which for none other cause move War, but to thentent they may by
that mean the more easily exercise tyranny on their subiectis. For in the time
of peace, the auctorite of the counsel, the dignite of the rulers, the vigor
and strength of the laws, do somewhat let, that a prince can not do all that
him lists: But as soon as war is ones begun, now all the handlynge of
matters rests in the pleasure of a few persons. They that the prince
favors are lifted up alofte: and they that be in his displeasure, go down.
They exact as much money as pleases them. What need many words? Then they
think them self, that they be the greateste pryncis of the world. In the
mean season the capytaynes they sport and play to gether, till they have
gnawen the poor people to the hard boonis. And think ye that hit will grieve
them, that be of this mind, to enter lightly in to war, when any cause is
offered? Besides all this, it is a world to se by what means we color our
fault. I pretend the defense of our religon, but my mind is to get the
great riches that the Turk has. Under color to defend the churches right, I
purpose to revenge the hatred that I have in my stomach. I inclyne to
ambition, I follow my wrath, my cruel fierce and unbridled mind compels
me, and yet woll I find a cauillation and say, the leage is not kept, or
frendshyppe is broken, or some thing (I wotte not what my self) concerning
the laws of matrimony is omitted. And it is a wonder to speak, how they
never opteyne the self thing, that they so greatly desire. And whiles they
folishely labor to eschew this michiefe, or that, they fall in to an other
much worse, orels into the same. And surely if desire of glory causes them
thus to do, it is a thing much more magnificent and glorious to save then to
destroy: much more gay and goodly to build a cite, than to over throw and
destroy a city.

Farthermore admit that the victory in battle is got most prosperously,
yet how small a portion of the glory shall go unto the prince? The commons
woll claim a great part of hit, by the help of whose money the deed was done,
outlandishe soldiers, that are hired for money, woll challenge much more
then the commons: The capitaynes look to have very much of that glory, and
fortune most of all, which strikynge a great stroke in every matter, in war
may do most of all. If it come of a noble courage and stout stomach, that you
be moved to make war: se I pray you, how far wide be ye from your purpose?
For whiles ye woll not be seen to bow to one man, as to a prince your
neighbor, and peraue^ture of your alia^ce, and which may fortune has done you
good: how much more abiectly must ye bow your self, what time ye seek aid
and help of barbarous people, ye and that is more unworthy, of such men as
are defiled with all mischiuous deeds, if we must needs call such kind of
monsters men? Whiles ye go about to allure unto you with fair words and
promises, rauyshers of virgins and of relygious women, menkyllers, stout
robbers and rouers (for these be the special men of war). And whiles you
labor to be some what cruel and superior over your equal, you are
constrained to submit your self to the very dregs of all men living. And
whiles ye go about to drive your neighbor out of his land, ye must needs
first bring into your own land the most pestilente puddell of unthriftiness
that can be. You mistrust a prince of your own aliance, and will you commit
your self holly to an armed multitude? How much surer were it to commit
your self to concord?

If ye woll make war because of lucre, take your countours and cast: And I
woll say, it is better to have war than peace, if ye find not, that not
alonely less, but also uncertain winning is got with inestymable costis.

Ye say ye make war for the safe guard of the common weal, ye but no way
sooner nor more vnthryftyly may the common weal peryshe, then by war. For
before ye enter into the feld, ye have already hurt more your country, then ye
can do good getting the victory. Ye have wasted the citisens goods, ye fill
the houses with lamentation, ye fyl all the contray with thieves, robbers, and
ra^yshers. For these are the relikes of war. And where as before ye might have
enjoyed al France, ye shyft our self besides many regions thereof. If ye love
your own subjects truly, why reuolue you not in mind these words. Why shall
I put so many, in their lusty floryshing youth, in all michefes and perils? Why
shall I depart so many honest wives and their husbands, and make so many
fatherles children? Why shall I claim a title I know not, and a doubtful
right, with spilling of my subjects blood? We have seen in our time, that in
war made under color of defense of the church, the pristes have been so often
pylled with demes, that none enemy might do more. So that while we go about
folishely to eschew falling in the diche, we willyngly leap hedlonge into the
diche, while we can not suffer a light iniurye, we afflicte our self with
most grievous despites. While we be ashamed of gentilnes to dowe to a prince,
we be feign to please people mos^^ base. Whiles we vndescretelye coueite
liberty, we entangle our self in most grievous bondage. Whiles we hount after
a litel lucre, we grieve our self and ours with inestimable harms. It had been
a point of a prudent christen man (if he be a true christen man) by all manner
means to have fled, to have shoned, and by prayer to have withstanden so
fendly a thing, and so far boothe from the life and doctrine of Christ. But
if it can by no mean be eschewed, by reason of the ungraciousness of many men,
when ye have assayed every way, and that ye have for peace sake, left nothing
vnsoughte up, than the next way is, that ye do your diligence: that so ill a
thing may be ge^ted and done by them that be ill, and that it be atcheued with
as little effusion of man's bloudde as can be.

Now if we endeavor us to be the self same thing, that we here our self
called, that is, good christen men, we shall little esteem any worldly thing,
nor yet ambiciously covet any thing of this world. For if we set all our
mind, that we may lightly and purely part hence, if we inclyne holly to
heavenly things, if we py^che all our felicite in Christ alone, if we believe
all that is truly good, truly gaye and glorious, truly joyful, to remain
in Christ alone, if we thro^ghly think that a godly man can of no man be
hurt, if we pondre how vain and vanishynge are the scornful things of
this world, if we inwardely behold, how hard a thing hit is for a man to
be in a manner transformed in to god, and so here with continual and
vnfatigable meditation to be purged from all infections of this world, that
within a while the husk of this body being cast of, it may pass hence to
the company of angels, finallye if we surely have these three things, with out
which none is worthy of the name of a christen man, Innocence, that we may be
pure from all vicis, Charity, that we may do good as nere as we can, to every
man, Patience, that we may suffer them that do us ill, and if we can with good
deeds overcome wrongs to us done: I pray you, what war can there be among
us for triffils? If it be but a tale that is told of Christ, why do we not
openly put him out of our company? Why should we glory in his title? But if
he be, as he is in very deed, the true way, the very Truth, and the very
life, why does all the manner of our living differ so far a sonder, from
the true example of him? If we aknowlege and take Chri^te for our auctour,
which is very Charity, and nothe^ taught nor gave other thing but charytye
and peace, then go to, let us not in titles and signs, but in our deeds and
living plainly express him. Let us have in our hearts a fervent desire of
peace, that Christ may ^gayne know us for his. To this intent the princis,
the prelates, and the cites and cominalties should apply their counsels.
There has been hither to inoughe spylte of christen man's blood. We have showed
plea^ure enough to the ennemes of christen religion. And if the common people,
as they ar^ wont, make any ruffelynge, let the princis bridle and quayle them,
which princis ought to be the self same thing in the common weal, that the
eye is in the body, and the reason in the scule. Again if the princis make any
trouble, it is the part of good prelatis by their wisdom and gra^ite to
pacify and swage such motions. Orels at the least we being satiat with
continual wars, let the desire of peace a lit^ell mo^e us. The very misery
and wretchedness of war draws us to peace, Christ inticeth us, The bishop
exhorts us, if ever any bishop did, Leo the tenthe does, which occupies
the ^owme of our peaceble Solomon. For all his desire, all his intent and
labor, is for this intent, that they whom one commune feyth has coupled to
gether, should be joined in one commune concord. He labors that the church
of Christ should florsshe, not in riches or ^ordshyps, but in her own propre
virtues. Surely this is a right goodly act, and well besemynge a man descended
of such a noble lineage as Medices: by whose civil prudence the noble cite of
Florence moo^te freshely flourished in long continual peace: the whose house
of Medices has been a help unto all good letters. Leo him self having alwey
a sobre and a gentle wit, gyuynge him self from his tender youth to good
lettres of humanite, was ever brought up as it were in the lap of the Musis
among men must highly learned, he ^o fautles led his life, that even in the
city of Rome, where is most liberte of vice, was of him none yuell rumor, and
so go^ernynge him self came to the dignytie to be bishop there, which dignite
he never coueted, but was chosen thereto when he left thought thereon, by the
provision of god to help to redress things in great decay by long wars.
Let July the bishop have his glory of war, victories, and of his great
tryumphes. The which how yuell they beseme a chri^ten bishop, it is not for
such one as I am to declare. I wol this say, his glory, what so ever it be,
was mixed with the great di^truction and grievous sorrow of many a creature. But
by peace restored now to the world, Leo shall geatte more true glory, then
July won by so many wars that he either, boldly begun, or prosperously
fought and atcheued.

But they that had leauer here of proverbs, then either of peace or of
war, woll think that I have tarried longer about this digression: then is
mete for the declaracion of a Proverb.

FINIS.
Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. An. 1534.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.




