EPICTETVS his Manual. And CEBES his Table. Out of the Greek original, by
Io: HEALEY.

AT LONDON Printed for E. Blunt and W. Bar^et. 1610.

To a true sauorer of forward spirits, Master John Florio.
SIR, as distressed Sostratus spoke to more fortunate Areius, to make him his
mediator to Augustus The learned love the learned, if they be rightly learned:
So this your poor friend though he have found much of you, yet does still
follow you for as much more: that as his Mecaenas you would write to Augustus,
Be as mindful of Horace, as you would be of my self: For his apprentises
essay you procured (GOD thank you) an impregnable protection: He now prays
the same Patron (most worthy of all praise) for his iourney-mans Maister-peece:
yet as Horace to Vinnius for his verses to Augustus, Ne studio nostri pecces.
-- And though the land be the Lords wherein he most labored; yet see a
handful of fruits is fallen to your share, who first showed his workmanship.
This Manual of Epictetus, though not Saint Augustines Enchiridion, now by hap
is the hand, or rather the hand-maide of a greater body of Saint Augustines:
and has been held by some the hand to Philosophy, the instrument of
instruments: as Nature, greatest in the least: as Homers Ilias in a nutshell:
in less compass more cunning: In all languages, ages, by all persons high
prized, embraced, yea imbosomed. It filles not the hand with leaves, but files
ye head with leslons: nor would be held in hand, but had by heart to boot. He
is more senceles then a stock, that has no good sense of this Stoic. For the
translation and translator, to whom better recourse, then one so trauail'd in
translation; both pattern and patron of translators. Artificers best judge of
arts. Wise they must be that judge the wise. But a short book would have no
long Epistle, more then a small Town a great gate. Wherefore as he desired, I
have done: Who rest,

Yours in true hearted love. TH. TH.

The life of EPICTETVS.
EPICTETVS was a Philosopher of the sect of the Stoikes, borne in Hierapolis
(now called Haleppo, situate in Phrygia, not far from Laodicea): His estate
was servile; according to the testimony of AVLVS GELLIVS in his Noctes Atticae.
For at Rome he was slave unto one EPAPHRODITVS, one of NERO's familiars. His
life was spotless and vntaintable, his spirit wholly secluded that arrogancy
of carriage which otherwise stuck as a great blemish in the lives of the most
and best Philosophers. For his esteem, it had that high place in the worlds
affection, that his very lamp^ (being but of Potters claye) was bought and
sold for fifty pounds sterling. Of this EPICTETVS, you shall find honorable
mention made in LVCIAN, who otherwise was a perpetual detractor from all the
Philosophers, and in general, a professed scorner of Gods and men. And in that
place where he mentions him, he touches also at this sale of his lamp, (for
thus he writes in his Dialogue; (...) that is, to the unlearned engrosser of
books:) Our times (says he) has brought forth a man, and I think he is yet
alive, that gave fifty pound for EPICTETVS his earthen Lamp, thinking
(be-like) that if he had but light to study by from thence, that then he
should have all EPICTETVS his wisdom inspired into him in dreams, and so
become parallel to that admired father. Thus writes LVCIAN. EPICTETVS was
wont to affirm, that the scope and extent of all Philosophy was included in
these two words: (...), Bear and Forbear. In the reign of DOMITIAN, either
his own dislike of his tyrannical government, or the Senates edict for the
expulsion of all the Philosophers out of Rome, made him depart to Hierapolis,
his native soil, whence afterward he is said to return, and so to make his
aboade in Rome until the reign of MARCUS ANTONIUS, about which time he dyed.

EPICTETVS his Manual.
CHAPTER. 1.
IN the order of the worlds existence, there are some things naturally
subjected unto our command, and some that exceed it. Of the first sort, is
Opinion, affect, desire, dislike, and in a word, all actions, whose performance
is peculiarly resident in our selves: Of the latter sort, is the body, riches,
glory, souerainty, and to conclude, althings whose perfections depend not on
our selves, but ab externo.

CHAP. 2.
The things that are swayed by our human wills, are in their own nature
free, and surmounters of all lettes and impediments what-soeuer. But the other
from whose managing we are naturally secluded, are exposed unto all infirmity,
slavery, and hindrance, and indeed, direct aliens from our proper goods.

CHAP. 3.
Wherefore take this general memento, if thou repute those things that are
naturally servile, to be really free, and confound thy proper goods with
mixture of those external ones, thou shall never want woe, but be driven by
sorrow and perturbation to give terms of offense both to God and Man. But if
thou prize nothing for thine own but that which is essentially so, and hold all
those external goods, as they are, truly aliens from thy state, thou shall be
seated above the power of all injury or compulsion: thou shall have no
accusation to lay against any man, nor any act which thy will shall not prompt
thee to perform: thou shall stand beyond the reach of hurt, and without the
fear of foes. Briefly, thou shall not taste of the least calamity.

CHAP. 4.
If thine affections therefore stand for these happy objects, be sure that thou
pursue them with a more then mean alacrity, resolving to omit some things
for ever, and othersome but for the present. Mary if thy desires bear a like
level both unto these, and likewise unto riches, honors and soueraignties;
thou may perhaps come short of the attainment even of those later, because
thou stand so affected unto the former: but, how-soeuer, thou shall be sure
to loose the first, which are the only steps and guides unto all freedom and
felicity.

CHAP. 5.
Wherefore when thou see any distasteful occurrence, let it be thy first care
to persuade thy self thus: rush this is but a fantasy, and is not as it
seems. And afterward when thou come to examine it more exactly, follow the
rules thou have prescribed unto thee; and this especially: Whether this
occurrence concern the things that lie under man's managing or no? if it do
not, then the case is plain, it is wholly impertinent to thee.

CHAP. 6.
Remember well that the aim of appetite, is to attain what it affects, and
the maine of dislike is to avoid what it disliketh. So that to be frustrated
of what we desire, and to incur what we would avoid, are both unfortunate
events. If therefore thy desires stand at the staves end, only with those
things that are undoubtedly opposite unto those which are at thine own dispose,
thou shall never meet with any motion of dislike, but if thou stand at
defiance with death, sickness or poverty, and seek to eschew these, thou
art in the direct course of calamity.

CHAP. 7.
Thou shall therefore remove thy dislike from these things that are not in the
compass of our command, and make those the obiectes thereof, which are the
essential opposites of those that are under our moderation and government. But
as for appetite, let it not by any means have access into thy thoughts as
yet. For if thou affect what thou can not attain, thy desires must perforce
be frustrate. But how, or in what measure to affect the true and fit objects
of affect (such things I mean as are at our own discretion) thou have not as
yet learned. Use only that same (...), that instinct, which attracteth the
spirit unto this, and with-draweth it from that: but this must be with
dilligent restraint, and moderation thereof in both respects.

CHAP. 8.
In all things that are either delectable, profitable, or amiable, be sure
that thou do first of all examine their existence; beginning at matters of the
least moment; if thou take delight in such a pot or glass, consider that it
is but a pot, or a glass that thou delightest in: so shall not the breaking of
that, break the peace of thy mind. So, if thou love thy wife, or children,
consider that they are but mortals, on whom thy love is laid, and so though
they perish, thy quiet shall still survive.

CHAP. 9.
When thou entrest upon any action, take an exact survey of the nature thereof;
as if thou go to bathe, observe both the necessary and the accidental events
in bathing, that some are a washing, some are a thrusting out of the bathe,
some railing, and other some stealing. And to go surely to work, propose but
this to thy self, I will dispatch my bathing, and observe the direct
prescription of nature in this my purpose. And this likewise in all other
designs. For this ground being laid, there is no inconvenience ca^ surprise
the unprovided. For this thou may say, I was not only aware of this, but
also resolved before, to follow my determination according to nature,
how-so-euer. But if I do grumble at any event, then did I not observe it
before it befell.

CHAP. 10.
It is not the trunesse of things themselves, but men's indirect opinions
thereof that fill their bosoms with perturbations. As for example: death is
not evil in it self: for if it had been so, Socrates would not have said
otherwise: but it is the opinion that men carry of death, which gives it all the maleuolence it has. Therefore in our crosses and incombrances, we should
do well to withdraw our accusations from others, and lay them upon our
selves and our own misprisions.

To accuse others in any misfortune of our own, is the character of ignorance:
to accuse ones self, intimates some progress in knowledge: but to accuse
neither our selves nor others, argues perfection of understanding.

CHAP. 11.
Never be proud of excellence in others: if an horse should boast of
himself, and say I am a goodly beast, it were somewhat tolerable, but for
thee to cast forth thy braues that thou have such a goodly horse, is
ridiculous, for thou art proud of thy horses person, and goodness, not thine
own. What is thine own then? The use of objects: well then, when thou have
the habit of swaying these objects according to the method that nature has
prescribed, then boast and spare not, for by that time, thou may have goods
of thine own to delight in.

CHAP. 12.
For as it is in navigations, if the ship be landed, and thou go a shore for
fresh water, perhaps, by the way, thou may gather a cockle, or a scallion,
or so, and yet not-with-standing thy mind is principally on the ship, and
thine ear still attentive on the masters call, at which thou leauest all, and
runnest, least thou be chained and stowed under hatches, as they are feign to
do in transportation of sheep: so in the maine voyage of this life, if thou
lightest on a wife, or a child, instead of a cockle, or a scallion, thou
may take them without trouble. But if the master call, then, thou trudgest
away, then a board, leaving thy trash, and never looking after it: well then,
if thou be aged, beware of wandering far from the ship, least the master
call, and thou should faint ere thou could come to be embarked.

CHAP. 13.
Thou ought not to wish that all events should sort unto thine affection:
wisdom would rather advise thee to wish the events of all occurents to be
such, as they are. Sickness is a clogge and a shackle unto the body, but none
to thy mind unless thou list thy self. Lamenesse incombers the legs, but
not the resolution. This if thou do but note in all other accidents, thou
shall find them all to be rather encombrances, unto al other things, then unto
thy determinations.

CHAP 14.
At all occasions, be ready to turn to thine own thoughts, and therein search
the proper instructions which thou have concerning the uses of what soever
befalls thee: if thou see a beautiful personage, call Temperance to her
task, and she will come with alacrity. If thou meetest with pains, make thy
buckler of patience, which also is the surest shield for the repulse of
reproache. Use but thy self unto this course, and thou shall be no more
ouer-maystred by appearances.

CHAP. 15.
Let it never come forth of thy mouth that thou have lost any thing: but that
thou have restored it. Thy son is dead: why then he is restored unto him
that lent him thee. Thy livings are taken from thee. Why so then, are they not
restored? No, for he was a wicked man that got them from me. Why, what is
that to thee, what instruments he that gave thee them will use, for the taking
them again? as long as thou have them, use them, but as if they were an other
man's, and this thou may learn by the travelers usage of his Inn, and
lodging.

CHAP. 16.
If ever thou will attain to any progress in goodness, thou must stand at
utter defiance with such cogitations as these: if I neglect mine own estate, I
shall want whereon to live. If I correct not my son, he will never be good.
It is far better to starve with hunger, and so be quit at once from the
feeling of fear and molestation, then to live in abundance of all external
goods, with a mind perturbed, and void of all inward content. And it is
better to see badnesse in ones son, then to feel misery in ones self.

CHAP. 17.
Begin at the lowest step of the worlds occasions. Is thine oil spilt, or
thy farm spoiled? well, suppose this with thy self: this I pay for my peace
of conscience, and this for my constancy in troubles: nothing is gotten for
gramercy. And when thou call thy boy, presuppose that he will not come, or
if he do, that he will do nothing as thou would have him. But ever beware
of this, that it lie not in his power to perturbe thy settled quiet at his
pleasure.

CHAP. 18.
If thou aim at perfection in Philosophy, never make bones of being reputed a
fool or an ass in worldly respects: Nor may thou profess any knowledge at
any hand. If thou seem wise unto others, yet distrust it thy self. For be
thou well assured of this, that it is an enterprise of extreme difficulty to
contain thy determinations in the parts which nature and reason has
proposed, and yet to admit the fruition of things external: And a thousand to
one, that he that respects the one, must necessarily reject the other.

CHAP. 19.
If thy care to keep thy wife, children, friends, and family, in perpetual
fullness of health and external happiness, thou show thy self a fool, for
thou indeauorest to sway those things that stand without the compass of thy
power, and to turn external goods into real ones. Now if thy will be that thy
son should not run into enormities, thou art a fool in that. For thy
desire is, that error should not be error, but of some other nature. But if
thy desire be not to be frustrate in thy wishes, this may be allowed thee.

CHAP. 20.
That man is absolute Lord over every thing, who at his own pleasure can
preserve or deliver the things which his will is to preserve or deliver: He
therefore that will be free, must neither desire nor dislike any thing that is
in the power of others to dispose of. Otherwise, he must take the yoke
whether he will or no.

CHAP. 21.
Remember that this life, is but as a banquet. If any one carue to thee take
part of ye piece with modesty, and return the rest: is the dish set from thee?
stay it not: is it not yet come to thee? gape not after it, but expect it with
sober behavior. Bear but this hand on thine affections to thy wife, thy
children, dignities, and possessions, and thou shall in time be a fit guest
for the banquets of the Gods. But admit that a profer of some of those be
made thee: if then thou do truly despise and refuse it, thou shall not only
be worthy to share with the Gods in their banquets, but even in their glories.
By this means did Diogenes, Heraclitus, and others, purchase that epithet
worthy their reverend carriage, Divine.

CHAP. 22.
When thou see any one lamenting either because his son is gone to travel, or
for some other temporal mishap, be sure to carry a wary respect unto thy
self, that the sight hereof breed no alteration in thy thoughts, as to persuade
thee that it is those external goods that have brought down this calamity
upon him: But rather make a distinction with thy self, and be ready to tell
thy thoughts this tale: It is not this casualty that afflicts this man (for had
it befalne some other it would not have afflicted him) but it is his own
mis-apprehension hereof, that makes him moan thus. Thus resolved, do not
doubt to minister the best counsel that thou can afforde to assuage his
passion, to which end thou may lawfully put on a form of tears to associate
his tears. But be sure thy mind be not any way molested, look to that
above all things.

CHAP. 23.
Consider with thy self that thou have that part to play here on this
earthly stage, which thy master has voutch safed to appoint thee: be it a
long part or a short, in a long play or a short. If he have decreed that thou
should act a beggar, let it be thine endeavor to represent the imposed
person, ingeniously, and industriouslye. So like-wise must thou do in the
parts of a cripple, a King, or a common Plebeian. It is thy duty to discharge
thine appointed part with discretion, but what part thou shall have allotted
thee, is left unto the direction of another.

CHAP. 24.
If thou observe any inauspicious sign in the croaking of the Raven, or such
like auguries, keep thy mind firm against all such Fantasies, and say with
thy self, this presage becomes not me, but either my body, my state, my
credit, my children, my wife, or something that way: but unto my self, all
Potentates are fortunate, if so be I list my self. For what-soeuer befalls,
is lest unto me, to make mine use thereof.

CHAP. 25.
The way to be invincible, is never to contend: for it is not in our power to
be victorious when we please.

CHAP. 26.
When thou beholdest a man high-topt with honors, proud in rich possession, and
flourishing in external felicities, beware that thine eye do not cause thy
tongue to call that man happy. For if true tranquillity have her feate only in
things that lie wholly at our dispose, then must there be no place there,
either for envy or emulation, nor must thy desires fly either after
Confulshippes nor Kingdoms, but after freedom. To which freedom there is but
one only way conducteth us, and that is, The contempt of all things that are
not in our powers to dispose of.

CHAP. 27.
Remember that he that shall iniure thee by word, or violence, is not the
author of that injury himself, but the opinion which causes thee to hold
those actions as disgraceful and injurious. Wherefore when any one derideth
thee, know that is but thine own opinion that suggesteth this to be a
derision. And therefore have an especial care to curb thy mind from too
quick assenting to thine eye. Get but a little time of the object, ere thou
give up thine assent, and thou shall have thy judgment at a far easier
command.

CHAP. 28.
Let thy daily meditation be of death, exile, and all other accidents which
the world reputeth for calamities. But amongst all, let death have the first
rank in thy contemplation. So shall thy cogitations never be dejected, and so
shall thine affections never be exorbitant.

CHAP. 29.
Do thou aim at the attaynment of wisdom? Then first of all, prepare thy
self to be the worlds laughing-stocke, to be the common place of the
multitude of mockers. There will one come with this guird: Oh here is a
mushrump Philosopher! shot up since yesterday: Another with this: Lord sir
where light you on this grave stateliness? But let not stateliness be found
in thee: such things as shall seem to participate really of goodness, stick
to them as firm as if GOD himself had fixed thy station therein: and assure
thy self that if thou continue this course, they that derided thee heretofore,
will admire thee here-after. But if thy spirit yield unto their scoffs, then
doubtless shall thou incur a redoubled derision.

CAHP. 30.
If ever thou seek to be eminent, and to satisfy the affections of others.
know this undoubtedly that thou have lost thine hold of perfection. And
therefore let thy rest be set upon this, in all accidents, that thou art a
Philosopher: which if thou desire to make apparent unto any one, give thy self
the first notice of it, and let that be sufficient.

CHAP. 31.
Let it never grieve thee to be destitute of honors, and places of state: for
if it be an evil thing to lack preferment, then have external things alike
power to draw thee into inconvenience, and into vice. Is it thy part then to
hunt after dignity? or to wish to be invited to such or such a great man's
banquet? O by no means. What reproache then can once touch thee? or how is it
possible that thou can want an honorable place, when thou may be Lord and
Sovereign over all those goods which are peculiar adhaerents to the nature of
man? O but I cannot benefit my friends: No? who told you so? It may be thou not
can aid them with money, nor procure them the freedom of the city: what
then? Did ever man teach thee that these were not the gifts of others, nor
excluded wholye from our disposings? And who will help another to that which
he wants himself? I but we entreat you (say they) to use but some means
where-by we may attain this or that: Well, if I may do so without injury to
mine honesty, my faith, and the high pitch of mine own thoughts, and that you
will show me how, I will use all the means I can for you. But if you care not
if I lose my true goods to purchase you things only seeming good, is that a
part of honest friendship, or of headlong fondness? What do you make choice
of? an honest friend, or an heavy purse? If you approve the first, then assist
me in the preservation of mine honesty, and be not the causes of employing me
in those businesses whereby I should bring all my goodness to nothing.

O but I have yet no means to benefit my country! As how man? you cannot
build it a school, an Exchange, or a Bathe: what is all that to the purpose?
the Armorer does not store the commonwealth with shoes, nor the sho-omaker
with arms. It suffices every man to contain himself in his own vocation.
Now if thou perchance should by thine instructions ingraff true goodness in
some other of thy countrymen, should thou not benefit thy country? assure
thy self thou should: thou art no unprofitable member in the state then. Yea
but what place shall I hold then (say thou) in the body politic? Even what
place so ever thou can with the saue-gard of thy modesty and integrity* but
if thou casheere them to pleasure thy country, what use shall a good state have
of one given over to impudence and treachery?

CHAP. 32.
Do thou see any one preferred before thee at banquets, in salutations, or
in councels? well, if these be good things, thou ought to congratulate with
him to whom they are befallen. But if they be evils, grieve not that thou have
missed them, but remember, that seeing it is not thy study to pursue those
things that are not in a man's own power to dispose of, thou can not possibly
have those graces allotted thee, that others have, whose study is all upon that
object. For how shall he that does not attend continually at a great man's
door, have equal place in his favor with him that does give this due
attendance? or he that waits not at his heels, with him that does? or he that
flatters him not, with him that does? unjust and insatiable therefore should
thine affections be, if thou pay not the due price for things that are thus
saleable, and yet think to have them given thee gratis: For admit this
comparison: what is the price of a dish of lettice? say an halfe-peny. Well, one
comes, pays his halfe-peny and has his lettice: if thou pay nothing, and so
have none, do thou think thy self in worse place then he that had of
them? no, thou have no reason to do so, for as he has his lettice, so thou
have paid no price. Even so it is here. Thou art not invited unto some great
man's banquet? why, nor have thou defrayed the price that the banquet is sold
for: namely praise, and flattory for which the maker thereof sets it forth
to sail. Pay then the price of it, if it like thee to partake of it. But if
thou will not perform the first, and yet desire to enjoy the latter, thy
thoughts are basely covetous and deiectd. Well then instead of this feast, thou
have nothing. No? yes that thou have: thou have not pleased him whom thou
could not find in thine heart to praise; nor have thou been forced to endure
his insolence, by eating of his viands.

CHAP. 33.
The prescriptions of nature are laid down apparently, even in things whereof
all the world has one opinion. As for example: if thy neighbors child do
break a glass, or such like, every one presently can say it was a chance. Why
know then, that if it had been thine own, that had been broken, thou
ought to be perturbed no more, then thou wast at the breaking of thy
neighbors. Now ascend from this unto things of greater moment: thy neighbors
wise, or his child dies. Every one can say, Why! we are all mortal; what
remedy! but when his own goes, then presently he bursteth forth with, O woe
is me! O me most wretched man! whereas in very deed we ought now chiefelye
to remember how we stood affected when we heard of the like casualtie be
fallen others.

CHAP. 34.
As the marks in shooting are not set to make the Archer level wide: so
like-wise we see in nature there is nothing essentiallye evil. If any man by
chance should fall a strikeing thee, and another stand by and let him alone,
thou would think hardly of him: and art not thou ashamed then to let thy
thoughts be injured by every man, and to be grieved and vexed at the scoffs
of every one? be advised then, and adventure upon nothing without due
consideration of the precedences and consequences thereof, and then proceed,
freely. Other-wise thou may well go cheerfully about it in the beginning
(having not observed the accidents depending there-vpon) but in the process of
the work, thou art sure to be chased from proceeding by some disgraceful
obstacle or other.

CHAP. 35.
Would thou be victor in the Olympic games? In troth and so would I, it is
a glory of great esteem. But mark what does ordinarylye fore-runne it, and
what follows it: and then enter the lists: thou must be tied to keep order,
to eat but when needs must, to forbear all delicacies, to use necessary
excercises, at set times, to drink no cold water, nor wine but at prescribed
seasons: brieflye, you must be as obsequious to your Wrastlers and your
Fencers prescriptions as you would be to your Physicians. And then you come to
the trial: where the hand perhaps is hurt, or the anckle wrested: down you
go in the dust, and rise perhaps with your mouths full thereof: here may
thou get thy skin full of strokes, and be ouer-throwne when all is done.
Consider all this well, and then if you like, it, turn champion and spare not.
If not thou must retire as little children do, that now play the Wrastlers,
now the Fencers, and by and by the Fiddlers, now they sound the Trumpets, and
presently they present the tragedies: Even so shall thou do; one while being a
wrastler, another while a Fencer, then an Orator, and lastly a Philosopher:
but indeed, directly nothing: but as an Ape does, imitating all thou see, and
posting in thine affections perpetually from one object to another. The reason
is, thou take no premeditation of the depences of what-so-euer thou go
about, but hurlest on unto action without all discretion, being wholly swayed
by the leuity of appetite. Such a company were they who hearing a Philosopher
say: O how truly spoke Socrates in this? nay what man on earth can speak as
he did? would needs here upon in all have, turn flat Philosophers.

CHAP. 36.
Man, consider first the nature of the thing that thou intendest, and secondly,
thine own nature, whether they two may hold good correspondence together or
no. Have thou desire to proceed master in the five exercises? or in Wrestling
only? Why look upon thine arms, thighs, and legs, and examine them all
well: for these are natural assistants one to another. Do thou think that
in these courses, thou can eat, drink, and abstain, all in one measure?
Thou must labor, thou must watch, thou must leave thy friends, thou must
become an object for the very scorn of children, thou must be debased under
all men besides thee in honors, offices, counsels, and in ^ll causes
whatsoever: lay these things to thine heart, and resolve with thy self whether
thou would change thy peace, freedom, and constancy of mind, for these
other endowments. If thou would not, then follow the fashion of boys no
longer to be now a Philosopher, now a Publican, now an orator, and tomorrow
the deputy of Caesar. Here is no cohaerence in these things: to be a man fixed,
either in goodness or badnesse, is a man's part. Thou must either practice thy
reason and understanding, or give all thy service to the world, and the worlds
dependances. Thy labor must be employed either abroad or at home: that is thou
must either be a professed Philosopher, or a direct member of the vulgar.

CHAP. 37.
All offices of man in this world are to be proportionate by mutual
affections. Have thou a father? that name commands thy diligent care of him,
and thy forbearance of him in all things: binding thy patience to endure his
worst callumnies and most injurious violences. Imagine him a wicked man: has
nature then allotted thee a good father? no, but a father she has: well, then
do thy duty to him with all diligence, stand not to examine his actions, but
to foresee, that in all thine actions unto him the ordinance of nature be kept
inuiolate. So shall no man hurt thee, unless thou list thy self: and when
thou supposest thy self hurt, then shall thou be hurt indeed. This is thy way
to discern the duty of a neighbor, a citizen, or an Emperor, by a daily
speculation of their mutual concords.

CHAP. 38.
Know, that the first and foremost point of religion is a true belief: to be
assuredly persuaded, that there is a God, and that he swayeth the state of the
whole universe, in goodness and in justice: that we must obey him, and assent
unto his commands in the smallest condition: approouing all his actions, and
following their directions as the effects of that purest and most glorious
Intellect. Thus doing, thou shall never have cause to repine at him, nor to
repute him negligent of thee. Now this cannot be, unless thou reject the
things that lie not in thy power to dispose of, and place the whole nature of
good and evil in those things whose order is tied unto man's own discretion.
For if thou bind, either goodness or badnesse to any of the other, it is
impossible that thou should not accuse the author of them, and grow into an
hate of him, when-soeuer thou art deceived of what thou desiredst, and fallest
into that which thou soughtest to avoid. For it is inherent in every creature
by nature, to abhor and eschew the original causes of all that seems
hurtful, as well as the effects themselves: and contrariwise, to follow, and
admire the causes and productions of all that seems useful. He therefore
that thinks himself injured, has small reason to rejoice in that he
seems to injury the other again: for it is impossible that loss should be
parent unto true delight. But this erroneous conceit, makes the son to
disparage the father, when he does not allow him enough of that which opinion
holds for a true good, and this made Eteocles and Polinices go together by
the ears for their fathers Empire, because they thought there was such a deal
of happiness included in sovereignty. This makes the husbandman curse the
heavens one while and the seaman another while: the merchant also, and the man
that burieth his wife or children: For these men's piety is inseperably chained
unto their profit. But he whose endeavor works for a due moderation of his
desire, and dislike, herein lays down a good ground or his piety also. Now as
or sacrifices and offerings, et each one observe the custom of the land wherein
he lives: doing it with purity, parsimonie, diligence, cleanness, and
with-in the compass of his ability.

CHAP. 39.
When thou go unto a diuinatour, remember that thou know not the end of
that thou go about, but go to learn that of him. But if thou be a
Philosopher, thou know the quality of it ere thou go. For if it concern
a thing that is not in the power of man, it is impossible that it should be
either good or evil. So that when thou come to the Sooth-sayer, be sure thou
leave both dislike, and desire behind thee: otherwise, thou shall never
approach his face without fear. But set down thy staff at this, what ever
the end be, it no way concerns thee: For thou have power to make use of it,
come in what shape soever it will: And in this none in the World can be thy
hinderance. And therefore come to the Gods, as to thy counselors with a bold
spirit: and when thou have hard their wills, remember who are thy Counselors,
and how great a contempt thou shall commit in disobeying their direction. But
if thou come to the Oracle (as it pleased Socrates to do) about a thing whose
whole consideration relyeth upon the event; and wherein neither Art nor Reason
can aid thee with knowledge of the dependances, then must thou ruminate upon
the first head thereof: therefore if thou be to undergo the defense of thy
friend or country with danger of thine own person never go to ask the Augure
whether thou should defend them or no. For if he tell thee the intrailes
presage misfortune, it is likely that he means either of death, or the laming
of some member, or of banishment. But then comes reason on the other side, and
this withal: The danger that I undergo, my friend and country undergoes
also with me. And therefore herein take council of that great Pythian
Priest, who expelled one out of the Temple for not helping his friend in a
mortal extremity.

CHAP. 40.
Prescribe thy self a certain form of law to observe, both in thine own
speculation alone, and when thou also conuersest with others.

CHAP. 41.
Silence generally is a thing of great approbation: so is the breuity of speech
together with the necessity of the thing spoken. We should be sparing of our
tongues, neither admitting every occasion of talk, nor every subject in our
talk, as to discourse of fencers, plays, wrastlings, drinkings, the common
bumbast of every man's conference. And when we speak of men, let our
especial care be to keep our selves either from commending any man or
censuring him, with others.

CHAP. 42.
Adapt the discourses of thy friends unto thine own as near as thou can:
but if thou be in strange company be silent.

CHAP. 43.
Let not thy laughter be profuse, nor be led by every light occasion.

CHAP. 44.
If thou can possibly, let never oath proceed from thy lips: at least do
what may by all means be done to avoid swearing.

CAHP. 45.
Avoid the vulgar banquets, revels and compotations: and when occasion serves
curb thy self most stricktly, least thou slip into the common gulf of
licentious custom. For know that he that is foul, without all question will
in time defile him that conuerseth with him, were he never so pure before.

CHAP. 46.
Let thine use of bodily necessaries never extend further then the bodies
service of the mind requires: let thy meat, drink, apparel, house and
servants be all within the limits of parsimonious nature: far be those things
from thee, which tend to pomp and ostentation.

CHAP. 47.
Until thou take a wife abstain with all thine indeauor from veneriall
delights: but being married, use it lawfully, so it be with modesty. But never
upbraid those that use it before, nor taunt them with their incontinency, nor
boast of thine own abstinence in that kind.

CHAP. 48.
If one come and tell thee, Such a man slaundered you thus or thus: never stand
to apologize for thy self: but answer him again only thus: he knows not
mine other faults, for if he did, he would never have reckoned only those you
tell me off.

CHAP. 49.
There is no necessity of thine often going to the plays, or to the prizes:
but if thou have any spare time, go, so that it may appear that thou
respectest only thy self in these cases, that is, that thou would have him
only to win the prize, that wins it, and that only to be acted which is
acted: so shall thy thoughts remain undisturbed. But for the whootes and
cries, and laughters, and other turbulent motions, avoid them utterly. And when
thou go from the playhouse, never talk much of that which befell, it no
way concerns thy reformation. If thou do not as I say, then all the people
will perceive that thou wast taken with admiration of the goodly shows.

CHAP. 50.
Be not ouer-hasty of haunting the Lectures: But when thou do go to them,
carry thy self with all gravity and constancy: and give no man cause of
perturbation.

CHAP. 51.
When thou have a business with any man (especially if he be of the Nobility)
think with thy self what course Socrates or Zeno would take in such a case. So
shall thou be sure to have a rule of reason, and thereby thou shall perform
thine affair with a perfect Decorum.

CHAP. 52.
When thou art to go speak with a great man, presuppose with thy self: faith
he is not at home, or, he is busy, or, I shall hardly get to the speech of him,
or it may be he will not respect me. If thine occasion be so that thou must
go thus, why bear these ordinary occurrents, and never say unto thy self, I
have known him keep a lesser state: to say thus, were common grosenesse,
peculiar onley to him that raileth at external shadows.

CHAP. 53.
Amongst thy friends, beware thou never stand tediously discoursing of thine
own exploytes or perils: For though the rememberance thereof be delightful
unto thee, yet the recounting of thy fortunes is nothing so pleasing unto
others.

CHAP. 54.
And euer-more avoid the playing of the Buffone, and procuring of others
laughter: for thence may a man soonest of all slip down into the baseness
of vulgar behavior: And this is a thing that is of great force in diminishing
thy friends good likings of thee.

CHAP. 55.
And it is a dangerous enterprise to enter into discourses of obscaenity: when
such an accident falls out (if thou can conveniently) check the author of
such an uncivil Theme: but if thou can not well do that, then print thy
dislike of such an argument in thy looks, and silence, and by that means give
him notice of his error.

CHAP. 56.
If thy imagination present thee with any delight, clap a bridle on thy
thoughts immediately, least thou be born headlong away therewith. Examine the
thing it self, and take some time for thy self to deliberate: which done,
recollect both the times, namely wherein thou may enjoy the pleasure, and
that wherein after that fruitio^ thou art sure to feel dislike and discontent,
lay these two spaces together, and compare them with this, that if thou
abstain, thou shall have cause of joy, and occasion to commend thine own
circumspection. If thou be the^ to vnder-go any delightful actio^, take heed
that thou be not entangled in the sweet inticements thereof: but set this
against them all: O how much more excellent is it for a man to have his
conscience tell him that he has conquered all these allurements!

CHAP. 57.
When thou performest any thing that thou have resolved, be not ashamed of the
public eye, what ever the vulgars censure be of thee. For if the act be
unlawful, then abhor to resolve of such a thing, but if it be not, why
should thou fear a false reprehension?

CHAP. 58.
As in this proposition, It is Day, and it is Night, the parts being
severed, have both their force in a true signification, but being conjoined,
signify no truth at all: So at a banquet to fall to the best dishe at first
and to fly al at the fairest, is for the bodies good that is fed therewith: but
consider the presence of the guests, and it is an act incurring foul disgrace.
Wherefore when thou art invited to a feast, remember this, that the cates yt ar
set before thee are to be prized by the respect of the body: and yet there is a
reverence due to the master of the feast, and that must needs be observed.

CHAP. 59.
If thou undergo a function beyond thy power to discharge, you must needs both
perform that indecently, and likewise thou neglectest another which thou
might execute with full decency.

CHAP. 60.
Even as in thy walks thou have a care to avoid the treading upon nails, or
the wresting of thy feet: So in the main course of thy life beware that thou
hurt not thy mind, the Lady of thy works, and thine actions gouernesse. This
if we would look well unto in all our designs would make us proceed unto
our enterprises with far more heed and diligence.

CHAP. 61.
A man's purse is limited by his body, as the shoe is by the foot. If thou
keep a mean, a mean will keep thee: but if thou exceed thy bound, thou art
in the direct way to headlong ruin: as it is even in ones shoe: For if thou
go beyond thy necessary accoutrement therein, then first thou must have a
shoe buckled with Gold, and then a Velvet shoe, and then an imbrothered one:
For the thing that once leapeth over the mean, runs eternally without
limitation.

CHAP. 62.
A woman as soon as ever she reaches fourteen, observes that men begin to
carry an eye of observation upon her, and therefore she perceiving that there is
no use of her but in a man's arms, begins to trick up her self, and all
the hope she has, is in her comely wearing of her clothes. But it were a
labor worthy commendations to give them all to understand that they have no
way in the world to procure themselves credit, but by their modesty,
shamefastness and sobriety.

CHAP. 63.
The true sign of a stupid wit is, to be always conversant in corporal
matters: As in long exercise of the body: in much eating, drinking, stooling,
or in excessive practice of Venus her prescriptions. These things are to be
suddenly dispatched: The serious deliberation of things is peculiar to the
mental fruition.

CHAP. 64.
VVhen-soeuer any man has offended thee in word or in work, remember this,
that it was an opinion that told him he did as be- fitted him herein: for it
cannot be that he should satisfy thy liking in this act, but his own
liking. Now if his judgment sail him, why then he that is deceived has the
loss fallen on his side. For he that shall define an undiscovered truth to
be a lie, wrongs not the truth herein, but is wronged himself, by his
misconceite of the truth. Take but these grounds with thee, and thou shalneuer
be molested by the callumnies of others. For, thou have this repulse for every
disgrace that shall be objected, It is but your opinion.

CHAP. 65.
Every thing may be apprehended two ways, either with toleration, or with
impatience. If thy brother offer thee injury, do not consider it is an
injurious part, for so thou shall decline unto the impatient apprehending of
it, but reuolue this in thy thoughts, that he is thy brother, borne and brought
up together with thee: so shall thou apprehend the wrong done with a mind
intending mitigation.

CHAP. 66.
There is no coherence in these assertions, I am richer then you, and so I am
better then you. I am more eloquent then you, therefore I am your better: there
is more a great deal in these: I am richer then you: therefore my wealth is
above yours. I am more eloquent then you: therefore, my pleading exceeds
yours. But thou thy self art neither wealth it self nor eloquence.

CHAP. 67.
If any man be brief in his bathing (or in any other exercise) thou may not
say that he has done it badly, but briefly. If any one drink much wine, say
not that he has drunk badly, but largely. For before thou censure him, how
know thou that he has offended herein. So shall thou get the true
knowledge when to censure the things thou see, and when to approve them.

CHAP. 68.
Never profess thy self a Philosopher, never dispute of learning amongst the
unlearned. Never discourse at a feast of the best forms of eating or drinking,
but eat and drink as best befitteth thee. And remember that this was Socrates
continual course, for avoiding of ostentation: they that desired he should
commend them to the Philosophers, frequented his company, and he lead them
away, unto them whom they desired to follow: So easily did he suffer himself
to be neglected.

CHAP. 69.
If thou chance to be present at any discourse of the precepts of learning,
held in an unlearned audience, be it thy study to be silent: for it is a
dangerous thing to speak any thing without due premeditation. If any one call
thee an ignorant creature, and thou feel not thy self offended herewith,
know that thou have laid a good foundation for knowledge. For the sheep do
not bring their fodder to the shepherds, and show them what they have eaten,
but decocting the meat they have feed upon, give the proose hereof in their
wool, and in their milk. Let not therefore the vulgar be eare-witnesse of
thy words, but eyewitness of thy works, which are the effects following the
due disgestio^ of verbal precepts.

CHAP. 70.
Art thou parsimonious in the keeping of thy body? then be not proud of it.
Do thou drink water? let no ordinary occasion make thee affirm so much
unto others. If thou resolve to undertake any pains for thine own benefit,
and not for others, do not proclaim it before the Gods, but if by chance thou
be greatly a thirst, restrain thy desire by spitting forth the water that
thou have tasted, but when thou have done, do not tell this to any other.

CHAP. 71.
It is a true mark of vulgar baseness for a man to expect neither good nor
harm from himself, but all from external events. Contrary wise the true
note of a Philosopher is to repose all his expectation, upon himself alone.

CHAP. 72.
These are the tokens of proficience in goodness: to reprehend no man, to
praise or dispraise no man, to traduce no man, to be silent in ones own
commendations, touching his place, or knowledge: to lay the fault upon ones
self in all his encombrances: to contemn those that praise him in his own
heart: to avoid the defense of himself in any reprehension: to walk like a
weak man, softly, and to have a perpetual care, that the state he aymeth at,
be not snatched from him ere he can attain it: to include all his desires in
himself: to lay his whole dislike upon the opposites unto our natural goods:
to bear a moderate affect in all things: to neglect his being held a fool, or
an ignorant fellow: and finally, to keep a guard over himself, as over a
treacherous enemy.

CHAP. 73.
If thou shall happen to hear any man brag of his faculty in understanding and
expounding the writings of Chrysippus, say thus to thy self: had not
Chrysippus writ obscurely, this fellow had wanted matter to boast of. But
what is the aim of my study? the knowledge of nature, and the following of
that knowledge, who shall teach me then? Chrysippus says one. Well, to
Chrysippus I go. But now cannot I conceive him. Well, then must I go seek an
expositour: so then as yet I have done nothing worth nameing. But when I have
gotten an expositor, then remains it that I make use of all his instructions,
and there is the matter of most moment. But if I stand only in admiration of
his acute expositions, why then what prove I but a Grammarian in steed of a
Philosopher? saving only this, that I read Chrysippus in stead of Homer.
Therefore when any one entreats me to read Chrysippus to him, I am ashamed,
because I cannot confirm my doctrine with my deeds.

CHAP. 74.
Be it thy care to observe all these as decretall laws, never to be violated,
but that repentance must follow the transgressor. And what-so ever other men do
talk of thee, contemn it, for thou have not their tongues under thy disposing.

CHAP. 75.
How long will it be ere thou fasten thine hold upon excellence, and abstain
wholly from violation of reasons positive degrees? Thou have as good rules
given thee for thy reformation, as could possibly be prescribed, and thou have
embraced them: Why then do thou look for any more masters, and deferrest to
reduce thy self unto order, until some such man appear: Thou art now past a
boy: add maturity enstileth thee a man. If therefore thou continue still in thy
neglect, adding delay unto delay, purpose to purpose, and putting of all
things until to morrow, will it not be as apparent as the light, that thou
shall never profitte any thing, but live and dye a man of base condition?
assure thy self it will. Be wise then, and put thy self into the course of a
full man, and make that which thou see to be good, the perpetual law, and
inviolable rule of thine actions. And when thou meetest with labor or delight,
with honor or with disgrace, then tell thy self that now thou art in the
Olympike games; that now there is no starting back: and that only our stay, or
encombrance, may either detain thy progress long, or destroy it for ever.
Thus became Socrates the man that he was, being his own furtherer in all
attempts, and following the directions of none but Reason. And as for thee,
though thou be not a Socrates, yet ought thou to live as one that
intends to attain to Socrates his perfection.

CHAP. 76.
The first, and most necessary precept in all Philosophye, concerns the use
of their decrees, as in this, of speaking euer-more the truth. The next,
disposes of the demonstrations, as in this; why must one speak euer-more
truly? the third, confirms and distinguishes both the former, as thus; How
can this be a demonstration? what is a demonstration? what is the
demonstration here? what i ye consequence? what is the difference? which is the
truth? which is the falsehood? So that this third place depends necessarily
upon the second, and the second upon the first: But the base, the foundation,
and most necessary place of all, is the first. But we take another course, we
keep (all of us) a terrible coil with the third place, beating our brains
wholye about that, whilst the first in the mean space lies out of all
eustome, unrespected of any man. And therefore we do incur the offense of
lying: yet every one has the demonstration that one should not lie at his
tongues end.

CHAP. 77.
In all our enterprises we should pray thus: Jupiter thou high and holy God,
and thou o changelesse Fate, direct me to the end, that your immutable
determinations have assigned me; for I will follow your appointments most
cheerfully: and if I would not do so, I were a villain, and yet must forward
unto what you have allotted, whether I would or no.

CHAP. 78.
He that can adapt his affects unto necessity, herein performs a part of
wisdom, and is in some sort privy to the designs of the deities.

CHAP. 79.
And oh what a worthy saying was that third speech of his. Why if it be GODS
pleasure, Crito, GODS pleasure be fullfilled: It is in the power of Anytus and
Melitus to kill me, but to do me any hurt, is a thing surmounting all their
proiects whatso-euer.

The end of Epictetus his Manual.
The table of Cebes, the Theban Philosopher: Containing a prescript method for
the well ordering of the life of man.
AS we were walking in the temple of Saturn, and viewing the diverse gifts of
charitable persons, amongst the rest we espied a table, hung up before the
door of the Oratorie, containing many strange, and uncouth resemblances, the
meaning whereof we could not possibly conjecture, for the picture bare neither
the form of city, nor of camp, but it consisted of three parkes as it were,
or enclosures: one, a large one, and within that, two other, a greater and a
lesser. In the greatest enclosure of all, there was a gate, about the which was
a great concourse of people drawn: and within, there were a many in the forms
of women. In the entrance, there stood the picture of a grave aged man, who
seemed to give some directions to the per*sons as they entered, much talk had
we about the signification of this potraiture, but none could conceive truly
what it should intend. At last, as we were in this doubt, an ancient man that
stood by, stepped unto us, and told us: Strangers (quoth he) it is no wonder if
this picture trouble you to understand the true meaning thereof: for there are
but few of our own Citizens that can give the true interpretation hereof as
he that offered it, intended. For it was none of this city that gave it, but a
stranger, a worthy man, and a true follower of Pythagoras and Parmenides, both
in doctrine and conversation, coming to this City, dedicated both this
Temple, and this Table unto the service of GOD Saturn. Did you know the man
Sir, quoth I? yes, quoth he, that I did, and was an auditor of his admired
doctrine a long time, for even in his younger years, his instructions bare
great perfection, and luster: many a time have I heard him teach the exposition
of this table unto his followers. I beseech you sir, quoth I, if your business
be not of greater import, to expound the meaning hereof unto us, for I assure
you, our desires to know it are vehement. Truly strangers (quoth he) and my
leisure serves me to satisfy you, but you must take one caveat with you,
more then you are aware off, and that is this: the exposition hereof is
attended with much danger. What danger sir, quoth I? Mary this quoth he: if you
give go^od ear unto the discourse that you shall hear, and fix your memories
with a true understanding, it will crown you with wisdom and beatitude: if
not, it will plunge you in a boundless depth of all dullness and misery. For
this explanation resembles the riddle of Sphynx, wherewith with she used to
intrappe poor passengers, he that could understand it, passed safe, but he
that did not was sure to pay for his ignorance with his life. Even so is it
here. For Ignorance is a Sphynx unto man. And this obscure picture, conteyneth
a description of all the good and evil that lackeyeth the life of man: As also
of all that which is indifferent and pertaketh of neither. Now if a man
conceive not this aright, it will not dispatch him at once, as the Sphynx did
those that fell into her claws: But it will infect his whole life with a
continual corrosion; and such a torment as those seek, who being condemned and
giued, do every moment expect the hand of the hangman. But contrariwise, if one
apprehend it with a true conceit, Ignorance breaks his own neck, and the
whole course of his life that understands it aright; shall be replenished with
perfect beatitude. Mark my words therefore well, and let them not go in at
one ear and out at another. Lord God (quoth I) how have you inflamed us with a
desire to hear this relation, if all be thus: yes assuredly quoth he it is
even thus. Proceed sir I beseech you quoth I, for we be no negligent auditors
in a matter of so great hope, or so great hurt unto the hearers. So the old man
lifting up his staff, and pointing to the picture: See you this incloser,
quoth he? Yes very well: why then mark me: This is called LIFE: and the great
multitude you see flock about the gate, are such as are to enter into the the
course of this life. And that old man whom ye see with a paper in one hand, and
seeming to point out something therein with the other, is called, Life's GENIUS.
He instructs those that enter, what method to observe in their course of
life, and lays them down what they must follow, upon peril of their own
destructions. I pray you what kind of life (sir) does he direct them to
follow, said I? or how does he will them to proceed? See you not a Throne,
quoth he, near unto the gate as the people go in, and a woman sitting
thereon witth a visor on her face, in queint apparel, and a cup in her hand?
Yes that I do, quoth I, what is she? It is IMPOSTVRE, quoth he, that
seduceth all the world. What does she? she drinks of her own brewing unto
all men living, what drink is it? It is Error, quoth he, and Ignorance: and
how then? why when they have tasted of this cup, then enter they, the course
of life: Why but tell me sir, do all then drink of Error? All quoth he,
but some indeed drink more, and other some less.

And behold, see you not a crew of women atttired like whores, there within the
gate? yes, sir. Why those are called Opinions, Desires, and Pleasures, and as
soon as any come in at the gate, presently these run dancing to them, fall to
dalliance with them and so lead them whether they list. Whether lead they them,
said I? Some to security, said he, and some to ruin, by Impostures means. Oh
worthy sir, how dangerous a drink have you told me of! Nay, when they come
first unto men, quoth he, they make them promises of all delights, of
perpetual security in perfect beatitude: now the men, being drunk with the
Error, and Ignorance that Imposture presented them, cannot for their lives
find the right way to that good course, but go wandering about they know not
whether, as you see them described in the picture. And you see them that were
entered before, go round about as these women direct them. I do indeed, quoth
I; but what woman is that, that stands upon that round stone, seeming as though
she were blind, and carrying a semblance of madness in her gesture: that
same quoth he is FORTUNE, her blindness is not single, but accompanied with
madness, and deafness. Why what does she there then? She wanders about,
quoth he, taking from one, and giving to another, and by and by takes that
away which she gave but even now, and bestows it upon a third, without all
reason or constancy; and therefore her token there speaks her nature at
full. Which is that, quoth I? her standing upon that round stone. What is the
meaning of that? that her gifts are never secure nor certain. For he that
builds his trust upon them, shall be sure one day to pay dearly for his
credulity. What names bear they? They are called Fools: How chances it that
some of them weep, and some laugh? why are they not all in one form? They that
laugh and rejoice are Fortunes favorites, and salute her by the title of
Prosperous. But they that wring their hands and wail, are such as she has
deprived of that which she had given them before, and they call her Adverse
fortune. What are her gifts then, that they should make the loosers lament,
and the receivers rejoice? Her gifts, are Reputed goods: and what be those?
Riches, Nobility, children, glory, sovereignty, Empire and such like. And I
pray sir, hold you these for good? Of that hereafter, quoth he: let us now
make an end of the tables exposition. With all mine heart sir. You see now that
being past that gate, there is another enclosure, lying higher up, and
seven women accoutred like curtizans, standing without at the entrance. All
this I see. Well, one of these is called Incontinence, another Luxury, another
Avarice, and another, Flattery: and what stand they for there? They watch when
Fortune bestows any thing upon any man: how then? then they rejoice, and
embrace him, and flatter him, and entreat him to stay with them, promising
him a life, fraught with all the delight that the most unbounded affect can
desire. If any one do like this, and tarry with them, he is tickled with
false delight, that free imagines his life an heaven, when indeed it is
nothing so. For when his understanding r^turneth, then he will soon perceive
that he has not eaten at their charges, but that they have eaten up him, and
when they had so done, sent him away with his sound burden of derisio And now
having brought all the benefits of fortune unto nothing, he must turn drudge
to those drabs, suffer all their imperious injuries, and undergo all unseemly
offices for their pleasures, as cousenage, sacrilege, treachery, the every,
and all the rest of that ungracious beadroll. And when all those impious trades
fail him, then is he packt over into the hands of Punishment. Punishment,
which is she? Do you not perceive a little grate in the picture, behind those
women, and within that, as it were an obscure dungeon? Yes. And a great many
women all in tattred rags, and forlorn shapes? I see them also Why that same
that holds the scourge, is called Punishment: she that leans her head
upon her knee, is Sadness. She that teareth her hair, hight Sorrow. There
stands one also behind them, all deformed, meager, and naked, and a woman
with him, bearing the same figure of lean deformity. Who be they? The man's
name, quoth he, is Anguish, and the woman's Desperation: unto these is the
ruined man passed over, and confined to live in doleful extremity. From
thence they drive him farther, into the Iayle of Infelicity, and there shall
his captivity be endless unless Repentance be his bail. Why, what can she
do? Mary she can deliver him out of this huge deluge of miseries, and bring
him acquainted with another Opinion, and another Desire, who will guide him
unto the palace of True Instruction: and will also proferre to conduct him
unto False Instruction. And how then, quoth I? If he embrace that Opinion that
gives him directions in the way of True understanding he shall be thereby
purified, and reformed, and run the rest of his lives course in the
plentitude of perfection, beyond the reach of all future calamity: otherwise,
if he do not so, False instruction will subvert him with a new deceit. O God
(said I) how dangerous is this last difference! But what shape has this same
False Instruction? Behold yonder other enclosure, says he. So I do sir. At
the portall thereof sits a woman in neat and seemly habit: the vulgar and
the vainer sort call her Instruction, whereas indeed her true name is false
instruction. Now they that mean to pass unto true Instruction? Do all come
first unto this woman. Why is there no other way then this unto true
Instruction? Yes that there is. Who are they then that walk about within that
enclosure? They are the followers of false Instruction, imagining in themselves
(but al too erroneously) that they enjoy the company of true instruction. And
what are their professions? Some of them are Poets, some Orators, some
Logitians, some Musicians, Arithmetique, Geometry, Astrology, Philosophy,
Criticisme, and all other professions have bastards within this ring: nay here
are prosessed voluptuaries also. But what women are those that converse with
them in the habites of those former, amongst whom you reckoned Incontinence
and her fellows? They are the self-same. What, do they come hither also? That
they do, but not so ordinarily as elsewhere, into the first enclosure. And do
the Opinions come thus far also. Yes verily do they: for the drink that
Imposture gives these, even at first, is not yet out of their heads, they do
as yet smell of the dregs of Error and Ignorance: nor shall they ever be quitte
of their Opinions, or their other vices until they renounce the company of
False Instruction, and take themselves to the true course, and taking the
potion that is called Errors purgatio^, thereby vomit up all ye evils that
offended their minds, as their Opinions, their Ignorance, and all their other
enormities: for so shall their consciences be perfectly cured. But as long as
they remain with false Instruction, they shall never be thoroughly sound, nor
shall their disciplines help them away with any one incouenience. Which is the
way then that leads unto true instruction. Why look you here, see you this
high place that seems as desert and uninhabited. Well sir, I see it. Then you
see that little gate, and the way there before the gate, which looks as if it
were but little used, lying in such a steep descent of that craggy rock. That
I see also: you see more-ouer that hill there, that is environed on either side
with inaccessible cliffes, having only one narrow path whereby to ascend it:
True sir. That same path, is all the way we have to true Instruction. Truly
sir me thinks it is almost impossible to get up it. You mark that steep
rock then by that other hill. So I do. And see you not two lusty and comely
Viragoes standing thervppon, and reaching forth their hands in manner of a
cheerful inuitation. I see them well, but how call you their names? One of
them hight Continency, and the other Tollerance: and they are sisters. Why do
they reach forth their hands? They encourage the trauelers that come that way,
to be of good cheer, and to defy desperation the daughter of sluggishnesse;
assuring them, that after a little toil, the whole residue of their life
shall be topt with happy tranquillity, and that if they will climb but a little,
all the way after shall be most plain and easy. But when they come to the
rock how shall they do to ascend? I see no mean they have to mount so steep a
cliffe. True, but the two sisters do come down themselves from the top, and
lending them their hands, pull them up by degrees. After they are gotten up
a little way, they bid them rest a little, and then they bring Fortitude and
Confidence unto them, and pass their words to bring them to the presence of
True Instruction, showing them how plain and how pleasant the tract is, now
that they have surmounted the former difficulty, and how clear it is from all
cragges and incombrances, as you see in the Table. So indeed it seems. And see
you not that wood, and before it, as it were a pleasant launde, or meade? Al
full of light and delight? Right: and in the midst thereof another enclosure with
a gate unto it? There is so: but how call you that enclosure? mary it is called
ye habitation of the blessed, for in that place are all the virtues resident with
beatitude. Truly it looks like a delightful abode. You see then that goodly
matron that stands by the gate, with a constant eye of a middle age, rather
inclining to fifty, in a plain and ungarnished habit, and standing upon a
stone not round but cubike, and directly square? She has two other women also
near her that seem to be her daughters. So they do. The mid most of these
three is called Instruction* she of the one hand, Truth, and she on the other,
Persuasion. But why does Instruction stand upon a square stone? To show that
the path which leads unto her is fair and firm: and that her gifts do
bless the receiver with fruits of security. What does she give? She gives
Confidence, Security, and Acquittance from troubles. And what use of those? By
these man understands that his life is now to continue void of all
perturbations. Oh glorious, oh gracious gifts quoth I! but why does she stand
without the enclosure? to cure the travelers, and give them her drink before
they enter, and then to admit them passage in, unto the virtues. How is this
good sir quoth I? In truth I conceive you not. You shall, quoth he. It is
here, as if a person greatly diseased should betake his body to the cure of
the Physician: now he, first of all, purges away the causes, and nutriment of
the malady, and then corroborates the vitalls, and finally confirms the body
in perfect soundness. Now if the person had contemned the counsels of
Physic, he had been deservedly given over to the tyranny of his disease.
This I conceive, quoth I. Well, even thus quoth he, do men approach this
station of Instruction, which as soon as they arrive at, presently she cures
them, given her own receipt unto them which purges out all their ingulphed
evils, as by vomit or eiection. What are the evils they cast up. Error and
Ignorance, both which they drunk from the hand of Imposture, Arrogance also,
Avarice, Desire, Incontinence, Anger, and all the poisons which they swallowed
down while they were in the first enclosure. And whether does she send them
having purged them? She lets them in unto Knowledge and the other virtues.
Which be they? Why see you not a company of fair and modest matrons there
within the gate, amongst whom there is not one that seems painted, or
curiously adorned, as they before were all? I see them: what are their names?
The fore-most of them, hight knowledge, the rest are her sisters, called by the
names of Fortitude, Justice, Integrity of life, Temperance, Modesty,
Liberality, Continency, and ( Clemency. Oh goodly consort! quoth I. How great
is humane hope? your hopes quoth he shall be complete, if you conceive this
relation aright, and apply it unto your courses in the world. Sir, assure your
self, quoth I, we will omit no pains herein. Then shall your ends be
crowned with security, quoth he. But whether do these Virtues lead the man
that enters? Unto their mother. What is she? Her name is BEATITVDE. Of what
quality is she? See you not a way that ascends that height there, whereon the
tower of the three enclosures is founded? Behold there a fair and flourishing
matrone, enthroned in state, at the portch of the said tower in goodly raiment,
yet vntaxable of profuseness, with a crown of roses about her beauteous
temples. You say right sir, what is she? she is the person, that is called
Beatitude. And when one comes to her, what does she? She crowns him
(quoth he) with delight adjoined unto all the other virtues, as they are
crowned that are victors in dangerous conflicts: what conflicts has he bin in,
said I? In many sore ones, quoth he: and has conquered many a savage beast
that wounded him pitifully, and overthrew him often: yet brought he al their
fury under, and now is become his own man, making those savages serve him now,
as he was forced to stoop to them before: What beasts are they you speak of,
sir? I would feign know that. I speak of Ignorance and Error, first: are not
they true beasts? yes, and cruel ones too, quoth I. And then, quoth he I speak
of Sorrovv, Anguish, Avarice, Intemperance, and the whole Lernean fen of
vicious habits. All these has he now at command, whereas before they commanded
him. O renowned victory, quoth I, and memorably performed! but I pray sir tell
me this, what force is there in the crown she gives him? A blessed force
(young man) there is in that crown. He whose brows it encircleth, shall be
really blessed, and lift up beyond the pitch of misery: nor shall his bliss
rely upon others, but be fully established in him-self. Oh what a conquest
is there! But what does he when he has this crown? whether goes he then?
Then the virtues bring him back the same way that he came, and show him those
that live there beneath, how miserable and how mischievous their estate is, and
how they dash the ship of their life against the rocks, keeping no course but
rouing at random without all care or compass: and how they are led away to
bondage by their foes, some by Incontinence, some by Arrogance, some by Avarice,
some by Vainglory, some by one mean of ruin and some by another. And out of
these gives of perdition they have no means in the world to redeem
themselves, but there they lie in fetters of perturbation, all their lives
long. The reason hereof is, they have forgotten the instruction that Life's
Genius gave them at their ingresse, and so cannot light of the true course of
life. In truth you say well, but why should the Virtues go to show him the
place and perils that he had already passed? He tell you why. At his former
passage of them, he conceived not the half of their maleuolence, nor
understood the actions that were done there, almost any thing: but was
altogether enui^oned with doubts, because of the drink of Error and Ignorance
which he had tasted, which made him imagine that for good, which had no
goodness in it, and so in like manner of evil. Whereby he was thrust into the
course of corruption as well as the rest were. But now that he has attained the
knowledge of conueniences, he both beholds the misery of others, and
enjoys felicity himself. But when he has observed the misfortunes of these
men, what does he then? or whether goes he? faith even whether he lift
himself. For he is as secure in every place as if he were in the cave of
Corycum: and let him live were he will, he shall live in honesty and free
from all, even the least encombrance. All men shall be as glad of his company as
the sick person is of the Physicians why but shall he never more stand in
fear of those beasts you spoke of? shall they have no more power to touch him?
no, not a jot. He shall stand at defiance with Sorrow, Trouble, Incontinence,
Avarice, Need, and all other extremes whatsoever: he shall check and curb
them now as he pleases, who before plagued him worse then the stings of
adders, and as the serpents that kill all other things with their poison, meddle
not with the viper, because his own venime is an Amulet against all theirs: so
likewise shall no evil approach this perfect man, because in himself he has
a preservative against all their infections. All this is well, quoth I: but I
pray you sir tell me this: I see a great company descending the hill as it
were, some with crowns on their heads, seeming to exult and rejoice, and
others without crowns looking like despayring men, with their heads and legs
all bruised, and diverse women seem to detain them: what are these? They that
wear crowns, are the adopted sons of instruction, and rejoice at their
adoption. The other, are some of them rejected by her, and so fallne into
miserable estate: others, being weakened by Sloth, when they had gotten up as
far as Tolerance, turned back again, and so sell a wandering they knew not
whether. But what are the women that follow them? There is Sorrow, Trouble,
Desperation, Ignominy, and Ignorance. Why then belike all the mischieues that
may be, do follow them at the heels. So they do, and when they come back
in^o the first enclosure, unto Luxury, and Incontinence, they lay all the blame
on themselves, and fall a cursing Instruction, and all that are in the way to
her, as wretches, and unfortunate fools, that leave the tract that these now
do tread, and the pleasures of the first enclosure, to go seek had I wist and
hunt out a course of such unhappiness, refusing to stay and share with them in
their delightful goods. And what are their goods? Shall I tell you in a word?
Luxury and Incontinence. For like unto beasts, they are all for the belly, and
imagine the filling of that the full fruit of all their expected good.

But what call you the other women that come down there, laughing and making
semblance of mirth? They are Opinions: they carry men up unto Instuction, and
when they have done, come back, and tell the rest how graciously those they
presented were received, and how they are now in state of blessedness. Why but
do these Opinions go in unto the virtues? Oh no: it is altogether unlawful
for Opinion to come in the sight of knowledge, they do only deliver the men
over unto Instruction, whom she receiving, they go their ways to fetch more,
as ships do, that having vnladed their fraught make presently forth for a new
voyage, taking in other commodities. In truth sir, your comparison is passing
good, quoth I but you told us not yet what it is that Lives Genius says unto
those that are to enter the course of life. He bids them be of good
cheer, quoth he: and be you of good cheer also, for I will not keep a
letter of the exposition from you: we thank you most humbly sir, said we all.
Then he, reaching forth his staff again, pointed up, saying, see you that
blind woman upon the round stone there, whom even now I told you hight Fortune?
Yes. The Genius bids them, never to give credence unto her, never to imagine
any solidity in her bounties, never to hold her gifts as your proper goods: for
that when she list, she will take them from one, and bestow them on another,
magure all contradiction, it is her ordinarye practice. And therefore he
warns them, not to delight in her benevolence, nor to grieve at her
frowardness: Never to be conquered either by her curstness or her curesies,
to give her neither praises nor curses, seeing she does nothing with
discretion, but hurleth all about at six and seven, as I told you already.
Therefore does this Genius bid us never wonder at her exploits, nor play the
badde borrowers to count another man's money our own, and to be offended, and
hold our self injured, if it be demanded again: forgetting that our credit
lent us it, upon condition to have it restored without contention.

Thus (says this Genius) must we stand affected to the benefits of fortune,
and to remember well, that it is one of her old tricks to give, and take
again, and then to give one far more, and presently to take away all every
jot, both what she gave last, and what she left before. He bids us therefore
take her gifts, and having them, make have with them to that firm, and
constant kind of bounty: Which is that? That which Instruction gives to
those that come safe to her Tower to ask it. And what gives she? See gives
the True knowledge of profitable things, a gift of unchangeable goodness and
security. To her therefore he wills them all to make have, and when they come to
Luxury, and Incontinence, the two women aforementioned, to pass by them speedily,
and stop the ears unto their inueyg^ed persuasions, and so to hasten on
until they come unto False Instruction. There he advises them to make a
little stay, and take what they like of her for their Viaticum, the rest of
their journey. And then to scowre away with all speed unto the Palace of True
Instruction. This is the charge that the Genius of life lays upon all that
are upon entrance into the first enclosure: He that either refuses it, or
misaplyeth it, comes home by unhappiness and ruin. This mine honest friends
is the exposition of this Table: If you would be further satisfied in any
thing else, propound it, and I will resolve you. Gramercy, courteous sir. I pray
you then what is it that their Genius wishes them to take at the station of
False Inctruction? Such things as they shall need. And what be those?
Letters, Languages and Disciplines which Plato called the bridles of youth,
keeping them out of worse employments.

Must he that will pass to True Instruction needs take these here, or may
he let them alone if he please? He need not unless he list: They are
convenient, but wholly impertinent to virtue.

No? are they not necessary for the bettering of our understandings? Yes, but
our goodness may have increase without them, yet are they not altogether
vn-vsefull. For we may hear a doctrine read by another, and yet it were not
amiss if we could read it in the language our selves, then we benefit by
his reading nevertheless: so that one may be without these disciplines, well
enough. I but are not these that understand the arts of a better hability to
have goodness infused into them, then others that want those disciplines? No,
how should that be, quoth he, when they are as badly conceited of the true
nature of good and evil, and as black with the pitchy touch of vitiousnesse,
as others that understand nothing? It is an easiy thing for one to be a deep
scholar, and a master of all the disciplines, and yet be as prone to
drunkenesse, intemperance, avarice, injury, treachery, yea and madness, as he
that never saw the inside of a schoole-house. There are plenty of those
examples, we need not go far to fetch them. And therefore what prerogative
has learning in the reformation of a man's exorbitances? Truly none quoth I,
if things go thus. But why then are those scholars in the second enclosure,
as nearer neighbors to true Instruction then the rest?

Ablasse, says he, what good get they by that; When we see often that
diverse pass out of the first enclosure, from Incontinence and the other vices,
unto true Instruction without once resting amongst those Disciplinarians? What
man then can avouch their estate better because of their place? They are either
more dull, or more idle then others? Why said I, how is that? Because, says
he, though those of the second enclosure were clear from all faults else, yet
this alone sticks by them for ever, To profess to know that, Whereof they are
utterly ignorant: which conceit of themselves, makes them far more slack
in the quest of true Instruction.

Again, do you not see how the Opinions come flocking out of the first
enclosure unto them? These are the causes why their estate is not an hair
better then the others, vnless^ Repentance and they fall once acquainted, and
that they be verily persuaded that they dwell not with True Instruction, but
with her counterfeit, which draws them into errors, and so stops all the
means of their reformation and passage to security. Wherefore strangers, quoth
he, unless you take this course, and beat this discourse of mine over and
over, until you have gotten the habit thereof (to which end you must
continue an often revolution thereof in your meditation, and make it your
thoughts principal practice) you shall never make use of any word that you
have heard: Sir, we will do our best endeavors. But I pray resolve us this:
Why are not those things worthy the name of goods which Fortune gives unto
man's use? as life, health, riches, honors, children, conquests, and such
other her bounties: and why are not their contraries evils? this assertion
seems strange and incredible unto us. Well quoth he, be sure then that you
answer directly unto that I shall demand. I will, quoth I: whether is it good
for him that is an evil liver, to live, at all or no. It is not good I think
(quoth I) for him to live, but rather evil. How then can life (says he) be
good at all, if it be evil for him? Because (quoth I) as to the badde liver,
life is badde, so to the good liver, life is good. So then, you hold life both
good and badde. That I do said I. O beware of an absurdity, (quoth he.) It is
impossible for one thing to be good and evil. For so it should be both
profitable and hurtful, and likewise always, both to be affected and
avoided, and that both at one time. This is an absurdity indeed, quoth I. But
if he that lives badly, have a badnesse by living so, how can life but be
badde unto that man? I but quoth he, it is one thing to live, and another to
live badly. That is true quoth I. So then life in it self is not bad. For if
it were so, it would be so to the best lives as well as the worst: For all
should have a life that should be a badnes in itself. You say true. Well then
life being communicated, both to the good lives and the evil, to live, of it
self, is neither good nor evil, no more then cutting or burning is, both
which are good in some diseases, but hurtful unto all sound bodies. So is this
life: and therefore propose this to yourselfe: whether had you rather live
badly, or die honorably? The latter should be my choice, quoth I. So then,
quoth he, death in it self is no badde thing belike: for it is often times to
be preferred before life. Most true. Well then, sickness and health, have one
and the same respect. For occasion may so fall out, that it befitteth not the
sick man to recover. It may be so. Good, weigh riches then in the same
balance. Suppose that which is often seen: A man has great wealth, and
applies it to no good use: Many such there are. Do not his riches then help
his beatitude any way? I think not, because of his own badnes. Why then very
well, it is not wealth, but wise Instruction that makes a man happy. Surely so
it seems. How then can riches be good, when they have no power to better
their possessors? They cannot indeed. Well, it is befitting then that some
should not be rich at all, because they are ignorant of the true use of
riches. Nay I am of your mind in that. How then can that be any way pertaining
to goodness, which must be often times withheld from the use of diverse
persons, so that he yt can use wealth, as wealth should be used, may live well,
and he that cannot must needs break down his own quiet? you strike on
truth in all things, sir. Lastly (quoth he) it is the esteem of those for
goods, or the contempt of them as evils, that molesteth and offends the
cogitations of men, prizing them as things of such excellent worth, and the
only conducts unto the Court of happiness and this makes the^ undergo all
actions, even of how wicked a front soever, only for the attaynment of these
glosses. These accidents attend on all such admirers of external shows,
because theirdull understandings can no way penetrate into the natures of
things truly good, they are so graueled in the quicksands of erroneous
Ignorance.

The end of Cebes his Table.

