A right fruitful Epistle / devised by the most excellent clerk Erasmus / in
laud and praise of matrymony / translated in to English / by Rychard
Tauernour / which translation he has dedicate to the right honorable Master
Thomas Cromwell most worcester thy Counseloure to our sovereign lord king Henry the
eight.

CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.

To the right honorable Master Cromwell one of the kings most honorable
counsel, his humble servant Richard Cauernour sends greating.
YOur daily oratoure (most honorable sir) ponderyng with him self your
gratuyte bou^ty toward him, began besily to reuolue in mind, how he, again
on his part might somewhat declare his fervent zele of heart toward you.
Which he thus reuoluynge / loo suddenly (as god would) a certain Epistle of
Doctor Erasmus, de uysed in commendacion of wedlock, offered it self unto
his sight. Which so sone as he began to read, he thought it a thing full
necessary and expedyent, to translate it in to our vulgure to^g / and so under
your noble protection to communicate it to the people, na mely when he
considered the blind superstition of men and women / which cease not day by day
to pro fesse and vow perpetual chastyte before or they suffyciently know
themselves and thinfirmite of their nature. Which thing (in my opinion) has
been and is yet unto this day the rote and very cause original of innumerable
myscheues. I pray our lord Jesus of his infinite goodness to provide some spedy
reformation, when it shall be his pleasure. In the mean season, please it your
goodness (right honorable sir) to accept this rude and simple translacion of
your servant / and ye so doing shall not a little encourage him to grea ter
things in time coming. And thus Christ have you alwayse in his keapynge.

Amen.
An Epistle in praise of matrymony.
ALthough sweet cosyn ye be wise enough of your self, nor need not other men's
counsel, yet for ye old frendeshyp continued from our chylhode betwyxte us and
also for your kyndnes toward me / and finally because of the straight
alyaunce betwyxt us: I thought it my duty (if I would be the man whom ye always
have take me for / that is to say your friend and lover) of such things as I
judged to belong most to the preservation and dygnyte of you and yours /
gladly and freely to auertyse you. Other men's profyght sometime we espy better
then our owen. I have often followed your counsel, which I have found no less
profitable than friendly. Now if ye again will follow mine I trust it shall
repent neither me of my counsellynge / nor you of The narration.
your following. Our friend Antony Bald supped with me ye last night, one that
is (as ye know well enough) your great friend and nere kynsman. An heavy feste
and full of tearys. He showed me (which was a great sorrow to us both) that the
good gentle woman your mother is departed, yt your sister for sorrow and
desire is entered in to a house of barren nunnys / that the hope of your stock
is turned only unto you / that your friends with hole assent have offered you
a wife of great substance, of noble blood, of excellent beautye, of gentyl ma
ners, and finally which berethe great love toward you. That ye yet, this
notwithstanding, for some immoderate sorrow, or else some superstitious holiness
have so determined to live a chaste life, and never to marye, that nouther for
the care of your stock, nor love of issue, nor for any requests, prayers, or
tearys of your friends ye canbe plucked away from your purpose. But ye by mine
advise shall change this mind, and leuyng bachelershyp, a form of living
both barren and unnatural, shall give your self to most holy wedlock. In
which matter I covet that neither ye love of your fre^des which else ought to
ouerco^ your mind, nor mine authoryte any thing should aid my cause / if I
show not by clear reasons that this shall be for you both most honest, most
profitable and most pleasant, yea what will ye say if (as this time require)
also most necessary?

FOr first of al / if the^ regard of honestye moves you / which with good men
is hyghly considered, what thing is more honest then matrimony, whereunto
Christ himself did great honor and worshype, which vouche saved not only
to be present with his mother at the marriages, but also consecrated ye ma riage
feste with the first fruetz of his miracles? What is more holy then that which
ye creator of all things has ordained, copeled, sanctified? which dame
nature her self has enacted? What is more laudable than hit, which who
reprehendeth / is condemnable of heresy? So honorable is matrimony, as is the
name of heretyke slanderous. What is a thing of more equite, then to ren dre
that to the posterite / which we our selfs received of our auncestrye? What
act on the con trarye side is done with les consideration, than under the zele
of holiness to flee yt, as unholy and un godly, which god the well and fa there
of all holiness would have counted most holy? What thing is farther from all
humanite / than man to abhor from the laws of man's estate? What is a more
un kind act than to deny that to your yongers, which if ye took not of your
elders, ye could not be he that might deny? Now if we require ye Author of
matrymony, The Author of matrimony.
it was founded and ordained not of Lycurgus, not of Moses, not of Solon, but
of the high and mighty worker of all things, of him it was also praised /
enhonested and consecrate. For at the be (...) Man first created / forth with
was copuled with a wife.
gynnyng when he had made man of ye slyme of ye earth he thought yt his life
should be utterly miserable and vnplesaunt, if he joined not Eve a co^pagnion
unto him. Wherefore he brought forth the wife not of the earth, as he did man,
but out of the rybbes of Ada^, whereby it is to be understand that nothing
ought, to be more dear to us then ye wife, nothing more conjoined / nothing
more fast glued unto us. The self same After ye flode of Noye.
god after the flode / when he was at one again with mankind enacted (as we
read in scripture) the law of matrimony renu ed.
this law first, not that we should love bachelarshyp / but to crease / to
multiply / to replenyshe ye earth. But how could that be, onles men would give
their labor to wedlock? And lest we should here find cauellations / allegyng
the liberte of the old law of Moses, or the necessite of that season / I pray
you what means yt sentense repeted also in the new law of Christ / ratifyed
and confirmed by Christ's own mouth? For this cause (says he) shall man leave
Math. xix.
father and mother and styck to his wife. What thing is more holy than the
natural love of the child to his father? And yet the feythe of wedlock is
preferred above it By whose authorite? by gods. At what time? when not only
the old law floryshed / but also when the new law of Christ began to
spring. The father is forsaken / the mother is forsaken / and the wife is
stycked to. The son (in ye Civil law) emancipate / that is to say
enfranchysed and out of his fathers bonds / begins to be his own man and
at lybertye. The son, in the same law, abdicate / that is to say forsaken and
dysherited of his father / cease to be his son. But only death undo wed lock,
if yet yt death undo it. Now sir if ye other sacraments of Christ's church be
had in great vene ratio^, who sees not yt much worshype ought to be given to
this, which was both ordained of god, and first of all other? And the other in
earth, this in paradise / the other for remedy / this for solas / ye other were
put to in help of nature, which was fallen, only this was given to nature at
the first creation. If we count the laws holy which be institute of men, shall
not the law of wedlock be most holy which we have received of him, of whom
we have received life? and which began in manner even at one time with mankind?
To be short / because he would con ferme this law by sum example / when he was
a young man / and bydden (as said is) to the brydale, he came thither gladly
with his mother, and not contended with so doing, did also great honor to the
feste with his wonderful work / making none other where the prosperous
co^menceme^t and beginning of his miracles? Why A confutatio^.
than (ye will say) did Christ him self absteyne from wedlock? As though
there be not very many things in Christ / which we ought rather to maruayle
at, tha^ follow. He was borne without carnal father / he proceeded without pain
of his mother, he arose from death to live when the sepulcre was closed, what
is not in him above nature? Let such things be appropriate to him. Let us
(living within the law of nature) wonder and praise ye things that be above
nature / but follow those works yt be for our capacite. But he would be borne
of a virgyn. Truth it is, of a virgyn / but yet wedded. A virgyn to his mother
becam him yt was god, but yt she was wedded, she signyfied unto us what we
ought to do Uirginite be came her which (by the dyuyne inspiratio^ of the holy
ghost) being pure and immaculate brought forth him which was most pure and
unspotted / but yet Joseph was her husband, which thing sets forth unto us
the co^ mendation of the laws of wedlock. How could he more commend
wedlock, then wha^ he wyllyng to declare ye preuy and wonderful conjunction
of the divine nature with the humane body and soul, and wyllyng to declare his
ineffable and eternal love toward his church (that is to say, the company of
Christian people) calls himself the brydegrome and the church his spouse?
Great (says Paul) is the mystery of matrymony: To the Ephesians the v. Cha.
in Christ and in the chyche. If there had been any cople in earth more holy, if
there had be any bond of love and concord more religiously to be kept, than
wedlock / undoubtedly he had fetched his similytude from thens. What like thing
do ye ever read, in all scripture of bachelershyp? Honorable wedlock and the
immaculat bryde bed is spoken of. Bachelershype is not ones named. Now The law
of the Iwes
sir, Moses law abhors baren wedlock, and therefore we read that some were
put out of the comynalte for the same cause. And why so? suerly because they
living vnprofytably to the common well, and for there own syngular avail, did
not multyply the peo ple with any issue. If tha^ the law da^neth baren
matrymony much more it da^neth bachelors. If the infirmyte of nature escapes
not punishment, certes the froward will shall not eschape. If they were
punished whose nature say led to there will / what have they deserved / which
will not so much as put to their good will, that they be not barren? The laws
of the Hebrews gave this honor to matrymonye / that he that married a new
wife, should not be compelled that year to goo forth to the batel. The cite is
in great ieopardy if there be not men of arms to defend it, but needs it must
decay if there be not wedded men, by whom the youth co^tynually faylynge may be
supplied. Also the laws of ye Romans punyshed The law of ti^^^ mar^^^
them that were bachelars in remouyng them from all promotions of the cite. But
such as had increased with children the commune weal / to them they ordained a
reward openly to be given, as it were for their well deset uynge. The law of
the. iii. chylderne is a sufficye^t prove for this matter. for I will not here
rehearse all ye rest. Lycurgus made The law of the La cedemonians.
a law that they which married not wives, should in somer season be driven from
the enterludes and other syghtes, and in winter go about the market place all
naked and curse them selves, sayng they suffered just punyshme^t, because they
would not obey the laws. Now will ye know how much matrymonye was set by in
old time? Consider the punishment for ye defoyling of it. The Greeks The batel
of Troy.
ones thought it expedyent to revenge the breche of matrymonye by contynuall
wars enduryng the space of. x. years. Furthermore by the laws not only of
the Romans / but also of the Hebrews and other nacyons / aduowterers should
lose there lives. The thief was delivered by paynge. iiii. times so much as he
The law of the to man's
had stolen / the syn of aduowtrye was punyshed with the axe. Also among the
Hebrews he was stoned to death with the peoples han The law of the Iwes.
des which desyled that, without which the people should not be. And the rigor
of their laws not contented therewith / suffered also that he which was found
in aduowtre should be put to death with out judgment / with out laws / gyuyng
that liberty to the grefe of ye wedded men, which uneath is granted to him
yt in ieoperdye of life defends himself. Doutles wedlock must needs seem a
right holy thing which defiled can not be repurged without man nes blood / and
the reuengyng where of / is neither compelled to abide ye laws nor the judge /
ye which seuerite and rigor of law is neither in murdre nor i treson. But
what stand we alday in written laws? This is the law of nature / not graven
in tables of bras, but inwardly fyxed i our hearts, which who will not obey, he
is not so much as to be esteemed a man much les a good cytizen. For if (as the
Stoikes, men of sharp judgments The Stoikes
do dyspute) to live well is nothing else, but to follow the guide of nature /
what thing is so agreeable to nature as matrymony? For nothing is so naturally
given nouther to man, nor yet to any other kind of brute bestes as that every
one should preserve his kind from destruction and by propaga tion of posterytye
to make it as it were immortal, which without carnal copulatio^ (as every man
knows) can not be brought to pas. And it seems a foul shame dum bestes to
obey ye laws of na ture, and men (after the manner of gy auntes) to bid batell
against nature, whose work if we will be hold with yees not dasselling, we
shall perceive yt her will is that there be in every kind of things a certain
spyce of wedlock. For I omytte to speak of trees, in A certier Kind of
wedlock i trees
whom yet by ye authoryte of Pliny wedlock is found with so manyfeste
diuersyte of the male and female, that if the male tree should not with his
boughs lie upon ye female trees that stand about him couetyng as it were a
medlyng to gether, they should abide baren and fruteles. I hold my In precy
ous stones.
peace of precious stones, i which the same author writes (but not he alone)
that there is found both male and female. I pray you has not god so knyte all
things to gether with certain bonds, that one thing does neade an others
help? What thynk ye to the heaven which turns about with co^tynual mouyng? I
pray you while it makes the earth leynge under neth, which is mother of al /
with sundry kind of things fruteful, pouring seed (as it were) upon it / does
it not thoffice of an husband? But to run through each thing were over long.
Now, to what purpose have we spoken this? Suerly, that ye may understand, by
such natural commyxtions, every thing to have his being and continuance,
without which althynges to be dyssolued / to peryshe / and to fall away. It is
feyned A fabule and the exposition thereof.
by the old and wise poets (whose study was to cover the precepts of
philosophye under mystycall fabuls) that gyauntes the sons of the earth,
having feet like serpents, did cast mountains upon montaynes that reached
up to heaven, and so standing upon them warred against the gods. What
sygnifieth this fable? Suerly that certain ungodly persons / wild / and of
an ungentle nature did greatly abhor from matrimonyall concord / and therefore
they were cast down hedelonge with Iuppiters thunder bolt / that is to say /
they utterly decayed and came to naught, sithe they eschued the thing, whereby
mankind is only preserved. But the self same poets have feyned that Drpheus
being a poet and a mynstrell did move with the sweet note of his musycall
instru me^t ye hard rocks of stone. What meaned they hereby? Nothing else, but
that a wise and an eloquent man did first prohybet the stony men / and which
lived after the manner of wild beasts / from leyng at large / and brought
them to the holy laws of matrymonye. Wherefore it appears euydently that who
so ever is not touched with desyer of wedlock seems to be no man, but a stone
/ an ennemy to nature / a rebelle to god / by his own folly seeking his decay
and undoing. But goo to, sithe we be fallen into fabuls no thing fabulous nor
vein / the same Drpheus when he descended down to hellys and there moved Pluto
lord of hell and the souls there abydyng on such wise that he might easily
lead away with him Euridice his wife / what other thing suppose we that the
poets thought, than that they would commend unto us the love of wedlock,
which also in hell is counted holy and relygyous? Hereunto also belongethe,
that the antyquite made Jupiter lord of wedlock, and named him for the same
purpose Gamelium / and made Juno the lady of women in chyldbed, calling her
pronubam and Lucinam, Superstityously errynge (I grant well) in the names of
the gods, but not errynge in this that they judged matrimony a thing holy and
worthy to be regarded of the gods. Surely there have been diverse laws /
cerymonyes / and vsages among diverse peoples and nations. But there was never
nation so barbarous / so far from al humanite / with whom the name of
wedlock has not be recounted holy / has not be recounted worshypfull. This
the Thrasian this the Sarmate / this the man of Inde, this the Greek / this the
Italion / this the Brytan furdest of all the world, or if there be any further
then they, have had in high reverence. And why so? For of necessyte that
thing must needs be common, which the commen parent of all / has emprynted,
and so inwardly emprynted, that the sense and feelynge of it, has not only
perced ye turtyls / and the doves / but also the most cruel wyld bestes. For
the lions be gentil and meke to their lyonnesses. The tygrees fight for their
whelps. The asses stycke not to run through fyers leynge in their way for
the sauegarde and defense of their fools. And this they call the law of nature
which as it is most strong, so it is most large. Wherefore like as he is no A
similitude.
dilygent husband, which contented with the things present, tendethe full
curiously the trees ready grown / but has little regard outher of setting or
of graffyng / because yt of necessite within few years those orcheyardes (be
they never so well kept) must decay and become desolate. So in like wise he
is to be judged an vndyligent cytize^ in ye publyke weal, which contented with
the company present, has no respect nor consideracio^ to supply new in place
of the old. Noman therefore have been counted a noble and worthy citizen, which
has not bestowed his dilygence in begettyng chylderne and bringing them
virtuously up. Among the Hebrews and Persyans he was most hyghely commended, yt
had most plenty of wives, as though the contre were most bound to him, that
with most chyldern had enryched it. Do ye study to be more holy then was
Abraham? He should never have been called Pater multarum gentium that is to say /
the Father of many peoples / and that of gods own mouth, if he had fled
the company of his wife. Do ye labor to be reputed more religious tha^ Jacob?
He stycked not to bye his wife Rachel with so long apprentyshode and bondage.
Be ye wyser than Solomon? But what a flock of wives keapte he at home? Be ye
chaster then Socrates? Which suffered at home in his house Xantippe that
wayward woman not only (as he was wont to geste him self) because he might
learn pacyence at home, but because he would seem not to halt in thoffyce of
nature. For he a man (whom the dyuine answer of Apollo only judged wise)
understood full well, that under this law and condition he was begotten, to
this he was borne / this he did owe to nature. For if it have been well said
of the old philosophers / if it have been not without cause co^ fermed of our
dyuines, if it have been ryghtly every where pronounced as a proverb, that god
A proverb.
nor nature have made no thing frustrate nor in vain / why (I pray you) has
god given us these members? why these pryckes and prouocatio^s? why has he
added the power of begettynge, if bachelarshyp be taken for a praise? if one
would give you a precious gift, as a bow / a garment / or aswerde, ye should
seem unworthy the thing that ye have received, if outher ye would not, or ye
could not use it. Where as all other things be ordained by nature with most
high reason, it is not lykely that she slumbered and slepte in making only this
pryue mem bre. Nor I here not him which A confutation.
will say unto me that / that foul ychynge and pryckes of carnal lust have
come not of nature, but of syn. What is more onlyke the trowth? As though
matrymony (whose office can not be executed without these pryckes) was not
before syn. Moreover in other bestes I pray you from whens comes those
pryckes and prouocations? of nature, or of sin? wonder it is if not of
nature. And as touching the fowlnes / surely we make that by our imaginacio^ to
be foul, which of the self nature is fair and holy. Else, if we would weygh
the thing, not by the opinion of the people, but by the very nature, how is
it les foul (after ye manner of wild bestes) to eat / to chaw / to dygest,
empte the belly, tha^ to use the law full and permytted pleasure of the bo die?
But virtue (ye say) is to be obeyed rather than nature. As though / that is to
be called virtue which repugneth with nature, from whens if virtue have not
his first beginning, certes it can not be it, which may with excercyse and
learning be made perfect. But the apostles life delyteth you, for they also
followed bachelarshyp, and exhorted other to the same. Let thapostolycall men
follow thapostles, which (because there office is to teache and instruct the
people) can not both satisfye their flock and their wyfes, if they should have
any. How be it that thappostles also had wives, it is evidently clear. Let us
grant bachelarshyp to ye bishops. What do ye follow the appostes form of
living, being so far from the office of an apostle, sith ye be a man both
temporal and also without office? It is lycenced them to be without wives, to
the intent they may the better attend to begette the more chylderne to Christ.
Let this be ye pryuilege of prestes and relygyous men, which (as it appear)
have succeeded the Essenes form of living which damned holy matrymony. Your
estate requires otherwise. But Christ himself (ye will say) have pronounced
them blessed which Mat. 19.
have gelded the^ selfs for the king dom of god. I reiecte not the authoryte,
but I will expound Chri stes meaning. First of all, I thynk this sayng of
Christ to apperteine especially to those times when it was expedient to be
most ready and lose from all wordly bussynesses. Then was the time that they
should fle and ren hither and thither through all lands, the perse cutoure was
at hand on every side. But now such is the state of things and times, that
no where ye may find the pureness and per fection of manners les spotted and
contaminate, than among wedded persons. Let the swarms of monks, friars,
chanons, and nunnys auaunce their professyon as much as them lust. Let them
bost as much as they will, their cerymonyes and dysguysed cotes (where by they
be chefely known from the te^porall) suerly the most holy kind of life is
wedlock puerly and chastely kept. Forthermore not he only geldeth himself
which lives without a wife, but he why che chastely and holyly does thoffyce of
wedlock. And would god they were trewly chaste, so many as cloak their vices
under the glorious title of chastity and castra tyon, which under the shadow
of chastyte do more fowly rage in fylthy and bestely abhomynation. For I am
ashamed, so help me god, here to reken up, in to what shameful abhominatyons
they often times fall, which do thus repugne against nature. To be short,
Christ never commanded bachelarshyp to none erthly person, but he openly
forbyddethe deuorcement. Suerly He thynkethe yt expedye^t for prestes to have
wy ues.
me think, he should be not the worste counselor for ye common weal
(co^syderyng the fashyons and manners of men) which would grant also the
prestes and relygyous persons license to mary, namely sithe there is every where
so great a multitude of prestes, of which (alas) how few live a chaste life?
How much better were it to turn their co^cubyns into wives, so that those
whom they have now with great infamye, and with an unquiet conscience, they
might then have openly with an honest fame, and beget chylderne whom they may
love as trewly legytymate, and bring them godly up, so that another the father
shall be ashamed of them, nor they of there father. And this (I trow) the
officyals of bishops should have procured long a go, but that greater gaynes
arise by the concubyns, then should by the wives. But virgynyte (ye will A
confutaryon.
say) is a dyuyne thing, an angelycall thing. Trewthe it is, but, on the
contrary side, wedlock is an humane thing. I now speak to a man being my
self a man. A co^me^dable thing, certes, is virgynite, but yet so that this
praise be not transferred to over many, which commendation if every man
commenly will begin to usurp, what can be said or thought more hurtful and
more pernycious than virginyte? More over though in other men virgynyte should
most of all deserve praise, yet suerly i you it can not lack blame, in whom
it now stands to preserve your noble stock, worthy of an immortal
contynua^ce. Finally he is but a very little of, from the praise of virgynite,
which keeps purely the law of wedlock, and which has a wife to the cntent
to beget chylderne, and not to satysfy his wanton lust. If the brother, in the
law of Moses, be commanded The sues law.
to raise the seade of his brother, which dyed without issue, will ye suffer
the hope of your whole lygnage to be utterly extynte, namely sith it is
returned to you only? Nor I am not so ignorant but yt I know welynoygh that the
praises of virginite have been rehearsed, and celebrate with great volumes of sum
of our old fathers. Among whom Hierome Hierome
so auau^ceth it, yt in manner he despises wedlock and was provoked of the
bishops that were of the true opinyo^ to rechau^t and sing a new song. But
let this heat be granted to those times. How I would wysh those yt thus
every where without dyscretion do exhort the youth (not yet known to them
selfs) to bachelarshyp and vyrgynyte, to bestow their labor in descryuynge
the form of chaste and pure matrimony. But yet they which ar so well pleased
with virginite be not dysplea sed with the wars against the Turks which
pass us so far in number, whose judgment if it be right, it shall follow
that it be chefcly thought right and holy, busyly to beget chylderne and
supplye youth suffycyent for the use of the wars. Except perchance they
think to prepare gonnes, weapo^nys, ships to ye warrrs, and think little
neade of men. The same do allow to slay with the swerd the parents of infideles,
to the in tent that their chylderne might be baptized, yea unknowing also. If
this be true, how gentyl ler a deed were it to bring the same to effect
with the office of intermaryinge, each with other. No nation is so cruel that
abhor reth not the murdre of infauntes. Laws of princes in manner with like
rigor punyshe them that cause that, which is conceived in the woman to com
forth deed, and them that make them baren with medycynes. Why so? Forther is
small diuersyte betwyxt him that murdereth that which begin to be borne, and
him which procures that nothing can be borne This that in your body either
dries up, or with ye great danger of your health putryfyeth and corrupts,
which in your sleep falls away, had been a man if ye were a man your self.
The old law of the Jews curses him which when he is commanded to lie with
his brothers wife yt is dead, casts his seade on the earth that nothing should
be engengred, and is judged unworthy life, which enuyeth life to the fruit yt
is to be borne. But how little from him differ they, which have enjoined
themselfes perpetual barrenness? Do they not seem to kyl so many me^, as
should have been borne, if they had given their labor to the begettynge of
chylderne? I pray you if a man have a piece of ground rank of na ture,
which untilled, he suffers to be contynually barren, is not this man
punyshable by ye Civil law, because it is for the profete of the commuue well
that every man tends well his own? If he be punyshed which neglects his
ground which (be hit never so well tyld) bring forth nothing else than wheat /
or beans / or pese, what punishment is he worcester thy which refuses to tylle
that ground which tylled bears men? And in tyllage of the earth is required a
long and paynefull labor, here the short tyllage is also entysed with a
pleasure / as it were a reward prepared therefore. Wherefore if the sense of
nature, if Aepiloge
honestye / if natural affectyon / if devotion / if gentelnes / if virtue any
thing move you, why abhor ye from that which god ordeyneth, nature enacteth,
reason entyseth / the scryptures both of god and man praise / the laws
commau^de, the whole consent of al natyons approve / to which the ensample of
every good man pro uoketh? That if the most part of things (yea which be
also bitter) ar of a good man to be desired for none other purpose, but because
they be honest, matrimony doutles is chefely to be desired whereof a man may
dout whether it has more honesty tha^ pleasure For what thing is sweter, then
with her to live, with whom ye may be most streyghtly copuled, not only in ye
benevolence of the mind, but also in the conjunction of ye body. If a great
delectation of mind be taken of the benevolence of our other kynsmen, sithe it
is an especyall swetnes to have one with whom ye may communycate the secret
affectyons of your mind, with whom ye may speak even as it were with your
own self, whom ye may sauely trust, which supposethe your chances to be
his, what felycyte (think ye) have the conjunction of man and wife, than which
no thing in the universal world may be found outher greater or fermer? For
with our other friends we be conjoined only with the benevolence of minds,
with our wife we be copuled with most high love, with permyxtyon of bodies,
with the confederate ba^d of the sacrament, and finally with the felaweshyp of
all chances. Furthermore in other fre^dshyps, how great symulation is there?
how great falsyte? Yea they, whom we judge over best friends, like as the
swalous flee away, when somer is gone, so they forsake us, when fortune tur
neth her whele. And sometime the frescher friend cast out the old. We here of
few, whose fydelyte endure till their lives end. The wives love is with no
falsite cor rupted, with no symulation obscured, with no chauuce of things
mynyshed, finally with death only (nay not with death neither) with drawn. She,
the love of her parents / she, the love of her systers / she, the love of her
brethren despyseth for the love of you, her only respect is to you, of you
she hangs / with you she coueteth to dye. Have ye riches? there is one yt
shall save it / there is one yt shall increase it. Have ye none? there is one
that may seek it if ye have wealth / your felycyte is doubled / if aduersyte,
there shall be one which may conforte you, which may sit by your side, which may
serve you / which may co uet your greffe to be hers. Do ye judge any pleasure
to be compared with this so great a coniunctio^? If ye tarry at home there is at
hand which shall drive away ye tedyousnes of solytary being. If from home / ye
have one that shall kiss you when ye depart / long for you when ye be absent,
receive you joy ously when ye return. A sweet co^paygnyon of youth / a kind
solas of age. By nature yea any felawshyp is delectable to man, as who^ nature
has created to beneuole^ce and frendshyp. This felawshyp then how shall it
not be most sweet, in which every thing is comune to them both? And
contrarily, if we se the savage bestes also abhor solytarye living and
delyted in felawshyp, in my mind he is not onys to be supposed a man, which
abhors from this fe lawshyp most honest and plesau^t of all. For what is
more hateful the^ yt man which (as though he were borne only to himself)
lives for himself, seeks for him self / spa reth for himself / does cost to
him self, loves no person, is loved of no person? Shall not such monstre
be adjudged worthy to be cast out of all men's company into the mydde see with
Cymon the Athenyense, which because he fled all men's compaygny, was called
Misanthropus that is to say hateman? Ney there dare I here propound unto pou
those plesures which (where as they be naturally most sweet to man) yet (I can
not tell how (of the great wits they be dyssem bled, rather than despised.
Albe it, who can be borne with so rigo rous a dysposytion (I will not say
dumppyshe and dastardly) which may not be taken with such kind of pleasurs,
namely if he may attain them without the offense of god and man / without the
loss of his good name? Certes I would call him no man but a plain stone.
Albeit, that pleasure of bodies is the least part of the gods that wedlock
has. But ymagyn that ye can contempne this, as unworthy tor a man (how be it
without these we deserve not onys the name of a man) let it be put (if ye will)
a monge the most base commodytes of wedlock / now sir what can be more amia
ble then chaste love / nay what more holy and honest? There accres seth by the
means a sweet flock of alyesses / there is dubled the nu^bre of parents / of
brethren / of systerne / of neuewes. For nature can give one only mother / one
only father. By wedlock, an other father / an other mother is gotten, which
(because they have committed their own flesh unto you) can not but love you
most tenderly. Now sir, how hyghly will ye esteame this thing, when your fayer
wife shall make you a father with a fayer child? When sum little young babe shall
play in your halle which shall resemble you and your wife? Which with a myld
lyspyng, or amyable stam-(merynge shall call you dade. Now add, un to your wyfes
love, ye bond more strong then any adama^te, which not death him self can
braste a sundre.

Oh how blessed (says Flaccus) be they Horace.
whom ye fast knot of wedlock does tey whose steadfast love by no pleit ca^
starte Till only death them tweyne do part. Ye have them that may delyght your
age / yt may close your eyes / yt may do thoffyce of the buryals / in who^e ye
may seem regenerate / whom being a live, ye shall be thought not to have dyed.
Your gooddes which ye have gotten go not to strau^g heirs. Thus, when ye ar
passing out of the world, and have fully executed all to gether, yet not death
him self can seem sharp nor bitter unto you. Age must crepe upon us all /
whether we will or not. By this polecye nature has provided that in out
chylderne and neuewes we may be renewed and florysh fresh again. For who ca^
bear age heuyly when in his son he beholdethe his own vysage that he
himself bare wha^ he was young? Death is p^pared for all. But by this only way
the prouydence of nature assayethe (as it were) a certain immortalite, whyll
she thus makes one thing to issue out of an other (like as a young plant
which is cut of, from ye tree sprigeth freshly up) nor he semethe not to be
utterly quenched, which dies, leuynge issue behynd.

BUt I know well enough The refutation of the inco^modities of marya ge.
what among these, ye mur mure against me. A blessed thing is wedlock, if al
prove acording to the desire. But what if a wayward wife chau^ceth? What if an
unchaste / what if unnatural chylderne? There will run in your mind
thexamples of those whom wedlock have brought to utter destruction. Heap up
as much as ye can, but yet these be ye vices of men and not of wedlock.
Believe me, an evil wife is not wont to chance, but to evil husbondes. Put
this unto it / that it lies in you to choose out a good one. But what if after
the marriages she be mard? Of an evil husband (I will well) a good wife may be
mard. but of a good / the evil is wont to be reformed and mended. We blame
wives falsely. No man (if ye give any credence to me) had ever a shrewe to his
wife, but thrughe his own defaute. And of good pare^tes comu^ly be borne like
chylderne. Howbeit the chyl derne also (how so ever they be borne) communly do
prove such, as they be formed and fashoned in there bryngyng up. Now sir / I
see no cause why ye should fear ielowsye. This is the syknes of folyshe lovers.
The chaste and lawful love knows no ielowsye. What do ye tragedes cum to
your mind? This aduouterous woman stroke in su^der her husbond with an axe.
This poisoned him. That woman with her hateful manners did drive her husbond to
death. Why rather do not Cornelia wife to Ciberius Graccus cum to your
remembrance? Why do not Alcestis so good a wife of not so good an husbond? Why
do stat outher Iulia wife of Pompeius or Portia the wife of Cato run in your
mind? Why do not Artemisea worthy eternal memory? Why do not Hypsicratea wife
to Mithridates king of Pontus? Why com not into your mind yt most gentle
behavior of Tertia Aemilia ye wife of Scipio Africanus? Why do not ye
faythfulnes of Turia? Why do not Lucretia and Lentula cum in mind? Why do not
Arria so hyghly commended of Pliny? Why do not other innumerable, whose honest
and chaste living / and faythfulnes toward their husbands could not be
altered nor corrupted not by death? A rare byrd in earth (ye say) is an honest
woman. And ymagine ye again your self worthy to have a rare wife.

A good woman (says ye wise man) is a great felicite. Be bold to hope oon
worthy for yor manners. And very much (as touching this matter) lies in the
fashonynge of her and in ye behauyng of your self toward her whom ye chose.
But sweter (ye will say) is liberte. Who so ever takes a wife, takes a pair
of fetters which nothing save only death can shake of. What can be sweet to a
man a lone? If liberty be sweet, it were best (by mine advise) to take a
co^paygnion with whom ye may part this so plesau^t a thing. How beit, what is
more free than this bondage, where either is so bond to other that neither would
be enfrau^chysed? Is not every man bound to his friend? Yet no man complayneth
that his liberty is take away. But ye fear lest if Orbitas
death should take away your chylderne ye should fall in to sorrow. If ye fere
to be chylderneles, for this very cause ye ought to mary a wife which only may
be the cause that ye be not chyldernles. But what search ye out so dilygently
(nay so narouly and curiously) all the incomodities of matrimony, as who should
say the sengyll life had no incommodie at all? As who should say, there were
any life of man that is not subject to all the chances of fortune. He must get
him out of the world which will bear no incommodite. That if ye will have
respect to the life in heaven, this life of man is to be said a death / and no
life. But if ye keep your mind within ye bounds of man's estate / nothing is
neither sauffer, neither quieter, neither pleasau^ter, neither amiablear,
neither happyer, than ye wedded life. Mark the thing by ye end. How many se
ye, which have onys assayed wedlock, that go not gredely to it again. Did
not my friend Mauricius (whose excellent pru de^ce is not unknown unto you)
after the death of his wife whom he so singularly loved, marye the next monethe
after a new wife? Not so greatly for thimpaciencie of his lust, but he
thought his life no life without a wife, a sweet company on of al things.
Does not Iouius our friend now woo his fourth wife? So he loved them when
they lived yt he seemed comfortles. So, when one dyed he hated to be a wydower,
as though he fayntly had loved them. But what reason we of honesty and
plesauntnes, when not only profete entysethe but also necessite constrayneth to
wedlock? Take matrimony away, and within few years mankind shall be utterly
gone. Xerxes king of Persea when he beheld out of an high tower the great
multitude of men he could not refrain weapynge, because yt of so many
thousands of men, within three score years none should be left a live. Why the
thing that he understood of his army, do not we consider of al mankind?
Wedlock taken away, who one, of so many regions, provinces, realms, cities,
towns, within an hundredth years shall be left alive? Go we now and auau^ce
bachelarshyp, which brings mankind to destruction. What pestilence, what
plage, can be sent on man either from heaven or from hell more hurtful? What
of any flode can be feared more dangerous? What can be looked for, more heavy
and grievous, though yt fire of Phaeton should cum again when all the world
was destroyed with fyar, And yet (for all that) in such trobelous sesons many
are wont to be left alive, but by bachelarshyp, suerly, nothing can be left.
We se what a route of diseases, how many casualtyes, daily and nyghtly lie in
wayght upon the fewenes of men. How many do the pestylence take away? How
many do ye see swalo we up? How many do batell consume. For I will not speak of
these quotydiane dethes. Death flies about every Where, he ronneth, he
caryeth, he hastes toquenche mankind, and do we yet auaunce bachelarshyp and
flee wedlock? Onles perchance the life of the Essens and Dupolitans (which
do dampne wedlock) do please us, whose pestilente sects be multyplyed and
increased with ungracious people never faylyng. Do we look that god will give
us ye same virtue that he has given (as they say) to the bees, so that
without the co^paynie of woman we might be great with child, and gather with
our mouths seeds of posterite out of the flowers? Do we require that like as
the poets feign yt Minerua issued out of Jupiters brains, so in like manner
chylderne should leap out of our hedys? Or (to be short) that according to the
old fabuls, men should spring out of ye earth, out of stones thrown forth,
out of hard trunkes of trees? Out of the lap of ye earth many things do
spring without our labor. Little plants spring up oftentimes under the
shadow of their mother. But unto man nature has given one only way of
deryuyng issue, which is, that by the mutual labor of man and woman mankind
should be preserved, which if men would flee as ye do, truly these things
which ye so hyghly auau^ce should not be. Ye auaunce bachelarshyp, ye magnify
virginite. But neither bachelars neither virgyns should be if ye take away the
use of wedlock. Why then is virginite preferred? Why is it in so high
reputacion, if it be the destruction of man? It was commended / but for a time,
and but in few, for it pleased god to she we to men a certain token, and as
it were a representacion of the heavenly life where they neither marye nor be
given in marriage. Mat. 22.
But for an example a few be sufficient, a multitude is not profitable. For
like as not al grou^des A symyly tude.
(be they never so rank) be sown to the sustenau^ce of man / but part is let
a lone / part dyght to ye pleasure and feedyng of the eyes. For the very copy
and plenty of the thing in so much arable ground suffers sum part to be
left barren and fruteles. But if none at al were sown, who sees not but that
we must return to ye fruit of trees wherewith they lived in old time before
the inuencion of tyllage. So bachelarshyp in so great a multitude of men / in
a few (I grant) is comme^dable, in all, a thing greatly to be dispraysed.
But admyte yt in other men virginite had ye name of an high virtue, yet in you
suerly it should be vicious. For other men shall seem, to have ente^ded a pureness
of living / ye shall be judged a traiterous murderoure of your lygnage, which,
when ye might have maynteined by honest wedlock, ye have suffered to peryshe by
foul bachelarshyp. Admyt it lawful, out of a great number of chylderne to
offer one virgyne to god. The vplandyshe men which dwell in the country offer
to god the first of their fruit / not their whole croppe. But ye, must remember
that ye only be left the last / and the leuynges of your stock. And I pray
you what diversity is there whether ye slay or refuse to save him which may by
you only be saved and easly saved? But the example of your sister A violation
provoke you to chastity. Nay, for this very cause only, ye ought most
chefely to eschew bachelarshyp. For now ye understand that the hope (which
before was commune to you both) of preserving your stock is reuolued and
cast whole upon your back. Let us pardone the frail kind of the woman / let
us pardon the vndescrete age. The maid ouercomen with sorrow did a mys. Thrughe
the entysme^tes of folyshe women and folyshe friars she has cast her self
hedlong. Ye being elder must needs remember that ye be a man. She would needs
dye with her auncestres, but your labor must be that they dye not. Your
sister has withdrawn her self of her duty, remember now that ye ought to
fulfill the parts of two. The doughtars of Loath stycked not to lie with their
father, iudgyng it better to maintain they? lygnage by unlawful and
abominable inceste than to suffer it clean to fall away. And will not ye then
by matrimony which is, honest, holy, chaste, without offense, with high pleasure
mayn tayne your stock, which shall else be utterly extyncte?

UUherfore let us suffer them to follow the life of Hippolytus, The co^ clusiou.
let them (I say) embrace bachelarshyp, which either can be husbands but
fathers can be none, or whose bare living is not able to bring up chylderne /
or whose stock may be mainteyned by other, or suerly is such, that better it
were for the common weal to be quenshed, than mayn teyned. But ye wha^
(wytnessyng the physician a man neither unlearned nor no liar) ye seem by your
nature very apt to engendre much posterite, when ye have great enheritau^ce,
coming also of a stock, so good, so noble, that without great sin and ye
great hurt of the common weal it can not be quenched, furthermore sithe your
age is iusty and floryshynge, nor ye lack not the beauty of ye body, and when
there is offered you a wife, so lusty a maid, so well borne as may be, thaste,
sobre, demure, godly, having an angels face / with fair lands, when your
friends beseech you, your kynred weape, your affinite call on / your natyue
country requires / the very dead corses of your auncestres rysyng out of
their graves obteste the same of you, do ye yet tarry, do ye yet think upon
bachelarshyp? If a thing scase honest should be required of you / if an hard
thing, yet either the requests of your friends, either the love of your stock
ought to ouercum your mind. How much then, more right and conuenicnt is it,
that the tears of your friends / the affection of your country / the natural
love of your auncestres ought to obtain yt of you, whereunto gods laws and
mannys

exhort / nature pricketh / reason leadethe / honesty allurethe / so many
commodities provoke / necessite also co^streyneth? But now we have brought
forth arguments abundantly enough. I trust long ago (through mine
aduertysme^t) ye have changed your purpose / and applied your mind to
holsommer counselles. Fare ye well.

TELOS.
Imprynted at London in Flestrete at the sign of the George by me Robert
Redman. CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.


