THE SEVEN SPIRITVALL Exercises of a devout Soul.

CONTAINING the Life and Death of our Savior CHRIST: compiled in seven
Meditations, replenished with most godly, and devout motions, and serving for
the seven days in the Week.

PSALM 119.15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the great
South-doore of Paul's, and at Britains Bursse. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mr. William Bull, MAYOR of the City of WELS, I. B.
Wishes all prosperity in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to
come.
IF all men are by nature and duty bound to gratify their wel-deseruing
Friends, (most dear, and much respected UNCLE) then must I not ouerslip time
to make requital of your manifold kindnesses, by some slender gift, such as
the zeal of my duty, and the ability of my mind is able to perform. And
now to make it appear, not so much in complements as in action, I have sent
you a small Treatise, which (in the judgment of some Divines, whom I reverence
in my heart) is, for matter, of worthy respect; for method, plain; for
practice, godly; and (I hope) for the fruits of it, profitable: for what of
higher regard, of more facility, of deeper devotion, and of greater comfort,
then the meditation of the History of our Savior CHRIST, which you see here
parted into seven days practice, and may be the Christians daily task. I
will say no more of it, only use it, peruse it, practice it: and after your
charitable censure, if it may seem worthy your patronage, claim it as your
own; your own you may then call it, for without you, it had never seen the
Sun, nor the Sun it. The reflexe of your favors toward me, and the
undeserved kindness of Some that are near allied to you (whom I only point
at, R. B. etc.
I need no more, as also the godly disposition of you all in matters of piety
and devotion) have called this light out of darkness, and made it (that long
has wandered from the Author) like a wearyed Pilgrim to fly to you for
protection.

As you love Christ, so favor it, and as you favor godliness, so love It.
Make it your daily, Viz. This Book.
though not your whole, task: and resolve of this, that Christ calls men, as
well to Mount Tabor by divine Meditation, to admire his goodness and glory; as
Caesar calls them to bear the Sword, for the defense and countenance of
authority.

Thus craving your favorable acceptance of this poor mite, undertaking the
patronage of the same, I wish you all health and happiness. Leaving this to
you, with the remembrance of my humble duty.

London, this 3. of October. 1612.

Your Cosen in all service to be commanded. I. B.

THE PREFACE to the seven Meditations, of the Life, and Death of our SAVIOVR
CHRIST.
AMongst all spiritual Exercises, (if we may give credit to an Ancient Writer)
there is none more profitable, In Prol. of the Medit. of the Life of Jesus.
then the Meditations of the Life and Death of our Savior. For as they work
in us, a despising, and contempt of all visible things; so do they arm us
against all the power of the world, the flesh, and the Devil: They purchase
familiarity with God; they procure his love toward us; they make us
confident, and they bring our souls to the Paradise of all virtues, and height
of all heavenly perfections.

For, where may we find the force, virtue, and true effects of pouerti-,
humility, patience, meekness, love, obedience, and other celesliall Graces,
more perfectly displayed, then in the life of our Savior. Therefore Bernard
speaks rightly, when he says: That man that would get unto himself virtue,
labors in vain, if he seek it any where else, or desire it of any other,
then of him that is Lord of all virtues, whose doctrine is the rule of
Wisdom, whose mercy is the work of Justice, whose life is the example of
Temperance, and whose death is the perfect president of Patience.

In this Exercise this sweet and holy Teacher spent and consumed his whole
time, making benefit and fruit of the godly collections, which he gathered
together of the anxieties and bitterness of Christ his Passion: in whose
person he pasionately speaks; Sup. Can. Sermon. 63.
O homo, vide quae pro te patior, non est dolor sicut dolor meus. Whereof also
he was not at any time unmindful, as he witnesses of himself.

Therefore a man shall do a work of exceeding worth, if once (at the least)
in every week, either by prayer, or Meditation, he run over the whole life
of our Savior Jesus: seeing there is no prayer more acceptable unto him, then
that, in which is made a remembrance and commemoration of his life, and death,
of his merits, and benefits which he has done for us.

And that this may be done more fitly, the Author has comprehended the Life,
Death, and Resurrection of Christ, in seven Prayers or Meditations following,
that they might serve for the seven days in the week; and the same in manner
of a thanksgiving, seeing there is no benefit for which we owe greater thanks
unto Almighty God. Then let God have the glory, that requires no more of us,
then the Confession and remembrance of his benefits, optima beneficiorum custos
est ipsa memoria beneficiorum, Hom 25. sup. Mat.
and perpetua confessio gratiarum, says Chrysostom; The best preserver of the
graces of God is the mention and confession of his graces.

SEVEN MEDITATIONS, of the Life of JESUS.
MEDITAT. I.
Christ descends from heaven, and is conceived in the Virgins Womb.
I Render unto thee immortal thanks (oh sweet Jesus) that for the love of me,
did descend from thy Regal Palace, and high bosom of thy Father, into this
low veil of all miseries, and vouchsafedst to take upon thee humane flesh, in
the holy womb of thy blessed Mother, Mat. 1.18.
I beseech thee (O Lord) to prepare my heart a Tabernacle for thee, and to that
end to adorn the same with all manner of virtues, that thou may therein make
perpetual habitation.

Oh would to God it might please thy goodness, to make my heart to be such
toward thee, that I be not afraid to inuit thee, but that thou may come to
dwell in me, and that I may be fit to receive thee with spiritual delight,
Luke 19.6
as Zacheus which received thee joyfully: and that thou may sweetly rest in
my heart without end. Oh that I could embrace thee with the arms of strong
affection, that at any time, I be not drawn from thee by thought, word, deed,
or vain imagination.

Mary visits Elizabeth.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet Jesus) for that after thou were conceived in the
womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, thou willedst her, by thy Angel Gabriel,
Luke 1.39
to go by the Mountains and visit Elizabeth that she might salute, and
congratulate with her, for that GOD had made her barren womb to bear. Thou
did not disdain to be shut nine Months in the glorious bowels of thy
Mother. Therefore I beseech thee to give me the grace of true Humility, and so
to imprint the same in my heart, that thou may always find me ready in
those things that appertain unto the godly worship and service of thee.

Grant (O Lord) that my heart may still disdain all worldly things, and that I
may continually desire to rest and dwell in thee, and that my heart may be
humbled to endure any low estate for thee, that willingly enduredst the lowest
degree of humility for my sake. Phil. 2.7.8


Christ is borne.
I Give thee thanks (O my sweet Jesus) which art borne of the most holy
Virgin, without damage of Virgins purity, and who laid thee straightway,
being borne, in a Manger or Cribbe, as poor and mortal; and humbly worshipped
thee as immortal God, Luke 1.46
and Creator of all things. I pray thy divine mercy, that thou would
vouchsafe to be continually borne in me by a new desire of Charity, and that
thou alone may be my whole desire, my only fulness, and firm hope of my
heart. Let it be pleasing unto thee, that I always seek thee, always think
on thee, and always fervently love thee.

Christ is wrapped in base clothing.
I Give unto thee infinite thanks (O sweet Jesus) that being borne, wast
subject to the bitterness of the air and cold seasons, and yet createdst the
air, and orderest the seasons: thou did not disdain to be wrapped in base
clothing, and to partake of my weakness and misery, to suck virgins Milk
from the breast of thy glorious Mother, as the innocent Lamb of God, in the
form of a poor and simple Babe; when thou wast indeed the true omnipotent
God. Thou becamest poor for our sakes, that art indeed the King of heaven and
earth, that we through thy poverty, 2 Cor. 8.9
might be made rich.

Grant then (O Lord) that in thy sight, I may always be a true Infant in
Humility, thy Child in Innocence; and that I may be always truly poor in
spirit, but rich in grace, and plentiful in goodness. Grant that for the love
of thee, I refuse nothing in this World, that is either bitter, or laborious;
that I love nothing in this world, but thee; desire to possess nothing above
thee; nor esteem any worldly thing in comparison of thee.

Christ is worshipped of the Shepherds.
I Give thee thanks (O bountiful Jesus) that as soon as thou wast borne, was
celebrated with the sweet Hymns of holy Angels, Luke 2.14
and worshipped of the Shepherds, Luke 2.20
with great joy and admiration, whom thou did choose to publish thy praise,
non sapientes, Beda.
sed simplices, qui fucare audita nescirent; not the wisemen of the world, but
plain and simple men, that knew to publish no more then they heard.

Give me grace (O Lord) to persevere always in thy praise with gladness, that
I may seek therein the society of the godly, and in seeking may find thee;
and (found) may joy in thee; and ioying, may enjoy thee eternally. Finally,
that my joy may burst forth with them, to publish abroad these glad tidings to
the comfort of others, as they have comforted me.

Christ is Circumcised, and called Jesus.
BE ever praised and glorified (O sweet Jesus) for that the eight day (according
to the custom of other Infants) thou would be circumcised, Luke 2.21.
and did begin to shed thy blood for the love of me, in thy most tender
age, and that thou would comsort me with ineffable consolation, were called
Jesus, a Savior; Mat. 1.21.
to save me, that otherwise had utterly perished.

I beseech thee (O Lord) to account me in the number of thy elect, and to
write my name in the book of the blessed. And that thou would circumcise my
heart from all superfluity, that is, from idle and hurtful speeches, from
unjust works, and from impure and vain thoughts, and cogitations. Set a watch
before mine eyes, keep the door of my lips, and so search my heart, that I may
confine my self within the bounds of thy will. Oh my Redeemer, thou art called
Jesus, that is, a Savior: for to thee only it belongs to give salvation.
Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) that the remembrance of this sweet Name of
Savior, may expel from me all despair, al inordinate faintness of heart,
and sloathfulnesse; that it may endue me with a steadfast hope of thy mercy,
and may save me from all the power of sin, the rage of Satan, and the
deceitful delights of this present world.

Christ is worshipped of the Wise men.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet Jesus) that were found of the Magi, or wisemen,
seeking thee with sincere faith, and inward devotion, by the appearing of a
Star; who falling down upon their knees before thee, offered Gold,
Frankencense, and Mirrhe.

Grant (O Lord) that I may seek thee in the company and society of those
Wisemen, not in Bethlehem, but even in the center of my heart, and (being
found in the same) I may worship thee in spirit and in truth, that I may offer
unto thee, the Gold of pure Charity, Gregor. in Homil.
the Incense of true Devotion, and the Mirrhe of perfect Mortification:
finally, grant me grace, that with readiness of heart, and willingness of
mind, I may bestow all my strength, and power in the imitation and following
of thy most holy life. And if at any time I err from thy truth, make (O Lord)
thy Word to be the star of my guide to lead me till I find thee.

Jesus is presented in the Temple.
I Give thee thanks (O Lord Jesus Christ) for that thou (to leave us the
example of Obedience and Humility) would be subject to the Law for the love
of us, Luke 2.22.
for that thou would be presented in the Temple in the Arms of thy blessed
Mother, and would the Oblation of two Turtle Doves (not of him that was
rich, Leu. 12.6.
but of a poor man) to be offered for thee. Luke 2.25.38.
When Simeon with Anna the Prophetess rejoicing at thy presence, did give a
worthy testimony of thy glory.

Grant that it may please thee (O Lord) not to suffer the least thought or
imagination of vanity at any time hereafter, to enter into my heart, and more
especially, that I be not lifted up with pride, nor carried with presumption. O
how happy were I if all manner of presumption, were banished from me, and all
desire of worldly favors, together with the inordinate conceit of
Selfe-affection, were extinguished in me?

Grant to me thy grace (O Lord) that I may be careless of vain oftentations,
that I submit my self to all men, and willingly obey them for thy ordinance
sake. And as thou (O Lord) came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, so
direct and sanctify my heart, and help me with thy righteousness, that I may
be obedient to thy Law, and perform those duties in thy sight, as may please
thee, and stand for thy glory.

Jesus flies into Egypt.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet Jesus) for that even in thy minority thou
did begin to suffer persecution, and disdainedst not to fly into Egypt,
to avoid the bloody hands of Herod, Mat. 2.13.
though thou might have crushed him with thy Rod of Iron, and dashed him in
pieces like a Potters vessel.

Grant me grace that in all my persecutions, tribulations and temptations, I
may wholly fly unto thee, as my only refuge; only seek thee, as my chief
treasure; and call upon thee, as the only hope of my salvation. And how often
soever thou imposest any of those crosses upon me, grant that I may endure
them with all patience; abide them with all tranquillity, and suffer them with
all gladness of heart, giving thee continual thanks, for all things that may
please thee to appoint to happen unto me: and in every estate to learn me to
be content: Lastly, guide me with thy free Spirit, that at the summons of thy
Angels, or at the voice of thy word in the mouth of thy Ministers, I may be
ready and willing to rise from the bloody pursuit of Sin and Satan, that
seek to destroy my soul.

Jesus sits among the Doctors.
I Likewise give thanks to thee (o Lord Jesus) for that thy Mother sought thee
with great sorrow, when thou remainedst in the Temple, and after three days
found thee with great joy, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, Luke 2.46.
whom thou did hear, and disputedst with them, astonishing their hearts
with thy great Wisdom, which they could not in any wise resist. O Lord, for
thy goodness, grant me, that I be never separated from thee, nor thou from
me: Put from me all sloathfulnesse and fear: expel the coldness of
affection from my heart, which is so much displeasing unto thee; and give me a
perfect devotion, and an ardent thirst after thy righteousness, which may so
possess my Soul, that I never grow faint, or weary in serving thee. And if
at any time I find not the comfort of thy presence; so touch my heart (o Lord)
with an ardent desire of thee, that I never cease till I have found the comfort
of thy presence again, and may joyfully say with thy Spouse; Cant. 3.4
I have found him whom my Soul loved. Amen.

MEDITAT. 2.
Jesus is Baptized.
I Give THEE thanks (o most sweet JESUS) for that thou would be baptized,
entering into the River Iordaine, by the hands of S. John Baptist, Mat. 3.15.
thy Servant, and forerunner, to fulfill all righteousness. Vouchsafe (o
Lord) to purge me in this life, and to make me clean from all my sins:
Confirm in me this thy Covenant of grace, and seal unto me the assurance of
righteousness and washing away of my sins by thy blood. Let me surfeit with the
love of thee, and with the vehement desire of thy heavenly kingdom. Fashion me
(o Lord) to thine own will and pleasure, before my Soul depart from the
imprisonment of my body, that I presume not to dispute with thee, but willingly
to submit my self to thy holy ordinance: That leaving this pilgrimage, I may
forthwith be with thee, that I may always see thee, and always enjoy the
happy eternity, which has no end.

Jesus is tempted of Satan in the Desert.
I Give thee thanks (O bountiful Jesus) that being in the Desert, did fast
forty days and forty nights, and afterward sufferedst thy self to be
tempted of Satan, Mat. 4.2.3
and when he was overcome, the Angels came, and ministered unto thee.

Grant (O Lord) that by thy grace, I may punish and chastise the wickedness of
my flesh, and all vicious affects thereof, and that (with the gift of
perseverance) I may exercise my self in continual fasting, watching, praying,
and other godly and spiritual Exercises. But chiefly grant (O Lord) that by
the help of thy grace, I may be free from the sin of Gluttony, and from all
other deceits and suggestions of the Devil. Let no temptation prevail against
me, nor be able to separate me from thee. But rather grant that all these
things may give greater occasion, that I may be the more firmly and strongly
united and joined unto thee, and that I may with more heedfulnes, watch against
all the subtle sleights of the Tempter, to follow thy example in resisting,
and to return with thee in triumph.

Jesus suffers diverse labors and necessities.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet lesu) that for the love of me, have been
afflicted in this world with infinite sorrows, and sundry necessities, as
heat, cold, hunger, thirst, labor, and weariness, with diverse watchings,
travels, persecutions, and all kind of tribulations.

Grant (o Lord) that for thy sake, I may sustain all adversities with
gladness, as imposed upon me, by the work of thy hands, for the just merit
of my sins. And that I may abide them with great patience.

Grant, that in all estates, as well in adversity, as prosperity; in grief,
as joy; in troubles, as tranquilities; I may still persevere in thee, and never
start or swerue from thee, but that in all things, thy will may be my will:
when thou strikest, let me not murmr against thee: when thou do afflict me
with poverty, and loss of worldly comforts, then lift up my heart, that I may
repose my wealth and my comfort in thee, o blessed Savior.

Jesus prays and preaches.
I Give thee thanks (O most sweet JESUS) for that thou did perform many
things for my sake, whilst thou did seek the conversion and safeguard of my
Soul, and in no wise did omit the office, and duty of a good Pastor: but
(even as a true Shepherd, and Savior of the World) did watch in praying,
and weary thy self in traveling from Province to Province, and from place to
place, to preach and teach, and publish thy heavenly doctrine.

I beseech thee (O LORD) to impart this grace unto me, that at any time
hereafter, I be never found slack, or sloathfull in thy service, but that I
may be ever ready and forward to do al good duties, respecting thy glory, and
the good of my brethren, Grant, that I may fervently thirst after the saving
health of all people, and that I may always have a desire and zeal of thy
name, and then shall I stand for the defense of Religion, and refuse no labor
or study, to promote thy glory.

Jesus is conversant amongst men.
I Give thee thanks (O benign Jesus) for that by conuersing amongst men, thou
would cheerfully comfort them, and cure their infirmities, of thy great
mercy.

Grant me (O Lord) that I may have a heart full of loving affections toward
all men, that I may have compassion on all that I perceive to be in affliction.
And grant me thy grace (O LORD) that I may esteem other men's miseries as mine
own, that I may bear with other men's imperfections, with a sincere heart, and
without any passion of anger, hatred, or contempt; and that I may help and
relieve their necessities after my ability, or at least, have a fellow-feeling
and touch of their miseries. O Lord, purge my soul perfectly from all vicious
concupiscences and vain desires, which have any domination in my heart, that
the same (being healed of all these evils, and freed from all these
impediments) may safely fly unto heaven, and never rest before it may be fit
by pure love and affection, to come unto thy heavenly embracements.

Jesus suffers many things for us.
I Give thee thanks (O good Jesus) that for the love which thou bear unto
me, thou did suffer innumerable injuries, blasphemies, slanders and
persecutions, and even of those chiefly, on whom thou bestowedst infinite
benefits and blessings.

I beseech thee (O Lord) to give me a pure, innocent, and simple heart, that I
may love my enemies, and that from my heart I may lament their evils and
wickedness. That I may always excuse them if they trespass in any thing, and
that (intending good for evil) I may truly imitate thy perfect charity and
patience.

Jesus comes into Jerusalem.
I Give thee thanks (O most loving JESUS) for that thou came to Jerusalem,
Mat. 21.5.
humble and meek, riding upon an Asse-colt; and on them that came to meet
thee, singing with pleasant Hymns, and glorious praises, thou sheddedst forth
tears full of bitterness, which thy grief did express, that was conceived
for the loss of so many souls, and the destruction of so beautiful a City.

Give me (O Lord) an inward knowledge, and feeling of mine own estate, that I
may wholly humble my self, and openly acknowledge my vileness. That I may so
far despise my self, that the flatterings, commendations, and applauses of men
be not (hereafter) pleasing unto me, but that I may daily mourn and bewail,
as well the sin of my neighbor, as the impiety of my self, still reckoning
and reputing his evil as mine own, Ier. 9.1.
that mine head may be filled with the waters of bitter sorrow, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, lamenting the destruction that thou have threatened against
unpenitent persons, because they know not those things which belong to their
peace. Luke 19.42


MEDITAT. III.
Jesus washes the feet of his Disciples.
I Give THEE thanks (O Lord Jesus) for that thou (to prescribe an end of the
old Law) did eat the Pascall Lamb in Jerusalem with thy Disciples, and to
give an example to them of thy great humility, and ineffable love, did
wash their feet, kneeling.

I beseech thee (O Lord) that this example may pierce my heart, and may
suppress all presumption and pride in me. Give me (O Lord) all humble
submission, by which I may subject my self to all men, not with constraint,
but willingly. Give me also perfect Obedience, by which I may fully satisfy
thy Commandments, and the ruling power of them that command in thy Name.
Stir up in me (O Lord) a most fervent Charity, by which I may love thee and
my neighbor with true pureness and simplicity. Let not the pride of my heart
carry me to disdain my brethren, but to endeavor my self to do them all
christian service, whether it be in the refreshing of their bodies, or
ministering spiritual comfort unto their souls.

Jesus ordayneth the Eucharist.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet Jesus) that of thy most excellent Charity, thou
have ordained the Sacrament of thy body and blood, Mat. 26.26
and of thy unspeakable bounty have given thy self to be food for us: and for
that also thou have not refused to be here spiritually present with us, to the
end of the world.

O Lord, excite in me (I beseech thee) a lively desire, and most ardent thirst
of this Sacrament. Grant, that I may come unto this Table of life, receive
thee, by a lively Faith, with chaste Love, with low Humility, with Purity of
heart, and with Sincerity of mind. Grant also, that my Soul may so thirst
after thee, and be so wounded with thy love, that at the length, I may be
admitted to possess thy heavenly pleasures, for the honor and glory of thy
Name.

Jesus comfort his Disciples at his last Supper.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet Jesus) for that being willing to leave the world,
thou did admonish and comfort thy Disciples with words full of holy
affection, and by earnest prayer did commend them to thy father, John 17.9.11.
showing thereby, with what love thou did embrace them, and all those that
should believe in thee by their doctrine. I beseech thee (O Lord) that my heart
may feel a sweetness in thy words, and that they may be always more pleasant
unto me, then the honey or the honey-combe. O Lord, let the spirit of thy
affection reign in me, that I may wholly transform my self into thy love.
Direct all my actions, that in me, and of me, always thy will may be done.

Jesus prays to his Father in the Garden.
I Give thee thanks (O loving lesus) that falling on the Earth, (thy Arms
spread forth) thou did pray unto thy Father, commending thy self wholly into
his hands, and praying that in all things not thy will but the will of thy
Father might be fulfilled. Luke 22.42
I beseech thee (o Lord) that in all tribulation, and necessity, I may run
unto thee by hearty prayer, that I may believe in thy providence wholly,
without election, or choice of my own will, or the expectation of any proper
commodity.

Grant that I may not at any time shun adversities, nor be withheld from any
good enterprise by the same. But that whatsoever shall happen unto me, I may
take it patiently, bearing and suffering all things with an humble and quiet
heart, as sent unto me by thy holy hands. And that I may account them not as
thy heavy judgments, to confound me utterly; but as thy chastisements, to
correct me, and that not in thy fury, but in thy Fatherly love and goodness.

Jesus is apprehended.
I Give thee thanks (o holy Jesus) for that thou would be taken with armed
men, and be bound by them as a wicked man and malifactor, and be brought before
Annas, Mat. 26.47
and did not abhor to abide the Judgment and sentence against thee. Oh
wonderful meekness of my Redeemer, whilst thou were apprehended, bound,
scorned, and evil entreated, thou did neither lament, murmr nor grudge,
but holding thy peace, did patiently follow them that did lead thee, draw
thee, and weary thee, thou did obey them that commanded thee, and with
great patience sufferedst the torments which they inflicted upon thee, when
thou could have had a legion of Angels to have rescued thee, and have
crushed the backs of thine enemies. O Lord, grant that such an example of thy
great virtue and patience, may shine in me, for the glory and honor of thy
most holy Name.

Jesus is smitten on the face.
I Give thee thanks (o amiable Jesus) that standing before the proud and
stiff-necked High Priest, no otherwise, then if thou had been a vile and
abject person, Luke 22.64
thou were stricken, and most patiently did suffer a cruel blow, which one
of his wicked ministers struck on thy face. Oh Lord, I beseech thee, mortify
in me all wrath and indignation; take from me all manner of envy and hate, and
extinguish in me all desires of revenge, that when any one does wrong and
iniure me, I may not be troubled or molested, neither devise at any time to be
revenged, but suffering all things, with patience, for thy sake, and by thy
example, I may for thy love, render to every man good for evil. Amen.

MEDITAT. IIII.
Jesus is diversely molested the night in which he is apprehended.
I Give THEE thanks (O sweet JESUS) that in the night of thy Passion, thou
were scorned, and deluded, Luke 22. and Chap. 23.
smitten of thine enemies, and diversely injured and molested. Thou know (O
LORD) how grievous and troublesome it is to me, to bear and suffer the least
wrong or injury. Thou know that my will and desire is slow and slack to
all virtue, and that all good affections and appetites wax cold in me. O Lord,
for thy mercy, help my infirmity: mortify in me all carnal affections, as
heat of anger, hope of revenge, and quicken thy graces within me.

Grant, that for no adversity, my mind be thrown down, or dejected. Help me
that I faint not under the burden of tribulations, which shall fall upon me;
neither let me repine at the injuries done unto me by others; but giving thee
thanks for all things, I may refer all things to the honor and glory of thy
Name.

Jesus is accused before Pilate.
I Give thee thanks (O Lord Jesus) that standing before Pontius Pilate, Mar.
12.17
thou did not answer unto the false complaints and accusations wherewith
they did iniure thee, did pass over all things with silence, even like a
meek lamb, which opens not his mouth, but is mute before the shearer.

Grant me (o Lord) that the reproaches, murmurings, or reuilings of wicked men,
make me not to swel against them, or puff me up with envy, but that being
taught by thy example, I may overcome all them, when the case so requires, by
silence and taciturnitie, that slander or impeach my good name. Give me the
grace of perfect Humility, that I may neither desire that men praise me, nor
be afraid to be dispraised for thee: But to comfort me with the reward of
blessedness, that thou have assured them that are reviled, and suffer
persecution for righteousness sake; namely, that theirs is the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 5.10.11.12.
and quod eis magna est merces in coelis; that great is their reward in heaven.

Jesus brought before Herod.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet JESUS) King of Heaven and Earth, that with great
stir and fury of the people, thou were brought before Herod, Luke 23.7.
by the commandment of Pilate.

Give me fortitude (o Lord) that persecutions may not confound me, nor the
injuries of my enemies provoke me to anger, nor that their impudency make me
to blush, or be ashamed, but that I may bear all things with meekness and
patience, and overcome with silence, according to the prescript of thy
Commandments; remembering always whose cause I have in hand, and that thou
denyest them before thy Father, that deny thee before men. Strengthen me (o
Lord) in thy cause and quarrel, for thou art greater then the Princes of the
earth, and can make thy servants to stand against them.

Jesus is accused before Herod.
I Give thee thanks (O holy JESUS) that standing before Herod, Luke 23.9 10.
and accused before the chief Priests and Elders of many crimes and
iniquities, thou would answer to nothing, but did justify thy cause by
holding thy peace.

Give me the gift of silence (o Lord) that I have not at any time, a desire to
speak vain, idle, or unclean speeches, nor that I waste not my time in
discoursing of barraine and unfruitful matters; but grant that my tongue utter
nothing that is not just, honest, profitable, and consonant to thy holy will.
Let me detest (o Lord) the vice of backebiting, and that I be still pleased to
hear and speak well of all men: And when they shall band themselves to plot
my destruction, yet make me to pray for them; and in all things to be mild and
merciful, Luke 6.36
as my heavenly father is merciful.

Jesus is judged more wicked then Barrabas.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet Jesus) that being compared with that infamous
murderer Barrabas, Mark 15.15. Act. 3.14.
thou were judged worse, and more unworthy of life, then he: so that homycide
was set at liberty, and thou (the author of life) condemned to dye. O King of
eternal glory, what greater infamy could thy majesty be afflicted with? From
hence (O LORD) from hence it appears, that thou art that lively stone
disallowed of men, which God nevertheless has chosen to himself, and placed
in the head corner.

Grant (o Lord) that I may prefer nothing before thee, that for any thing I
be not changed from thee, but that I may account all things as vile and base
that are compared unto thee. Grant, that the poison of envy never infect my
mind, but that I may always rest in thee, and place my salvation in thee.

Jesus is whipped.
Jesus, I give thee thanks, that being spoiled of thy garments, Mar. 15.15
thou sufferedst, thy chaste, holy, and naked flesh to be looked upon, and
afterward would abide to be scourged, and whipped, that by thy wounds our
wounds might be healed.

O Lord, despoyle my heart of all unclean cogitations: dis-robe me of the old
man with all his works, and cloth me with the new man, which is created to
thy image and similitude, in Justice and holiness, and grant that with all
patience and humility, I may abide the scourge of thy fatherly visitation.

Jesus is crowned with thorns.
I Give thee thanks (O bountiful Jesus) for that thou were so diversely illuded
after so great enuies, so many wounds, Mar. 15.17
and after thy blood so plentifully shed through thy whole body; and to thy
greater reproach, they attyred thee with a purple garment, and put a crown of
thorns upon thy head, with a Reed in thy hand, in stead of a Scepter, and
bending their knees saluted thee as King (or rather mocked thee) saying; Hail
King of the Jews.

Let (o Lord) the memory of this miserable Tragedy be ever imprinted in my
heart, and never blotted out of my remembrance. Fix thy charity in my mind,
that I may only love thee: think of thee, and of thy injuries; and so, ever
rest and depend on thee. That neither tribulation, miseries, nor persecutions,
separate me from thee: neither let it be grievous unto me at any time, if I be
despised, contemned, mocked, and derided of men for thy sake.

Jesus speaks to the women.
I Give thee thanks (O good Jesus) that in this laborsome journey, when thou
were brought forth to be crucified, thou did lovingly admonish the women
that were lamenting, Luke 23.28
not to pour forth their plaints over thee, but over themselves and their
children.

Grant (o Lord) that I may shed the tears of love and compassion so
abundantly, that the hardness of my heart may be mollified, and made
acceptable in the sight of thy Majesty. Grant (o Lord) that being wholly
inflamed with the love of thee, I may little or nothing esteem of worldly
causes, but that I may embrace thee, only love thee, and rest in thee, world
without end. Amen.

MEDITAT. V.
Jesus drinks the Vinegar mixed with gall.
I Give THEE thanks (O bountiful Jesus) that thy bones being wearied, Mat.
27.34
thy body being weakened, and thy self overmuch pressed with the weight of
thy tortures and sorrows, at length thou came unto the place of sacrifice,
where thou were found wholly afflicted, and almost killed with thirst; at which
time those barbarous and wicked Soldiers offered thee Vinegar mixed with gall
to drink.

Let it please thee (o Lord) that the remembrance of this Cup may extinguish in
me the inordinate concupiscence of gluttony, and delights of the flesh; and
grant, that at any time I give not consent to filthy and unlawful pleasures,
but give me the necessary virtue of Temperance, that all other appetites and
delights being suppressed, I may only hunger and thirst after thee, and place
my whole pleasures in thee.

Christ is crucified.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet JESUS) that were cruelly distract and handled:
when they came to crucify thee, Mat. 27.35
did dest also suffer that thy holy hands and feet should be nailed and
fastened to the Cross.

Grant me (o Lord) that with a faithful and acceptable heart, I may always
be mindful of that thy most ardent charity, by which thou were moved so
lovingly to stretch forth thy arms, and open thy hands to be nailed, and to
endure such horrible torments.

Arise (O Lord) and wound my heart with perfect charity, and fill all my senses
with thy love and affection, that at any time my desires and cogitations be not
separated from thee.

Jesus hangs upon the Cross.
I Give thee thanks (O most holy Jesu) that for three hours space thou
did hang upon the Cross, Ioh. 19.18
molested with many and intolerable infamies, abundantly shedding thy blood,
and in all thy members sustaining immeasurahle forrowes. Fasten (O Lord) my
wretched Soul (which lies prostrate on the ground) to the same Cross: purge
the same from uncleanness of Sin, and filthy desires, washing it with the
flowing springs of thy precious blood, which yields life and salvation.
Refuse not (o Lord) to cleanse me with the same blood, to sanctify and make me
pure with that most precious liquour of life. Offer the same (o Lord) unto thy
Father in remedy and full satisfaction of my sins and iniquities. Grant (O
Lord) I befeech thee, that my heart may taste, and my soul may drink of the
sweet drops of that thy precious blood.

Jesus hangs between two Thieves.
I Give thee thanks (O sweet Jesus) that for the love of me thou would be
hanged between two Thieves, Mat. 27.38
and be also accounted like unto them, that by this thy merueilous humility,
and patience, thou might heal and utterly destroy our haughty pride and
presumption.

Grant (o Lord) so to exalt my spirit, that I may despise all the things of
this world, and that I may only behold thee, only love thee, that I may never
meditate of any thing, but that thou (o LORD) and thy sufferings may be fresh
bleeding in my heart; that I may only think of thee, only talk of thee,
delight my self in thee, and that all my actions be in thee, and by thee, and
that nothing may satisfy my mind without thee.

Jesus prays for them that crucify him.
I Give thee thanks (O beloved Jesus) that were so good to them that handled
thee in such hard measure, and did also pray unto thy Father for them that
crucified thee, Luke 23.34
saying; Forgive them (Father) for they know not what they do.

Give me grace (O Lord) that I may have true patience and meekness; by which
being armed (according to the example which thou have given me, and the
commandment which thou have left me) I may love my enemies, and do good to
them that hate me, and that I may pray unto thee for them, that thou forgive
all their injuries.

Jesus is scoffed on the Cross.
I Give thee thanks (O bountiful IESV) that were scorned and despised of
thine enemies, Luke 23.36
and sufferedst so many injuries and blasphemies, even at that time, in which
they inflicted such ineffable griefs and sorrows on the cross upon thy naked
body.

Grant me grace, (O Lord) that being mindful of the humility which thou
did suffer, and patience with which thou did abide so great dolours and
infamies, I may also with the like sufferance endure all aduerfities,
perseuering with thee (even unto death) in the cross of patience. Let no force
of temptation, no tempest of tribulation, nor no affliction of injuries
withdraw me from any good purpose begun. Let neither life nor death, things
present, nor things to come, nor any creature separate me from thee.

Jesus promises Paradise to one of the Thieves.
I Give thee thanks (O excellent IESV) that did also suffer the injuries and
blasphemies of one of the Thieves, Mat. 27.38
and to the other that confessed his sins unto thee, and set forth thy
innocence with a pure Faith, did promise the glory of Paradise.

Oh happy me, if I might ever become so blessed, as to be so respected with
the eyes of thy mercy, with which thou did behold that happy Thief; and to
live so innocently, by the help of thy grace, that at the end of my life, I may
hear this thy most sweet saying: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise!
Amen.

MEDITAT. VI.
Jesus complains that he is forsaken of his Father.
I Give THEE thanks (o most sweet Jesus) that thy Wounds being opened, thy head
crowned with thorns, thy hands and feet fixed to the Cross, Mat. 27.46
thou did say; Oh God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

Work in me (o Lord) that in all adversities and temptations, I may fly unto
thee my loving Father, and (distrusting in my self) may only trust in thee,
and wholly resign my self into thy hands.

Grant (O Lord) I beseech thee, to wound the inward parts of my Soul, with the
remembrance of thy wounds. Let them be imprinted in the closet of my heart, and
so let me be satisfied with thee, that I may think of none but thee, nor
seek any other then thee, that seeking, I may find thee; and found, I may
possess thee for ever.

Jesus thirsts upon the Cross.
I Give thee thanks (O Lord Jesus Christ) that having thy body weakened, and
dry, by reason of thy most grievous torments, and great effusion of thy blood,
did vehemently thirst, Ioh. 19.28
and burning with desire of our salvation, did say, I thirst.

Grant (O Lord) that I may ardently thirst after thy honor, and the salvation
of Souls. Let me wholly occupy my self in the same, and conform my self to
thy holy will, doing as much as my estate is able. I beseech thee, that no love
of transitory things carry me away, nor no creature draw me into perilous
dangers. Nay, rather let me embrace all things for the love of thee, that are
to be embraced, but let me still hold thee more dear unto me then any thing,
and only in thee find rest and quietness.

Jesus drinks gall upon the Cross.
I Give thee thanks (O most merciful JESUS) that in the hour of thy death;
Mat. 27.34
to quench thy thirst, thou would apply a Sponge full of vinegar unto thy
mouth, that by tasting in that thy afflicted estate, thou might satisfy thy
heavenly Father for all our intemperances and voluptuousness, and leave unto
us a miraculous example of thy poverty.

Grant me grace (O Lord) that for the love of thee, I may despise all
dilicious savors, and exquisite banquets, and that I may be contented with
modesty and temperance, to eat and drink that only that may suffice to the
sustenance of this body, rendering thee infinite thanks for the same. Purify
and heal my Soul, that whatsoever is acceptable unto thee, may be pleasing to
me; and what displeases thee, may be unsavory and loathsome unto me.

Jesus ends the work of our Redemption.
I Give thee thanks (O Jesus, the fervent lover of mankind) that in so
absolute order thou did end the work of our Redemption, offering thy self a
lively Sacrifice on the Altar of the Cross for the sins of the world.

I beseech thee (O my Redeemer) that thou would vouchsafe to be the only
harbor of my heart, and the scope of my cogitations, words, and works, that
in all things with pure and chaste intention, I may only look on thee, that I
do that thing only which thy glory requires, that nothing please me, but
thee; and that I desire nothing besides thee. Grant (o Lord) that hereafter at
any time, I be not slack or remiss in thy service, but that (the fervor of
thy holy Spirit being daily renewed in me) my diligence may increase more and
more in thy praise and service.

Jesus dies.
I Give thee thanks (O most meek Jesus) that thou did call Death, and
command thy Spirit to leave the prison of the flesh (being commended into the
hands of thy Father) in which thing thou declarest, Ioh. 19.30
that thou art that true Shepherd, that dyed for the safeguard of his flock.

Grant me (O Lord) that being dead to sin, and all wicked vices, I may only
live unto thee, that (the course of this life being ended in charity) I may
forthwith enter into thee, that art the true Paradise of our souls.

Jesus is buried.
I Give thee thanks (O beloved Jesus) that with great complaints and mournings
of thy friends thou were taken from the Cross, John 19.40.41.
anointed with most precious ointments, wrapped in linen cloths, and put into
another man's Sepulcher: O Lord, bury with thee all my senses, and desires, that
being joined to thee in the strong linckes of love, I may be, as it were, dead,
in those things that displease thee. And of the contrary part, in all things
that please thee, let me be wholly alive, ready, and joyful; let me only be
delighted in thee, my Redeemer and treasure of my Soul. Amen.

MED^^^^. ^^^.
Christ (...)
I (...) for (...) have not spared to undergo the torments of death and hell
for my sake, that thou might advance me into thy Kingdom. Let the
consideration of this (o God) terrify me from sin, because thou sparedst not
thine only begotten Son, but that (...) endure the grea^^ (...) and (...).
Let it also (...) in my hea^^^ (...), that though (...) of wrath (...) in me,
Job 6.4.
and (...) thereof drink (...) spirit, yet I may still remember, that thou my
Savior have satisfied for all my sins, and conquered both Death and Hell, Col.
2.15
when thou did lead captivity captive: and by the spoil of all
principalities and powers of darkness, have swallowed them up into victory.
Behold, (O Lord) behold my infirmities, and consider that I am in thy hands but
as the clay in the hands of the Potter: If thou try me, give me patience to
bear it, and when thou smitest me, lift me up again; and if thy terrors
should fight against me, Job. 6.4.
yet teach me (o Lord) to resolve that it is thy fatherly work to kill sin
in me, that I being mortified in my sinful flesh, may be raised up unto the
life of glory. Amen.

Christ is risen from the dead.
I Give thee thanks (O good JESUS) that victoriously coming out of thy
Sepulcher with most noble triumph, after thou had overcome death, did
rise again the third day in great Glory and Majesty, visiting thy Disciples
and comforting them with exceeding gladness.

Grant (o Lord) that being quickened from death, and the deadly action of my
sinful life, and ungodly conversation, I may walk in the newness of life,
and seek only for those things which are high and heavenly, and not those
things which are vile and transitory, that when thou (being the true life)
shall secondly appear in the glory of thy Father with the Angels, I may
likewise appear with thee in glory, and be made everlastingly blessed in the
joyful fruition of that Kingdom that never shall have end.

Jesus ascends into heaven.
I Give thee thanks (O loving Jesus) that forty days being ouer-past after
thy Resurrection, thy Disciples did behold thee triumphantly, Acts 1.
and gloriously ascending into heaven, where sitting at the right hand of thy
Father, thou rulest, and raignest as King, world without end.

Let it be pleasing unto thy goodness (o Lord) that my Soul may be ravished
with the love of thee, Coloss. 3.1
and to seek those things that are above, and may despise al worldly things:
Let it always aspire unto thee, that it may be lift up unto the heavens, from
whence must come my comfort, my crown, and my joy. And that my prayer may
ascend unto thee as the morning Incense, let it affect, or be delighted in
nothing, but in thee my only Lord and God.

Jesus sends the HOLY GHOST.
I Give thee thanks (O most loving Jesus) that did send thy holy spirit upon
thy elect which perseuered in prayer, and did send them to preach and teach
the people throughout all the world.

I beseech thee (O LORD) to purify the inward parts of my heart, and to give
me true purity and cleannes of conscience, that the same Comforter finding in
my soul an acceptable dewlling place, may adorn and beautify it with the
most fruitful gifts of his Graces. Let him only comfort me, only strengthen
me, only rule me, and be only respected of me. Let me never want the comfort
of thy Spirit (o God) but that I may find him in his sweet influence of grace
and assistance, to sanctify my Soul, and to strengthen the inward man in all
godliness and virtue.

Jesus shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
I Give thee thanks (O bountiful JESUS) that when thou shall come at that
last day to judge the world, thou will render to every one according to his
works, either the joy of eternal life, or everlasting punishment.

Grant (o my loving Father) that I may have grace to spend the course of my
life in innocence, according to thy holy will, that at length, my Soul
leaving the imprisonment of the body, may be presented blameless before thee,
and being garnished with many virtues, may through thy mercy be received into
thy Tabernacle of glory, and that it may glorify and praise thee in the
fellowship and company of Saints, world without end. Amen.

A PRAYER, or Meditation on the Name of JESUS.
O Good IESV, o sweet Jesus, the Son of the Virgin Mary, full of pity and
mercy; o sweet Jesus, after thine infinite goodness, have mercy upon me; o
bountiful Jesus through that thy precious blood, which thou did plentifully
shed upon the Altar of the Cross for wicked Sinners, that thou wash me from
all my sins and iniquities, and that thou despise not thy Servant, which
humbly prays, and calls upon thee by this holy Name Jesus.

This Name Jesus is a sweet Name; yea, it is sweeter then any Nectar and
Ambrosia. This Name of Jesus brings life and salvation: for what is Jesus but
a Savior?

Therefore o good Jesus, which of thy goodness have created me, and by thy
precious blood have redeemed me; suffer not my Soul to be overcome with the
multitude of sins and offenses.

O good JESUS, let not mine iniquities condemn my Soul, which thou have made
of thine infinite goodness: acknowledge in me (o good Jesus) that which is
thine, and take from me all my sinful and filthy enormities.

O good Jesus, have mercy upon me so long as I am in this world, least at that
terrible day of Judgment I be damned with the wicked and reprobate.

O good Jesus, if according to thy Justice, I (being a perverse sinner) deserve
to be condemned by reason of my grievous sins and offenses, I humbly appeal
from thy severe Justice, to thy mercy and compassion, trusting altogether (o my
Lord Jesus) that thou will be gracious unto me, and wilt have mercy on my
soul, as a loving and pitiful Father. What profit will be to thee (O good
JESUS) in my flesh, if my Soul descend into hell? for it is certain that in
hell none shall confess the holy Name of Jesus.

O most merciful Jesus have mercy on us, o most sweet Jesus, deliver us from
all our tribulations, and adversities; o excellent Jesus be good unto us
miserable sinners; o most holy JESUS, grant that our souls may enjoy the
fellowship of the Elect in thy heavenly habitation. Strengthen me o most
loving Jesus, with the saving health of all that trust in thee. O Jesus the Son
of the most holy Virgin Mary, give unto us thy Mercy, Grace, Wisdom,
Charity, Chastity, Humility, and Patience in all our adversities, that we
may always praise and glorify thee, our Lord JESUS, which live and raignest
God world without end. Amen.

A short Prayer for Morning.
I Thank thee, most merciful Father, my maker and preserver, that thou have
so lovingly vouchsafed to tender my safety this night past, giving me sweet
sleep, to the refreshment of my soul and weak body. So (of thy goodness)
vouchsafe to extend thy loving favor toward me this day, that thereby I may
be both safely preserved from all kind of evil, and employ my self
diligently unto the execution of my vocation, to thy glory, and to the relief
of me and mine, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

A short Prayer for Evening.
O Almighty Lord God, I thank thee, that this day past, thou have of thy
mercy vouchsafed unto me thy poor creature, not only protection against all
dangers and evils, but also all things necessary. I humbly beseech thee, of
that same thy mercy, and for thy Son Jesus Christ his sake, to extend the like
protection and favor toward me this night, that I may enjoy at thine hands safe
and quiet rest, to the comfort and refreshment both of my body and soul, for
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.

