THE COMplaint of peace.

Written in Latin, by the famous Clerk Erasimus Roterodamus.

And Nuely translated into English by Thomas Paynell.

Anno domini. 1559.

To the Right Honorable Lord Antonie Uicounte Momtegue, Knight of the Right
Honorable order of the Garter.
ERasimus Roterodamus, one of the excelenste Clerks of our time, perceiving
and feeling the world to be waueryng, troublesome, unquiet, and every where
bended and inclined to war and myscheyfe, could not temper him self, nor
yet his pen, but neades he must write unto the world this true and eloquent
complaint the which I have translated and dedicated unto your Lorshyp, as
unto a father and a supporter of peace, and quietness, intytuled the complaynte
of Peace. And searching very narowlye for a place for peace to rest herself
in. He in his time, could no where is, no not among Princes (as he says) nor
Cardinales, Bishops, Prestes, Lawers, Married men, nor among Scole men, nor
Divines, nor yet among Religious me^, find where to bestow her quietly: such
tempests, and surges of Controuersye a rose in every City and Region
throughoute all Christendom, that peace was and is exiled even from those,
that to thensample of all others should have enbrased her, the which truly
if Christ's true Relygion had been among them, would most louyngelye and
quyetlye have received her, and most tenderlye retained her. And even now
every man's headde, as I conjecture and perceive is busye and unquiet, given
al to newfanglenes, the very mother of all commotions vprores, debates, battle
and murder: the mother of al ryetus and lycentius living, and of lewd
liberty sedycion and tre^son, the very root and beginning. Every man is now
ready to invade other, to spoil, to rob, to de^ace Cities, towns and
burrowes. Thus through Mars and Bellona, and for lack of unity and peace
Cities are spoiled and Civil laws, the present aid and mayntenaunce of the
common weal put to scylence. Thus Merchants are robed both by sea and by
land, thus the innocente husbandman is utterly undone, thus Kingdoms are
empouereshed, honest Matrons defiled, Uirgins defloured, incest and sacralege
supported, and thee world on every side ready to decay, and all this (as I have
said) for lack of true peace in Christ, y^ which causes men to be of one
accord in faith, confyrmable in purpose, and like in humility and diliction.
God of his goodness send us this P^ace. For why the peace of this world, is
rather a dyscorde than a Peace: of the which and the commodytyes thereof with
the ^ncommodytyes of war, an^ how Peace is turmulyd and toste from post to
pyller. Erasymus in this complaynte most syncerelye and euydenlye does
teach us, the which as it is most eloquentlye and pleasauntlye written, so
it is to those that ^auour and receive the truth, most true and pleasa^nte.

Thus our Lord preserve your Lordeshyppe ever and ever, and send us the
Peace that passes all understanding, and that never shall have end.

Amen.
The complainte of Peace.
IF mortal men (so it were for their commodity) would so disdain me, eiect
me, and utterly undo me, that has not deserved it. I would even now lament my
injury, and their iniquity: but when they even at this present do drive me,
the spring and founten of all felicity, from them utterly lost and cast
away, and call unto them the sea of all calamity, their infelicitie, is more
to be bewailed than is my injury, whose ch^unces I am enforsed to lament and to
have pity on them, with whom I had rather be angery and miscontentyd. For why
to drive his lover from him, howsoever he drives or rejects him is
vnkindnes^ to disdain him that has deseruid thanks vnthankefulnes^ and to
afflict and undo the parente and keeper of all men, is a wicked thing. But
seems not this an extreme deme^^y and madness, to think them selves unworthy
of so excellent commodityes, the which I do bring with me, and for these
willynglye to call for so cruel a heap of all euylles? It is semelye and
mete to be angerye with the evil: but what other thing can we do than be
wayle those, that are so driven and toste with furys? she which certenlye are
for no another cause more to be lamented, tha^ that they lament not them
selves, nor for no other cause more unhappy, than that they perceue not their
infelicitie. For it is a certain greece and step to health, to knowledge the
greatness of his infirmity, and sickness. For if I peace prays^d by the voice
of the Gods and men be the founten, ^eace.
parent nurysher, augmenter and defender of all good things, that other the
air has or the earth. If without me there is nothing flouryshynge no
where is, nothing sure^ nothing pure nor holy, nothing pleasant unto men,
nor thank^full unto the Gods. ^arre.
If war contrary to a^l things, be the sede of all euylles. A certain Occean
Sea of all natural things, wheresoever they be. If all flouryshyng things
through the vice of this, do putrify, things incresyd do dye, things
underset do fall, things well and subs^ancyall builded do peryshe, and that
are sweet, wax so w^e. Fynallye if it be a thing so far from holiness, that it
be a most present pestylence of al go^lynes and religion. If there be nothing
more unfortunate than this one thing unto men, nor nothing more hateful unto
the Gods. I pray the by the immortal Gods. Who shall believe these to be men.
Whoo shall believe that there is any cr^m of wisdom in them, that with so
great charges, so great stody, so great travel, so many cra^^^^^esses, so
many cares, so many perils do stody to cast me of, and would bye such a
heap of euylls so dearelye^ If wild beasts after this manner would despise
me, I would bear it more eas^lye, and impute thee injury done unto me, to
nature, where with the cruel inclination of nature, had done cruellye. If I
were hatyd of dumme beasts. I would forgive their ignorance because that
strength of the mind is denied them, the which only can perceive my gifts.
O unworthy thing, and more than prodigious: nature has created man endued
with reason, and that receuyth the will and mind of God, benevolence and
concord and yet I do sooner obtain a place among wyld beasts, how wild and
how brutyshe soever they be, than among men. And the confederations of so
many celestial circles, albeit their motion and power is not all one, yet
they continue and live thus many years. The powers of the Elements stryuynge
among them selfs, do defend with equal wait, eternal peace, and they in
so great a discord, with a mutual consent and exchange do noryshe
concord. And how faithful a consent and agreement of their members is there
in the body of Beasts, and how ready is their mutual defense? What thing is
there more unlike than is the body and the soul; and yet with how streyte an
amity has nature bound these two together, certes the separation of them
declares it, therefore as life is nothing else, Life.
but the society of the body and the soul, so the health of all the qualities
of the body is concord. Concor^
The unreasonable bestes do live every one in his kind ciuillye and in good
agreement. Elephantes do live in sondrye flocks Swyne and sheep paster
together. Craynes and Iayes do fly together in companyes. Storkes the masters
of pitye have their assembles. Dolphines do defend them selfs with mutual
offices and duties. The politic concord that is among Antes and Bees is
known. But whereto go I forwards to speak of these things, the which,
notwithstanding they lack reason, yet they lack not perceauyng. Thou may
know, that in trees and herbs there is a certain amity. Some be baron,
except thou join a male unto them, a vine embraseth an elm, a peach a vine,
insomuch that insensable things, seem yet to perceive the benefytes of peace.
And as these things have not the power of perceuynge, so that they have life,
yet they are borderers unto those things that perceive. What is so brutyshe as
the kind of stones: and yet thou shall say that they have the sense of peace
and concord. So an Adamant draws yerne unto him, and drawn, does hold it.
There is also agreement among ye most savage and wild beasts. The wyldnes of
Lions does not apere among the^ selves. A Bore does not move nor shake his
fy^ry ^uske against a bore. And among Linces there is peace. A Dragon shows no
cruelnes against a Dragon. And the proverbs have adournyd the concord of
wulues. I will add that seems to be more marvelous, the wicked spirits,
through whom the concord and peace of those ye be in heaven, and of men was
first broken, and now is broken, are in leage among^ them selves, and defend
that their tyranny such as it is, with consent and agreement men only, whom of
all other vnamitie becomes, the which principallye have most need thereof
another nature so mighty and effectuous in other things can accord, nor
instruction ioygne together, nor so many commodities procedyng of concord,
unite them, nor the feeling and experyence of so many euyls reduce and bring
them to mutual love and concord. The figure and form of all men is ^ommen,
and the self same voice, and where as al other kind of beasts do dyffer
most cheyfely amoug them selves in form and fashion of bodies, the vygure
and force of reason is given and appointed to man only, the which is unto them
and among them so commen, that it is commen to no another beasts, and speech
the principal conciler of amity and frendshyp, is given unto man, the seeds
of all discipline and virtuous are commonly grafte in him, a gentle and a meke
wit bending to mutual beneuole^ce yt which of it self deliteth to be
beloved, and is pleasant to do good unto other, except a man through evil
cupidities and lusts be as it were with Circes medicines corruptid, Circes.
and of a man through degeneration and going out of kind be made a beast? Of
this certe^ly ye vulgar and common people whatsoever does pertayne to mutual
benevolence, do call it humanity and gentleness, Nature unto this has addyd
tears, ^eares.
a document and experience of an exorable nature, where by if any offense
perchance has happened, or any small cloud duskyd the clearenes of amity,
they may easelye be made friends again. Lo by how many reasonnes and ways
nature has taught concord: And yet not being content with these
inticementes of peace, she would not that amity should be only pleasant
unto man, but also necessary. And therefore she has so parted and divided the
gifts as well of the body, as of the soul, that there is no man so well
furnished, but that now and than he may be releuyd and helped by the office
of the inferiors. Nor she attributh nor gives not the self same, nor yet the
like unto all men, that this inequality might be made equal through mutual
love and amity. Diverse things come forth of diverse countrise, that the very
use of them should teach mutual merytes and deservings. Unto other beasts,
she has attributed armur and help, where with they should defend them
selves, only manne she has brought forth without knowledge and feable, nor
no otherwise in sauegarde, than by confederations and mutual necessity.
Necessity.
Necessity invented cytyes, and necessity has taught the society and
fellowship that is among them, that they ioynyng their strength and power
together, should repel the vyolence of wild beasts, and robbers. For in
worldly things there is so little help that mankind even at the begynnyug of
life, had peryshed, if matrymonyall concord had not nouryshed and brought
him up. Nor man should not have been borne, and borne even at the beginning
of life, should by and by have peryshed, and lost life: if the friendly hand of
the mydwyfe, and frendely^ piety of the nurse, had not helped the infant. And
nature has planted unto this use, those vehemente little fyers of pyetie, that
thee parents love even that, that as yet they have not seen. And unto this she
has added the mutual piety of the children to their parents, that their
imbicilitie and weakness might mut^allye be ^ubleuatyd and suckeryd by their
aid and help, and that it ^yght be unto all like plausible and favorable, and
of the Greeks called most aptelye A^tipelargosis, that is a mutual
retaliation or compensatyon of benefyte^ unto this are added the bands of
kyndred, and of affinity. In some there comes the symilitude of wits, of
stodies, and of shape the surest rec^nciler of beneuolen^e. In many a certain
secret sense and feeling of ye mind, a marvelous great spurge and provocation
to mutual love and amity, where at our elders much maruelde^ and ascrybe it
to the will and power of God. With thus many arguments nature has taught peace
and concord. With thus many inticements she has inuytyd us unto her, with so
many cords she draws us with so many things, she compels us. And
after al these things, what effectuous infernal fury to hurt man, these
things being broken, cast a side, and shaken of, has plantyd in the hearts
of man this insatiable fury of fytynge? And but that the use and custom does
first take a way the admiration, and than the sense of the euy^^, who would
believe that these men were endued with reason, that with continual discord,
controversies, and wars contend and strive among them selves. Finally they
trouble and confound al places, both haloued and profane with rapine blood,
and ruin. Nor there are no confederations, be they never so holy, that can
separate and divide them furiously ragyng against them selves, to the mutual
destruction of them selves. Yea yt nothing had been put or added unto it, the
commen vocable or name of a man, had been sufficient for agreement among men.
But be it so that nature, the which is of great force among brute beasts,
profited nothing among men: shall Christ therefore be of no force, n^r power
among chrystians? Let the doctrine of nature be of little effect, yet among
beasts that have no understanding, it has great force and strength. But
forasmuch as the doctrine of Christ is much more excellent tha^ the doctrine of
nature, why does it not persuade ye thing unto those that profess her, the
which one of al other things she most principally does counsel: that is Peace
and mutual benevolence: or at least way, teach him to forget this so wicked
and so cruel madness of making of war. Wha^ I here the vocable and nature of
man, by and by I rune unto him as unto a creature borne properly for my wealth,
trusting yt it shall be leful for me to rest there, and when I here the title of
christian men, I make ye more have unto the^, having truly good hope to reign
am^nge them. But here among these (I am a shamed and loath to speak it) the
places of judicature, ye counsel ^hamber, ye courts, the temples do so rumble
and sound every where with debates and strifes, that the like is no where is among
the Ethnikes. Insomuch yt where as the company of advocates is ye gretest part
of the misery and calamity of man, Aduo^^te^.
yet this is but a small matter and a solitariousnes to the troubles of those
yt goo to law. I behold the City, by and by I have good esperaunce and hope,
that there at least ways is good agreement and concord among those yt the self
same waules do enclose, Cities.
ye self same laws do rule and govern, and as caryd in one ship, a commen
peril and danger does contain. But O wretch as I am, y^ here also does find
all things defiled with dissension, and so, that scarsely it is lefull to find
any house, in the which I may have a place for a few days. I leave of the
vulgar and commen people, Uulga^ people.
the which after the course of the Sea, are drawn with their own formur and
troubelous motions. Now I come unto the court of Princes, as into a cercerten
port and haven. Court
No dout (quod I) among the^ there shall be a place for Peace. For they are more
prudent and wise then the common people, they are the eye of ye people.
Furthermore they are placid in his stead and rome, that is the docter and
Prince of concord, of whom truly I am commtndyd to all men, but specially
unto these. And al things do promys me well. I see gentle salutatyons,
amorus, embrasynges, merye banketes, and all other duetyes and offices of
humanytye.

But o unworthy thing, it was not lawful among these to behold the only
shadow of true peace and concord. Al things were coule^yd and feigned, and
with open factions and secret dissentions and hatredes corruptid. And finally I
insomuch do find that among these there is no seat for Peace, Note.
that from hence comes the sprynges and begynninges of al dissension and
wars. But whether after this shall I unfortunate turn me, seeing that hope
has so oftentimes deceuyd me? But Princes are rather mightier then lernid,
and are led more by cupiditie and lust, tha^ by the right judgment of the
mind. I will convey my self to the company of eruditie and learnyd men. Good
letters make men. ^earned ^en.
But Philosophy more than men. Divinity makes the^ gods. It shall be lawefull
for me thus driven about with so many circutes to rest among these men. But
alas for sorrow, behold here in like manner a new kind of war not so
bluddye, but nolesse folyshe and mad. One scole varieth from a another, and
asthough the truth of things were changed, by the place, so certain decres
travail not over the Sea, certain pass not over the Alps, nor certain swime
not over the Rhene: yea in ye self same vnyuerstie the Logicians makes war
with the Rhetoricien, and the Divine does dyscorde with the Lawer. And in the
self same kind of profession and learning, thee Scotysse does fight with
the Tho^iste, the Nomynale with the Reale, the Platonyst with the Peripatike,
in so much yt in most small matters, they agree not, and often times they strive
most cruelly for a matter of nothing, until the heat of the dysputacion does
wax more and more from arguments to slanders, and from slanders to
buffettes. And albeit the thing be not done another with daggers nor speres,
yet with there poisoned and venimouse styles they wound each other^ and with
bytynge tethe and tauntes, they tear one another, and one against the others,
fame do violently move and shake the deadly darts of their tongues. Whether
shall I turn me, that so often have prouid that I am deceived? What remains
but only religion, Religion.
a secret as it were and a holy anchor whose profession, notwtstanding it be
the common profession of al christians, yet they do most peculiarlye profess
it with title, apparel, and ceremonies, yt commenly are commended by the name
of pr^istes. These therefore do put me beholding al things in good hope, y^
there is a haven prepared for me. ^
The white garments nobilitatid with my own color, do please me. I se crosses,
the tokens and notes of peace. I here the sweet name of a brother, the argument
of a singular charity. I here the salutations of peace very happy through ye
joyful pronunciation of things, yt be to come. I behold and se the communion
of al things a college joined together, al one temple, the self same laws,
the quotidian and daily conuentes. ^
Who does not trust yt here shall be a place for peace? But O unworthy thing, the
college does not almost never agree with the Bishop. This is a small matter,
but that they through dissentio^ must also be divided among the^ selves. How
many preistes be there, that are not at debate and strife ^ith some other
priest? Paul does judge it a thing not to be borne, that one christen man
should go to the law with another and should a priest strive with a priest? 1.
Cor. 6
and a bishop with a bishop? But perhaps some one will forgive these me^,
because that through long continuance and use, they are come in a manner to the
company of profane and lay me^, inasmuch as they have begune to possess the
self same things with them. Goo to. Let them hardly use their right, the
which as it were they do desende by prescription. Yet th^re remains one
kind of men, the which are so bound to religion, that if they would desire
it, they can by no means shake it of, no more than a tortuse her house or
shell. I should hope to have a place among these, but that my hope so
oftentimes frustratid, had taught me utterly to despere. And yet because I
will leave nothing unproven, I will experiment it and prove it. Thou sekest for
an end of this matter. I departed from no men more gladly. For what thing
should I hope for, when teligion does not agree with religion. There are as many
factions, as there are feloweshyppes. The Dominicales are at debate with the
Minorities. The Benedictines with the Bernardynes: as many names, so many
Religions, so many even o^ purpose, diverse ceremonies, because that nothing
should agree: every man is pleasyd with his own, and hates and condemns
other men's. The self same fellowship is through factions dyuyded. The
obseruauntes speak evil of the Coletes, and both they of the third kind,
^he which have their name of the Conu^ntes called Co^uentuales, and yet there
is no agreement among them. I now as it is mete and mistrusting al things,
desired to hyde my self in some little monasterye, yt truly and unfeignedly
were in quiet. This thing I shall say against my will, the which would to god
war not most true. Hitherto I have found none, that with civil, hatred and
braulinges was not infected. A shame it is to rehearse what unprofitable
strifes and debates the elder men which are to be fered and reuerencid for
their bearde and cloak sake, do excite and stir of tryfylles and vain
matters. And finally how greatly learnyd they seem unto them selves, and how
holy. Yet some little hope smyled upon me, that somewheres among so many
Marriages, Marriage.
some manner of place, should be given me. For what does not a commen house, a
commen bed, and commen children prom^s? Furthermore y^ mutual law of their
bodies, so that you shall rather believe the^ to be one body made of two, than to
be two. But that most myscheues Eris and contention is also cropen hither,
Eris.
and through the dissencion of their minds divides those, that with so many
bonds are bound. And yet I shall sooner chance to have a place among these,
than among those which with so many titles, so many di^ers garments, so many
ceremonies profess or absolute charity. But finally I desiryd this that at
the least way, a place might be appointed me in the breast of some one man. But
yet that chaunsyd not, for the self same man does strive and fight with him
self, reason makes war with the affections, and furthermore affection,
whilst pity draws one wai and cupiditie a another, strives with affection.
Again lust swadeth one thing, and anger another, ambition one thing,
co^ituousnes another. And being such men, yet they are not a shamid to be
cal^ed christians, albeit that they do utterly discord from the thing that is
unto Christ most cheyfe and peculier. Contemplate and behold his universal
life. The life of Christ
What other thing is it, than the doctrine of concord, and mutual love? What
other thing do hy^ commandments inculcate and repete, what his parabl^s but
Peace, but mutual charity? Did that noble Prophette Esaias inspyred with the
celestial spirit, and showing that Christ the reconciler of al things should
come: promys that he should be a ruler, or an over thrower of Cities? A
warrier? A triumpher? No no. What then? A Prince of peace, Esa. 9
and because he would that he should be notyd and vnderstandyd to be the best
of all other: he notyd him of that thing, that he iudgyd, the best of all
things. Nor it is no marvel that it seemed so to Esaias when that Syllius the
etnich poet wrote of me in this sort and manner. Sillius.
Peace of all things that nature gave unto man is best. Peace.
And that mistical poet does agree unto this man saying. Psa, 75^
His seat is made in peace. He said in peace, not in Hosts. He is a Prince of
peace, he loves peace, he is offended with discord. And again Esaias calls
peace a work of Justice, Esa, 32,
mening (if I be not disceyuyd) the self same that Paul mente, and he of
troubulous Saul, was made peasable, and the doctor of peace, with what breast,
with what eloquen^^^ did he preferrynge charytye above all other gifts of the
spryte, 1, Co, 13
thu^der out my praise unto the Corynthyans? why should I not glory to be
praysyd of so lawdable a man? He, 13.
This manne sometimes callethe him the God of peace. Collo, 3^
In another place he calls him the peace of God: manifestlye declaryng these
two to cleave and agree among them selves, that there can be no peace, where
GOD is not present, nor that God can be there, where peace is not present.

Lykewy^e we read in holy Write, the Angels of Peace to be called meke and
the ministers of God: Psame 103.
so that by it self it is manifest, whom we ought to take for the Angels of
war. Harken unto me ye excellent warryers. Behold under whose ensygnes ye
war. Certes under his, that first sowde dissension and discord between God
and man. What calamity so ever man does feel, he ought to ascribe it to his
dyssention and dyscorde. A light matter it is that certain men do argue that God
in holy Write, is called the God of Hosts, and ye God of vengaunce: For why
there is a great difference between the God of Jews, and the God of Christen
men, although that of their own nature they are one, and the self same God.
Or if the old titles do please us, go to, let him be the God of Hosts, so
that thou take and understand the sharpenes and front thereof to be y^ consent
of virtue, by whose aid and help good men destroy vice. Let him be the God
of vengaunce, Esaie. 1 ^ Reg. 12.
so thou take vengaunce for the correction of vice, and do refer the
bloudye occision of men, wherewith the books of the Heabrues, are replenished,
not to ye cutting and terynge of men in peces^ but to thee driuinge away of
wicked affections out of the breast and mind of man. But to follow on that we
purposyd. As often as the secret and divine letters do signifye absolute
felicytye they do it by thee name of Peace. As Esayas, Esai. 32.
my people (says he) shall sit in the beutifulnes of Peace. And another,
Psalm 124.
Peace (says he) upon Israel. Again Esaias does marvel at the feet of
those that denunce Peace, that denunce good things. Whosoever brings tidings
of Christ, Esai. 52
bringethe tidinges of Peace. He yt dyuulgath war, diuulgath him that is
most unlike Christ. Goo to now, What thing did draw the son of God into
the Earth, but that he myght^ reconcile the world unto the father, and ioygne
men among them selves, with an indissoluble charity, and last of all that he
might make man his friend. He was than an Ambasadoure for me, he did my
busynesses. 1. Psalm. Re. 22.
And therefore Solomon would bear his type and figure, the which unto us is
called peasable. 1, Psa, Reg, 22
How great soever David was. yet because he was a warrier, because he was
defiled with blood, 1, Psa, Reg, 22, ^8.
he is not suffered to build the house of god. Nor he deseruid not in this
part, to bear the type and figure of peasable Christ. Now O thou warrier,
ponder this in the mean while, if wars receauyd and done by the
commandment of God do profane men, what shall they do, whom ambition,
anger, and fury does persuade? If the blood of Ethnikes, being shed does
polute the meke king, what shall the great ^ffusion of christen blood do? I
pray ehe O thou christen Prince, if thou be truly a christian, behold the
Image of thy Prince, observe and mark how he entered into his kingdom, how he
proceeded, how he departed hence, and thou shall easily understand, how he
would have the to rule, mary that peace and concord might be the some and
conclusion of al thy care and rule. Did the Aungells wha^ Christ was borne,
blow up their warlyke trumpetes? The Jews unto whom war was permitted, hard
the sound of the trumpetes. These begynnynges were mete and conueniente for
those, Leui, 19,
to whom it was laweful to hate their enemies. But ye Angels of Peace sing
another manner of song to the people of Peace. Do they call men to war? or do
they promys vyctoryes? or tryumphe? No. What than at last? They denounce
Peace, and the congruences with the oracles of the Prophets. And they denounce
it not to those that breath out murders and war, that show them selves
fearce to battle, but to those which with good will are inclinyd to concord.
Let men culler and say what they will to their own destruction and hurt: If they
loved not war, they would not thus strive with continual wars among the^
selves. Go to. What other thing did Christ him self being of a good age
teach. What other thing did he exprese than Peace? And now and than he
salutid his Disciples with the good luck of peace. Peace be unto you. L^c. 24,
And he prescribed unto his ye form of gretinge, as only mete and worthi for
christian ^e^. Roma, 1,
And ye Apostles not obliuious and forgetful of this precepte and
commandment, begin their Epystles with Peace: and wyshe Peace unto those whom
they syngularly well do love. He wyssheth an excellent thing that wyssheth
health: but he that does desire peace, desires the sum and conclusion of all
felicity. And mark with what solicitude and care he now departing this
world, comme^deth Peace, the which he so often times in all his life time
commendyd. Love ye (says he) one a another as I have loved you. Io, 15,
And again. Io. 14.
I give you my peace, I leave you my peace. Do ye hear what he leueth unto his?
Does he leave the^ horses? or a guard? or an Enpeire? or riches? none of al
these things. What tha^? he gives peace, he leueth peace, Peace with his friends,
Peace with his enemies. Now I would thou shoulst consider, what he after the
mystical supper, the time of his death being now at hand, with those his
last prayers, desyrred of his father. I suppose that he which knew that
whatsoever he demanded he should obtain it, Io. 11.
would ask no vulgar nor no commen thing. O holy father (says he) keep
them in my name that they may be one as we be. Joan. 1^
See I beseech you, how noble a concord Christ does ask for his. He said
not that they may be of one mind, but that they may be one, nor that after
every manner, but as we (says he) be one: the which after a most perfect and
a vnspeacable way are the self same. And by the way declaryng that men by this
way and means only, must be sauid, if they among them selves do nourysh
mutual peace and concord. The Princes of this world do note and mark their
men, and specially in the time of war, with some notable note and sign,
that they may be known from other. But see and behold with what note or
badge Christ has markyd his: certes with no other tha^ with the note of
mutual cha, ritie, saying. Joan. 1^
By this badge and note men shall know that ye are my dyscyples, not if ye be
so or so apareled, not if ye feed upon this or that meat, nor if ye fast
only, nor if ye swallowe up so many psalms, but if ye love one anothere, nor
that after the commen sort, but as I have louid you. The precepts of the
Philosophers are innumerable, and the commandments of Moses and of the
kings are diverse and many, but my precepte (sayethe he) is but one, tha^ is,
that ye love together. And prescribing unto them one form of praying does he
not even at the beginning warn them of a marvelous concord? Our father
says he, it is the prayer of one, it is the common peticion of all men^ ^
they are al one house, al one familye, all depend of one father, ^
and how agrees it then that they should make continual war among them
selves? With what mouth or boldness do thou call upon the commen father, if
thou thrust thy swerd into thy brothers bowels? And now because he would
that this one thing should settell most depely in the minds of his, with how
many signs, with how many parables, with how many precepts has he repetyd
the stody of concord? John. 10
He namethe him self a shepherd, and his seruaun^es sheep. And I pray you,
who ever saw sheep fight with sheep: Or what shall woules do, if the fold
tear one another? when the vine does call him self the rote, and the
branches his, what other thing does he express than unanimity. It should
seem a prodigious thing worthy to be pourgid by sacrifice, if in the self same
vine one branch should war with a another: and is it not a monstrus thing,
if a christyan shall fight with a christian? Finallye if any thing be secret and
holy unto christen men, that should be very holy and depely setteled in their
minds, that Christ in those extreme and last commandments making as it were
his last will and testament deliuerd, commendinge those things unto his
children, y^ which he desired should never be forgotten. And what other thing
does he teach, commit, command, pray or desire in all these things, but mutual
love among his? Joan. 1^
What does ye communion of that holy bread and amiable cup decre, but a certain
new and an indissoluble concord. But wha^ he perceived ye peace could not
stand where men striued for offices, glory, riches, and to be reuengid: he
does then utterly exstirpe out of the minds of his such affectyons and
utterly forbids them not to resist evil, Math. 5.
and if they may he commands them to do good to those that have not deseruyd
it, Math. 5.
and to pray and wyshe them well, that wish other that is evil. And seem they
unto them selves to be christians, that for every light injury do draw the
greattest part of all the world to war? He commands that a prince should play
the minister among his people, nor that he in no other thing should excel
other, but that he be better than other, and that he aid and help many. And
yet some be not ashamed for a small access and piece of ground to be addid and
annexed unto their territorye, to stir up so great tumultes. He teach it us
to live with out any store, after the use and custom of birds and lyllyes.
He forbyddeth us to extend our carefulnes unto the next day. Math. 9.
It is his will and mind, that all we should depend from heaven. Mat, 19,
He excludes all rich men from the kingdom of heaven, and yet certain men
fear not for a little money unpaid, the which parauenture is not oyinge nor
dew, to shede somuche humayne blood. And in these days, these seem most just
causes of making of war. And truly Christ does no another thing, commaundynge
them to learn one certain thing of him, Mat. 11.
to be meke of mind and not fearce: Math. 5,
and what he commands the gift to be left before the altar, and not to be
offered before thou be in friendship with thy brother, does he not manifestly,
teach us, that concord is to be preferred above al other things, nor no
sacrifice to be thankful unto God, except he comme^d it? God refusid ye Jews
gifts, a kyd perchance or a sheep, the which yt they which were at debate did
offer: and dare christen me^ thus making war among them selves offer up that
holy sacrifice? Now when he lyketh him self unto a hen, gathering her
chyckens under her wings, Mat, 13.
with how apt a sign does he paynte concord? He is a getherer, and how
does it agree, that we christen men should be kytes? To the self it
pertaynethe, that he is called the corner stone, containing and ioigning both
the walls together: and does it not agree that his vicars should move all the
world to battle and war, and ^o^gne kingdoms to kingdoms? ^
And they, ^
as they bost them selves, have that high reconciler to their prince, and yet
by no means they can be reconcyled to them selves. He reconcilyd Pilate and
Herod, Lu. 23.
and yet he cannot bring his to concord. He that was defendyd does rebuke
Peter as yet half a Iwe, the which in iop^riye of his life was ready to defend
his Lord and master, and commaundyd him to put up his swerd: Ihon. 18
and among christen men, the sword even for every light matter is drawn
out against christians. Would he be defendyd with the sword, that dyinge
prayde for ^he authors of his death? All christen men's letters and books, ^u,
23.
whether thou read the old or the new testament, do sound nothing else but
peace and unanimity: ^
and all the life of christen men does entreat of nothing else but of war.
What cruelnes is ^^ys more th^n bestlye, ^
the which with so many things can not be ouercomde, nor mitygaty^. But let
them either leave of the glory of the title of christyanitie, or else express
the doctrine of Christ by concord. How long shall the life strive with the
name? Beutify your houses and your garments with the Image of the Cross,
as much as it shall please you: Christ shall not knowledge no another note nor
sign, but that that he him self prescribed, that is, the sign of concord.
Acts.1.
The Apostles being assembled together saw him goinge into Heaven, and
getheryd together they were commaundyd to tarry for the celestial and heavenly
sprite. And he promised that he would continually be conuersaunte among those
that were assembled, because no man should hope ^or trust Christ to be any
where present in wars. Now, what other thing is that fyery and flaming
sprite, than charytye? There is nothing more commen tha^ fire, and fire without
any damage or loss is kyndled with fire. Wylt thou know that the spyryte is
the parente of concord? Behold the end. Acts.4.
He says that they were al of one heart and mind.

Remove the sp^it^ from the body, by and by the whole composition of the
members shall fall and decay. Take Peace away, the whole society of a
christyan life does peryshe. Many divines do at this present affirm, that
the celestial sprite is in fudyd by the Sacraments: if they preach and say
the truth, where is the peculier ^ffect of the sprite, ^
one heart and one mind? but if they be fables, why do they so great honor
unto these things? Truly I have said and spoken these things, that
christen men should be the more a shamyd of their manners, ^
and not that I would remove or take any thing from the Sacraments. And y^
it has pleasyd christen men to be called the church, of what other thing does
it monyshe us, ^
but of unanimity? What gremente is there between hosts and the church? this
does sound a congregation, and that a dissension: if thon glorifye that thou
art apart of the Church, what have thou to do wi^h war? Note.
If thou be remouid from the church, what have thou to do with Christ? If the
self same house receive you a^l, if ye have a commen prince, if ye war al for
one, if ye be consecratid and instructed with like Sacraments, if ye enjoy
like gifts, if ye be nouryshed with like s^ipendes, if the like reward be
asked and demaundyd, why do ye make such tumultes among you? We see that
there is among these wicked soldiers, the which being hired for wages, even to
the minister of slawter, great concord, and for no another cause, but that they
go to war under the self same ensigns, and cannot so many things ioygne
those, that profess piety? Is there nothing done by so many Sacraments?
Baptism is the common Sacrament of all other, Baptism
by this we are borne again to Christian and cut of from the wo^ld, are grafte
in the members of Christ. What thing can be so much it self, as the members
of ye self same body? Of this therefore there is another bond nor fre, Barbaria^
nor Gr^ke, man nor woman: but all are the self same in Christ, the which
reduces all things unto concord. A little blood tastyd on both parts o^t of
^he cup, Note.
does so join the Scythes, that they tarry nor delay not to die for their
friend. ^mitie.
And amity is a secret and a bolye thing among the Ethnickes, the which a
common table has conciled: and shall not that heavenly bread, Note his place
for the sa^ramente ^f the ^ulter.
and that mistical cup contain and keep christen men in love and amity, the
which Christ him self has ordaynyd, the which daily they do renew in the
sacrifices? If Christ has done nothing there and in these things. What need
now so many Ceremonies? if he went about a serius matter, why do we asthoughe
he had done some light matter, neglecte i^^ Dare any man be so bold to come to
that table the note of amytye, or to the bankette of Peace, that preparethe
war against chrystyans, that prepares to lease them, for whom Christ dyed,
to draw their blood, for whom Christ shed his blood and O breasts more than
adama^tynes, in so many things there is society and fellowship, and in life so
inexplicable debate. The self same law of birth is unto al men, and the self
same necessity of age and death. All we have the self same prince of kind,
and the self same author of religion: we are al redeemed with the self same
blood and co^secratid with the self same sacrifices, and nouryshyd with the
self same sacraments, and whatsoever gift comes of these it comes from the
self same founten, and equally it is comme^ unto all. We have al but one
church, and the self same reward shall all me^ have. And the celestial
Iherusale^ where unto christian me^ do suspire and breath, is namid of ye vision
of peace, where of ye church in the mean while does sustain and bear the
figur^. And how chaunsith ^t tha^ that this does so gretlye differ from yt
ensample? Has diligent nature profitid so little, has Christ him self with all
his co^maundemen^s, with so many mysteries and signs made nothing perfect? yea
euilthinges (as the proverb says) reconcile those yt be evil. The lyf^ of
man.
What is more frail that the life of man, what is shorter? unto how many
infirmities and chau^ches is it subject? And yet saying it has more euylls of
it self than it can well bear or suffer, yet they as mad men call unto them
selfs the greatest part^ of all euylles.

So great blyndnes does occupye the minds of men, ^
that they see nothing of all these things: they are so driven and that
hedlyng, that they break and cut of all the bands of nature and of Christ,
and of confederations, ^
They fight in all places and often, nor there is no measure nor no end.
Nation with natyon, City with City, Faction with Faction, Prince with Prince
is hurt and destroyed, and for the folyshenes or ambition of two men, the which
shall shortly as it were with a fever peryshe, humayne matters are troubled and
turned vpsyde down. But I will leave of the tragydies of the old war. Let us
repete the Acts of a ten years sense. Among what nation did they not fight
both by sea and by land most cruellye? What region whas not moysted and wet
with christen blood? What river, what sea was not infectid and dyed with
humayne blood. O shame, they fight more cruellye than Jews, than Ethnyckes,
than wyld beasts. What war soever the Jews had, it was made against
strangers, the which christen men should make against vice, with the which
there is now agreement, and war is made against men. And yet Gods
commandment led the Jews to battle. But ambition, Ambiti^^
(if thou Judge thee thing truly all cullers set apart) does violently hale
christen men clean ouerwarth: and anger a very evil counseyler, Anger,
does drive them, and vnsaciate cupiditie of having does draw the^. They were
busy with foriners, christen men are in leage with Turks, and among them
selves they have war. The desire of glory most commonly did stir the
Ethnicke tyranes to war, and yet they did so subdue the Barbarus and wild
nations, that it was expedyent for them to be subdude, and that the victor
should stody to be fauerd of those that were subdude: And they labord as much as
was possible that the victory might be with out blood, that an honest fame and
renome might be unto him that wanne, and the victors benignitye a solace to
those that were subdued. But I am shamyd to remember for how light and vain
causes christen princes provoke the wo^ld to war. The cause whi pryre is make
war.
This prince does find out, or fayneth some old or currupte title, asthoughe
it were some great matter, who should govern and rule the kingd^me, so that the
commodity and profit of the come^ well were seen unto. He findethe a fault
that some what (I cannot well tell you what) is omyttyd in the confederation
and leage of a hundred ti^les and articles. This man is priuatelye offendyd
with him for his spouse deceytfullye c^nueyed away, or for some light word or
merry scoff freely spoken. And there be (the which thing of all other is most
scelerate and wickid) that through a tyrannical deceyte (because the feel and
perceive their power, by the concord of the people to decay, and by their
dissension to be stablyshyd) do subourne and apoynt them, that of purpose
shall move war, that they may dy^ide those that be joined, and the more
licentiously and freely rob and spoil the unfortunate people. Other there be
most nocent, the which are nouryshed with the damages and loss of the people,
and in the time of peace have little to do in the commen well. What infernal
furis could send in such poysen into a christen heart? Dione^^us.
Who has taught christen men this tyranny? The which neither any Dionisius,
nor any Mezentius has known. Mezentious
They are rather bestes than men, and only noble by tyranny, nor no where is
noble nor wise, but to do hurt and mischefe, nor never in accord and
agreement, but to oppress the commen wealth. And they that do these things, are
taken and acceptid for christians, and every where thus pollutyd approach and
come to the holy churches and Aulters. O most pestylente persons, worthy
to be into thee extreme Islands exiled. If christen men be the members of one
body, why does not every man rejoice of other men's felicity and fortune? Now
if that kingdom which bordereth upon a another do floryshe in wealth, it is
thought in a manner to be a just and a laweful cause to make war. For what
other thing (if we will speak the truth) has mouyd, or shall move so
many to tear the kingdom of France with arms, France and the high prais
there^f.
but because it is the most floryshynge of all other? There is no kingdom more
ample and wide: nor no where is a more noble Senate, no whers a more famous
vnyuersitie, no where is more greater concord, and for ye cause most highest in
power. The laws floryshe no where is so greatly, Religyon no where is more
vntouchyd nor with ye inter medlyng of Jews as among the Italions co^ruptid,
nor infectid with ye neyg^bered of Turks or Mores as among the Spanierdes, and
the Hugariens. Germanye (so that I speak nothing of the Bohemes) is into so
many kings divided, that there is no manner a face of any kingdom. France
only is as it were an undefiled flower of the christian dominion, and as a
most sure castle, if perchance any tempest should arise, is many ways
inuadyd, and with so many crafts and deceites molestyd, nor for no not her
cause, but that they should be, if there were in the^ any vain of a christian
mind, most feign and glad of. And unto these wy^kyd deeds they pretend a
good and a just title, thus they past and make away, to amplyfy and to enlarge
the empeir^ of Christ. O monstrous thing, they think that the commen well of
chrystendome is not well counseylid nor provided for, except they overthrow
thee most beutifull and most fortunate part of christendom. What, that
entreating and doing of those things, they pass the wyld beasts in cruelnes.
All kind of beasts fight not, nor the conflictes of beasts are not as we have
said before, and it is more often to be repetyd and spoken of, that they may
the better remember it, but against a contrary kind of beasts. An Adder does
not byte an Adder, nor a Lynxe does not tear a Lynxe in pecys. And again,
when they fight they fight with their own weapons. Nature has armid them,
me^ are borne vnarmyd. O GOD immortal, with what weapens does anger arm a
man? Christians do invade christen men with the ingines of hell. Who can
believe that gounes were the invention of man? Nor they run not with so
thick, nor with a multitude so hard closyd together to their mutual
destruction. Who ever saw ten lions fight with ten bulls? But how often
do twentye thousand chrystyans fight with weapons with so many christen
men? So much pleas^re it is to hurt, and so much pleasure to offend and to
draw out the blood of their Brethren. Nor beasts for the most part fight
not, but wha^ hunger, or the care of their yonglinges do cause them to rage.
But what injury is there so light unto christen me^, that seems not a
sufficient and a mete cause and occasyon of war? If thee comminaitye should
do these things, they might pretend ignorance, if they were youngemen,
lack of knowledge might excuse them, if they be prophayne persons, the
quality of thee person would alienate the cruelnes of the deed. But now we
see that the seed of war does most cheyfelye spring of those, Note.
by whose counsel and moderatyon it was meet and convenient, the motions of
the people should be swagyd. The ignoble and contemnyd bulgar people do build
excellent Cytyes, and edifyed, ciuylye they do rule them, and gouernynge them,
they inryche them. Governors and rulers krepe into those Cytyes, and as waspes
and dorres they secretelye do conueye and stele that, that by other men's
industrye and labor is provided and gotten: and that, that of many is well
hepyd together, of a few is ill spente: and that, that is well builded, is
most cruellye brought to ruin. If they remember not the old, let who so
will remember with him self, the battles and wars that have been foughtenne
and made this ten year, and wayinge the causes, he shall find that they for
the princes causes have been begoune, and endyd with the great damage and
loss of the people, unto whom they nothing pertaynyd. And that, that in
times paste among the Ethnickes and gentylles was estemyd fylthy an hoar hedde
(as he says) to were an helmette, Note.
that is now laudable and praise worthy among christen men. Naso,
An old souldyer unto Naso is a filthy thing, and unto these, a warrier of
three ^core and ten, is an excellent thing. Yea, nor preistes truly are
not ashamed, whom in time paste, ^^. 16.
God in that bluddye and vnmeke law of Moses, would not they should be
defiled with any blood. Divines the masters of the christian life, are not
ashamyd, the professors of the absolute religion are not a shamyd. Bishops
are not ashamyd, Cardinals, and the vicars of Christ are not a shamyd to be the
authors and fire brandes of that thing, the which Christ so greatly has
derestyd. How do myters and helmetes agree? what has a crosyer or a sheep
hook to do with a sword? what has the gospel book to do with a shylde?
How does it agree to salute the people with peace, and to stir and provoke the
world to most trobelous battles? to give peace with the tongue, and in deed
to send in war? Doste thou with the self same mouth, ^
where with thou preacheste peasable Christ laud and praise war? Syngest
thou with the self same trumpet GOD and Satan? Doste thou couerid with a coule
incite at the holy Sermon, the simple unto murder the which of thy mouth
lokydde for the Euangelycall doctrine? Doste thou occupyinge the place of the
Apostles, teach that, that is contrary to the precepts of the Apostles? Art
thou not aferde, least that, that was said and spoken of Christ's messengers
(how goodlye be the fete of those that show forth Peace, To. 10.
good tidings. and health) be turnyd clean contrary? How fylthy is the
tongue of preystes exhorting unto war, incytynge to evil, provoking to
death and murder? Among the Romans as yet wyckedly religious, he that took
upon him to be thee high Bishop did assure with an oath, as the custom was to
keep his hands clean and pure from blood, and so, that being hurt he
should not be reuengyd. Uaspa^an.
And Tytus Uaspacyan an Ethnycke Emperor kept and performyd the faith of this
oath constantlye, and it is praysyd of the Ethnycke writers. But O shamefastnes
utterly taken from manne, preystes dedycated among Christen men unto GOD, and
Mounckes the which pretend a further holiness than these, inflame me^ to
murders and slaughters. And they make of the trumpette of the Gospel Mars
trumpet, and forgetting their dignytie, they curse and run vpp^ and down,
and suffer all things, so they may stir up war, and through these men,
Princes (the which peraduentre would be quyte) ar^ inflamed to war, by
whose auctorytie, it was meet and conuenyente, that they being in tumultes
and strife, should have been quiet. Yea they them selfs, (the which thing
is more prodygyous and wonderful) do fight, and even for thee self same
things, that the Philosophers among the wicked contemned, the contempt
whereof is, peculyer and proper unto men apostolycall. A few years since,
when the world was violentlye drawn by a certain fatal sore and disease
unto war: the euangelycall preachers, that is the gray and the black Friars,
song and blewe up their trumpets and kindled them more and more, that of their
own accord were inclyned to furiousnes. Among English men, they encoraged
them against the Frenchemen, and amoge the Frenchmen, they hartoned them
against thee Englyshemen, they instygated and provoked al men to war. No man
provoked to peace, except one or two, and for me to have named them, was unto
them in a manner death. The holy Bishops forgettyng their dignity and
professyon, ran hither and thither sharpening and troubling most diligently the
publyke sores and plages of the world. And on ye one part they pricte forwards
Pope July, and on the otherside Kings, as though they were not mad enough of
them selfs, to haste and to set forwards the war, and yet we cloak this
manifest madness with magnificent tytles. To this point a little we wrest ye laws,
the w^itings of good men, and the w^r^es of Scripture most shamefully, I will
not say wickedli. Yea ye thing is almost come to this point, yt it is folishnes
and wickedness too, once to open thy mouth against war, and to praise that, that
is only praised by the mouth of Christ. He seems to counsel the people very
slenderly, and to fauer the prince very little, that counseleth the thing of all
other most helthsome, and disswadeth from the thing of al things most
pestilent. Now preistes do follow the Hosts. Bishops bear a rule in the
Hosts, and leuynge their churches, they do Bellonas busynesses. Bellona.
Yea war does now engender and make preistes, it makes Bishops, it makes
Cardinales, of the which honorable tytles the legate of the camp is had and
estemid worthy of the successors of the Apostles. And it is the less to be
marueld at, if they, whom Mars engendered, do desire war. And to thentent
the sore should be the worse to be helyd, they culler such wickedness with the
figure and face of piety. The ensigns and standards have c^osses. The wicked
soldier and hyryd for money to tear and murdre men, does bear before him the
sign of the cross, Of Chri^^^^ cross
and that, that only is able to dissuade war, is the sign of war. O thou
wicked soldier, what have thou to do with ye cross? with these and such
minds and deeds. Dragons, Tigers, and Woules draw together. This sign is his
that has won, not by war, but by death, which sauid and lost not, the which
thing the enemies with whom thou have to do, if so be thou be a christen
man, may most chefely warn the, and how ye maiste obtain the upper hand.
Thou making have to destroy thy brother, do bear ye ensygne of health, and
with the cross do lose and destroy him, that is sauyd by the cross. What a
thing is this, that men even from those secret and reverent Sacraments run
to war (for these also are brought into the host, in the which most
specially is representyd the chefest concord of christen men) and draw their
nakyd swerdes against their brethren, and make Christ a loker one (if he
vouchesafe there to be present) of such a wicked deed, as of all other is
most acceptable and gracious unto the wicked spyrites. Fynallye the Cross of
Christ, which thing is most absurd and not to be hard, does shine and is
secret and holy in both the hosts and battles. What a monstrus thing is
this? Does the Cross fight against the Cross? Does Christ make war against
Christ? This sign of a christen name is wont to fear the enemies? Why do
they fight against that, that they adore and worship? I bes^che you, Our
lords prayer
what does the souldyer pray in these Sacryfyces. Our Father. O unshamefast
face, darste thou call him father, that go about to sleye thy Brother?
Halowid be thy name. How can the name of GOD be more dishonestyd than with
these tumultes that are among you. Thy kyngedome come. Prayste thou so, that
with such abundance of blood go about tyranny? Thy will be fulfyllyd in
Earth, as it is in Heaven. His will is to have Peace, and preparest thou
war? Thou of our commen father desyrest daily bred, and yet thou do burn
thy Brothers corn, and had rather it should peryshe as concerning thy
self than profyt him. Now with what mouth shalt you say this, And forgive us
our ^respasses, as we forgive those that trespass against us, that do make
have to sley thy Brother? Thou that with thy own peril doste draw thy
brother into peril and danger, do pray, that thou may avoid the danger
of tentation. Thou desyrest to be deliueryd from evil, by whose instincte and
motion, thou cra^tly g^ste about to do thy brother al evil and mis^hif. Plato
denide it to be calde war, Plato.
that ye Gretians should move against ye greeks, it is sedition says he. And
unto these, war is sacrete and holy, the which a christyan for every light
cause, and with such s^^ldiours and armur, makes against another. The laws of
ye Ethnickes do cast him sowde in a bag of leather into a river that does
moist or wet his swerd with the blood of his brother. Are they less brethren
whom Christ has coplid, than they whom consanguinitie has ioygned? And yet
here is a reward for the paracyde. O the miserable chance of those that war.
He yt ouercu^meth is a paracyde, and he that is overthrown, does peryshe, and
yet that notwithstanding, he because he went about to murder his parents, is
culpable of paracide. And after all this, they detest and curse the Turks as
wicked persons and alienate from Christ, even asthoughe that they, when they
do these things, were chrystyans, or asthoughe a more pleasant spectable
could be exhybytyd unto the Turks, ^
than if they saw them with mutual and like weapens kill them selves. The
Turks do sacryfyce unto deuylles, but when there is no sacryfyce more
acceptable unto them, than if one chrystyan sley another, what other thing
do thou then but that, that they do? Furthermore the wicked sprytes (when
that he in like manner that kylleth, and he that is kyllyd are made a sacrifice)
have a doble sacrifyce, who so fauerth the Turks, or is a friend unto deuylls,
does ofte^tymes offer such like sacrifices. But I long sense do here what
excusys witty and wise me^ shall make to their own destruction. They complain
that they are compellyd, and drawn unto war against their wylles. Lay of
this vyser, and excuse, away with these colors, counsel with thy own breast
and conscience, thou shalt find that anger, ambition, and folyshenes do draw
the hither, and no necessity: except paraduenture thou unto this end do
mesure necessity, if in all points it satisfyth not thy mind. Carrye these
fair words unto the people, Gal^. 9.
god is not derided, nor with cullers deceyuyd. And in the mean while, solemn
supplications and processions are made, peace is desirid, and prayed for with
great and loud clamurs, we cry out with marvelous great lowinges, grant us
peace we pray thee: here us. Shall not god justly annswere these. Why do ye
laugh me to scorn? ye pray me to put of, that wyllynglye ye do call unto you,
ye refuse by prayer^ that ye are authors of. If every offense causes war,
who has not a cause to complain him? Mannye things chance between the
husband and the wife, the which must be wynckydde at, except thou had
rather that benevolence and love should be broken. And if there be any such
sprunge among princes, what need is there by and by to be drawn to war?
There be laws, there be learned men, there be worshyppefull Abbotes, there be
reverent B^shoppes, by whose helthesume counsel the tumultes of things may be
composyd and swagyd. Why do they not rather make these men arbytrers, the
which they cannet obtain to be so unjust unto them, but that they shall
depart with less hurt, than they should by the experience and proof of war.
Note.
There is scacely any peace so eui^, but that it is better, than the most equal
war. First ponder every singular thing, that requires, or that brings in
war, and thou shall perceive how great gain thou shalt have. The Popes
^uc^^ritie
The authority of the Pope is most excellent, but when na^ions and princes
do strive tumultuously with wicked war, and that many years, where is then
the Popes authority, where is the power than next unto Christ? In this thing
^ertaynelye it should be showed, if they were not b^wnde with like cupidities.
The pope calls to war, men do obey, the self same calls to peace, why
do they no^ obey in like manner? If they rather desir peace, why did they
joyfully obey Iulye the author of war: Iuliu^.
no man scacely obeyed Leo provoking to peace and concord. If the Popes
authority be most holy, Certes it ought than to be most in force, as often as
he provoke to that, that christ did teach most specially. But they whom
Julius could stir unto mortal war, Leo.
when Leo that most holy Pope provoking the^ by so many menes to christian
religion could not do ye same do declare that under the pretense of the
Church. they have served their own lusts and cupidities, so that I say
nothing more sharply. If even from the heart ye do hate war, I shall
counsel you, how ye may defend concord. Perfect peace does not consiste in
affinites, nor in ye confederations of men, of thee which we do oftentimes
perceive and se, ye wares do rise and spring. The fountens where out this evil
does break, must be purgid, evil cupidities and desires do enge^der these
debates and tumultes. And whilst every man does serve and please his
affections, ye co^me^ well in ye mean seson is afflictyd and troubled, and yet
no man attaineth the things ye he by evil menes and ways does desire. An
exhortation unto princes
Let princes be wise for the profit of the people, and not for their own
profit: and let the^ truly be wise, that they may mesure their majesty,
their felicity, their riches, their glory with those things, that truly and
in deed make men great and excellent. Let them be of s^che a mind toward
the commen weal, as a father is toward his familye. A king shall esteem and
judge him self great and noble, if he command and rule those that be good,
and happy, if he make his fortunate and welthy, and noble, if he command and
govern those that are free, and rych, if he have rych subjects. And
floryshyng, if he have Cities that floryshe with perpetual Peace. And ye noble
men and magistrates shall ensue and follow the mind of the prince, and shall
measure all things with the commodity and profit of the comme^ well, and by
this ways and means they shall far more justly provide for their own
commodities. Shall a king that is of this mind, besone mouid to extort monye
of his subjects, to give it unto a barbarus and a straung soldier? Shall he
drive his to famyne and hunger, to enriche certain wickid Capitaines? Shall he
obiecte and cast his subjects lives to so many dangers? I think no. Let
him thus far exercise his empeire, that he being a man, remember that he rules
men, a freman, fre men, and at lest, a christen man, christen me^. And in like
manner the people shall so far forth honor him, as it shall seem profitable for
thee commen wealth, nor a good prince should ask, nor exact no another thing.
The consent and agremente of the citizens, shall diminishe the cupidities of an
evil Prince. Let the cause of private commodity, be far of from them both.
Let great honor be showed unto those that exclude war, and that by wit or
counsel shall restore concord, and that goth about by all means, not to
gather to gether a great strength and force of men and munition, but that
there be no need of them. The which most goodlye act and deed we read that
Dioclitianus Diocli^^anus,
one among so many empereurs, in his mind and thought conceived. But if war
cannot be auoydyd, yet let it be so vsyd, that the myschyfe thereof may fall
upon their heddes, that gave the occasion and causes thereof. Now the princes
make war in sauegard, the captens encrece thereby, the greteste part of the
evils and losses is powryd upon the husband men and commen people, unto whom
the war pertayneth not, nor that gave no cause nor occasion there of. Where is
the wisdom of the prince if he way not these things? There must a mean be
found, whereby it may be appointed that Empeirs chaung not nor as it were
walk not up and down so often, Note.
for the renouation and renuynge of things does engender tumultes, and
tumultes war. And this may easelye be done, if kings children were married
within the borders of their dominyon, or if it so like him to marye the^ to the
borderers, for so the hope of succession is cut of from the^ al. Nor let it not
be lawful for the prince to alienate or to sell any part of his dominion,
asthough free cities were private land. For the cities which are rulid by
kings are fre cities, and they which tyrannes ouerpresse do serve. Now by
the alteration of such marriages it chaunsith that he that is borne among
Iryshe men, shall suddenly rule those of Inde: or else he that rulid ye Syrians,
shall suddenly be king of England, so it chaunseth that neither of thee realms
has a prince, for whilst he leauith the first, of the last he is not known,
and unto them he is as a man borne in a another world. And in the mean seson
that he purchases ye, whylst he over comes it, whles he stablisheth it, he
co^sumeth and destroith the other, and sometime whylst he stodeth to embrace
both, he scacelye mete to rule one, leseth both. These princes will once agree
what each of the^ ought to rule and govern, and y^ no affinity shall e^ther
extend, or diminishe the borders of their dominion once given and delyuerd unto
the^, nor no confederations exstirpe nor destroy the^. And every one of them
shall labor and travel as much as he may possible, to adurne his part and
portion, and giving al his stody and diligence unto that part only, shall
travail to leave it enryched with all goodness and riches unto his children. And
by this menes it shall come to pass, that in all places all things shall
floryshe. But among them selfs they must be coupled and confederated not
with affynytes, ^owe ^rinces ^ughte to (...) confede^^yd.
nor with factious socyetes, but with pure and sincere amytie, and cheyfly with
common and like stody of forderyng and encresyng the common welthe. Let him
succeed the king that is either next of kyn, or judged most meet by the
suffrages and voices of the people, and let it suffyce other to be reputed and
counted noble among those that be honest. It is a kyngly thing not to know
pryuate affections, Note.
but to esteem al things for the publyke and common vtylytie. Forthermore a
Prince shall exchewe long peregrenacions, yea he should never will ne desire
to pass being thee bounds and borders of his kingdom: and he shall remember
the saying approved by the long consent of worlds. The forhed is more
excellent, than is ye hinder part. A Prince shall esteem him self to be enryched
not by the taking away of other men's, but if he increase his own. When war
must be entreted and spoken of, let him not call young men to counsel unto
whom war is pleasant and sweet, because they are vnexperte, Call none of
these to counsel.
how much evil and myscheyfe it has and conteyneth: nor those, unto whom it
is profitable that publyke tranquilytie be troubled: nor those the which are
nouryshed and made fat with the calamyties of thee people. He shall call wyttye
ancient and old men, whose mercy and benevolence is known unto the country.
Nor let not war be moved for the pleasure or lust of one or two, the which
once begone is not easelye ended. It is a most peryllous and a dangerous
thing, except it be taken in hand by the consent of all the people. The
occasyons and causes of war must even out of hand beforetolde and
declared. But yet certain must be wynked at, for gentylnes shall inuyte and
provoke gentylnes. Some times peace must be boughte. And if thou cast what
war shall consume and waste, and that thou shalt keep thy Cytizyns from
destruction, it shall seem, although thou dyddest bye it full dearelye, to be
boughte for little. And when a great d^ale moore, besides the blood of thye
Cytizyns, should have been spente in war: thou shalt reken how great and
manyfolde euylles thou exchuidst, and how much goodness thou defendidst, so
shall thou not repent the of thy expenses and charges. In the mean time let
Bishops do their office and duties. Let Preystes be truly Preystes.
Let Monks remember their professyon. Let Dyuynes teach that is worthy and
meet for Christ. Let all men conspyre against war. Let all men bark
against it. Let all men preach, extole and inculcate peace pryuatelye and
apertlye. Then if they cannot bring it to pass that it be not ended by the
sword, yet certes they shall not approve it, nor be present thereat, nor that
any honor by their aucthorytie be had or given too such a wicked, or to
such a suspecte thing.

Let it be suffycyente for those that be slain in battle, to be buried in
Prophayne and unhallowed ground. And if there be any good in this kind, the
which surely are very few, they shall not for these things be defrauded or
lease their reward. But the evil and wicked, the which are many, shall not
be pleased that this honors be taken from them. I speak of these wars that
commonly Christen men make against Christen men. Nor I mean nor think not
so of those, that with a simple and a relygyous stodye, and dylygence do
repel thee vyolente inc^rcyons of thee Barbaryens, and with their own peril
defend the publyke and common tranquylytie. Now the Trophies and signs of
their victoryes, dyed and stained with the blood of those, for whose salvation
Christ shed his blood, are auaunced and set up in temples among the Images
of the Apostles and Martyrs: as though that hereafter it be a Relygious work
not to be made Martyrs but too make Martyrs. It were suffycyente enough that
these things were kept in a place of judgment, or in an armary, for it is
not convenient yt any thing defylyd with blood, should be receuid into the
holy church, the which ought to be most clean and pure. Preistes consecratid
unto God should not be present, but to destroy and disanull war, for if they
consent and agree unto these things, and every where inculke and repete the
same, it wylbe of great force and strength. But if this be a fatal disese of
man's wyr, that be no means it cannot endure with out war, yet let this evil
then rether be shed against the Turks, How turks should be aluryd to christ.
although it were better to alure them by doctrine, good deeds and by the
innocence of life to Christ's religion, the^ to invade them with war. But if
war (as I have said) cannot in no wise be avoided, yet that were a liter and
an ^esier harm, than that christen men should so wickedly make war and be hurt
and destr^yde among them selfs. And if mutual charity do^ not unite them,
some commen enemy by some means or other shall ioygne them, so that there
shall be as it were a certain concord, although that true concord be absente
and lacking. Finally it is a great part of peace, from the heart to will Peace.
All such unto whom peace is plesaunt, do receive al occasions of peace, y^
things which do withstand it, either they neglecte them, or else they remove
them, and suffer many things, so tha^ so great goodness may be safe and
sound. They search the beginning and causes of war, the things that
pertain to peace, they praise them, or else they dissemble them, but that that
does tend toward war, they encrese and make it worse. I am a shamyd to open
for how vain and tryflynge matters they exci^e and stir great tragedies,
and how great tempests do rise of so small sparcles. The^ that great
multitude of iniuryes is remembered, and every man does heap on his own
evils and iniuryes done unto him, but in the mean space of good deeds there is
no remembrance, but deep forgetfulness, so that thou shalt truly swear,
that they desire, and couette war.

And oftentimes their are pryuet matters of princes, the which co^pel ye world
to war. But the cause why that war should be taken in hand, should be public
and more tha^ evident. But wha^ there is no cause they feign causes of
dissentio^ abusing ye vocables of cou^tris and regions to ye nourishment of
hatreds, and noble men do nourishe and encrese this error of ye folyshe people,
and abuse it to their own profit and commodity, and certain preistes also do
nourishe these things. The english man is enemi unto ye french man, for no
another cause, but yt he is a french man. The english man for no another cause
does hate a Scot, but because he is a Scot. The German is at debate with the
frenchman, the Spaniarde with them both. O ouerwartnes. The vain vocable of ye
place disioyneth men. Why should not so many things rather reconcile the^? Thou
English man do hate a french man, why do not thou a man, rether be
welwillyng unto man? a christian man unto a christian. Why can so void and so
light a matter do more with these men, than so many bands of nature, or of
Christ? The place does separate and divide men's bodies, but not their minds^ In
times past the Rhene separatyd the french man from the German, but the Rhene
does not separate a christian from a christian. The mountens pyrines dyuide the
Spaniardes from the Italiens, but the same divide not the communion of the
Church. The Sea divides english men from french men, but it dyuideth not
the society and felowshyppe of relygyon. Paul the Apostle disdayneth to here
these voices among christian men. 1. Cor. ^
I am Apollos, I am Cephas, I am Paul's disciple. Nor he suffers not wicked
names to divide Christ reconcylynge all things: and we judge the commen
vocable and name of a country to be a grave and a wayghty cause why one nation
should bend toward the destruction of a another. Nor this surely unto sum
men's minds is not suffycyente, for thou doste here that shrewdelye and of
purpose they do seek occasyons of debate and dyuysyon, they dyuyde France and
those things with vocables, the which another sea, mountens, nor true names of
regions divide. Of French men they make Germans, that through the
felowshyppe of the name, amity should not grow and encrece. If a Judge in
odious actions, as of divorce, does not lightlye receive their controversies,
nor admit every probation, why do these men in a thing of all other most
odious, admit every vain and light cause? But let them rather think and take
the matter as it is, that this world is the commen country of all men. If the
title of the country do reconcile all men, borne of the self same elders, if
affynytye of blood makethe friends, if the church be one famyly and equallye
commen to al men, if the self same house do couple and ioygne frendshyppe, it
is mete that wise and witty men should hang and cleue to this part. Thou
suffer and berist sum things with thy father in law, and for no another
cause but because he is thy wives father, and beryst thou nothing with him
that in feloweshyppe of relygyon is thy brother? Thou forgeueste many things
for the propinquintie and nighnes of kindred, and forgeuest thou nothing for
the affinite of religion? Truly there is no ba^d that binds more streyghtlye,
A very^ sure hand.
than the sodalitie and fellowship of Christ. Why is that thing only before our
eyes, that does exulcerate and hurt the heart? If thou fauer peace think thus
rether, in this he has hurtyd me, but at other times he has often profited
me: or by some other man's impulsio^ he has hindered and hurted me. And as they
that call men to concord lay the causes of dissension that were between
Agame^non and Achilles (as Homere does write) to the Gods Aten, Aten.
so let those things that at no time can be excusyd, be imputyd to desteny, or
if ye will, to some evil God, and let hatred be translatyd from men into these
things. Why are they wyser to their own destruction, than to defend
felicity? why are they more quicker of sight to evil, than to good? They
that are sumwhat more wise do or ever they go about any private matter,
deliver, consider, and look about them: but they, their eyes being closid and
shut up, cast them selves hedling into war, namely when it is once begun,
it cannot be auoydyd, yea of a little, it is made great, and of one, many, and
of an vnbluddy, a bluddy, and chefely when that this tempest does not afflicte
and punyshe one or two, but in like manner incloseth al men. If the common
people do lightly way these things, yet it is the princes and the nobilyties
part to ponder and way them. It is the preistes part by all means to
stablyshe these things, and to lay them unto the willing and vnwyllynge,
they will cleue and take place, if they be hard in all places. But doste thou
make war? First behold what manner a thing peace is, and what war is. What
profytte Peace brings, and what ^uyll and disprofite war brings, and so
shalt thou perceive whether it be expediente to permytte and change peace for
war. If it be a thing to be marueylde at, a kyngedome floryshynge every where
with all things, with cities well builded, with feldes well ^anerid and tild,
with very good laws, with most honest disciplines, with most holy manners:
think with thy self, if I make war, this felicity shall be troubled by me. On
the other side, if thou at any time have seen the ruin of Cities, thestretes
decayed and broken, the churches consumyd with fire, the feldes desolate, The
fruits of war.
and this miserable spectacle and syghte, as it is, is seen, think this to be
y^ fruit of war and battle. If thou think it grievous to bring into thy
country such a scelerate and fylthy company of hiryd soldiers, to nouryshe
and feed the^ with the damage and loss of thy Citizins, to serve them, to
slatter them, yea and to commit thy self and thy health to their arbytriment,
look that thou think this to be the condition of war. If thou abho theft,
war does teach it, if thou detest paracide, that is learnt in war. For how
shall he fear being moved to sley one, that hyrid for so light a stipend does
sleye and murder so many? If the neglecting of the laws be most present
pestilence of a common well, The neglecting of Laws.
the laws in yt time of war, shall keep silence, if thou esteem adultery,
incest and filthier things than those to be filthy, war is the master of all
these things. If impiety and the neglecting of religion be the spring of al
evils, The spring of ^l evils.
these thyng^s by the tempests of war are ouerthrown^. If thou judge the state
of that comenwele to be evil, where they that are worst may do most, in war
they that are most scelerate and most evil, do reygne. Note.
And their works whom in time of Peace thou woulst crucify and hang up, in
war are chefest and most regardid. For who can better led an army be
bywayes, than an exercised thief? whoo shall more strongelye rob other men's
houses, or spoil Churches, than a breaker down of walls, or a sacrilegious
person? Whoo shall more coragiouslye smite his enemy, or with his sword draw
out his bowels, than a swerd player, or a paracide? Who is so meet to set
Cities a fyer^ or ingentes of war, than he that is a burner of houses? who
shall so well contemn the perils of fludes and seas, as a pirate exercised with
long robbery? Will thou manifestlye know and see, how wicked a thing that
war is, mark and consider those well that does make it. Note.
If unto a religious prince nothing should be more acceptid than the health and
welfayre of his subjects, this man most specially should hate war. If it be
a princes felicity to rule and govern his daughters, he must most chefely
embrace peace. If we should principally wyshe unto a good prince, that he might
rule those that were best, he must needs detest war, where outeflo with the
pumpe of all impiety. If he think al yt his citizins do possese to be his, he
be all menes must needs avoid war, ye which, so that it chance happily, does
consume all men's substance, and the thing that has been purchasid and gotten
by honest arts and menes, must be spent upon a cruel sort of hang me^. Now
they most diligently must way this thing, that every man's one cause does
flatter him, and that every man's hope does please him, and when it is most
often very evil, yet unto him that is mouyd it seems most right and equal, and
this does often times deceive the^. But feign the cause to be most just, feign
the end of the war to be most profitable and prosperous: cast with thy self
the inco^modities where with the war was made and the commodities the which thou
have obtaynyd and gotten by the victory, and mark whether to win be of so
great a valor. The incommodities of war.
An vnbludlye victory does scacely chance at any time. And now thy men be
polutid with human blood. Besides this, count the loss of manners and public
discipline, the which with no utility and profit can be restoryd. Thou
consumest thy tresure, you spoildst thy people^ you do burden those yt be good,
thou do stir and provoke the dishonest to myschife, nor after that ye war is
fynyshed y^ relics thero^ are not by and by pacifide. Handy crafts, and
occupations do decay, the exchaunges and resortinge together of merchants
are shut up. And to enclose thy enemy, you art compelde to exclude thy s^l^e
from many regions and countries. Peace makethe al things commen.
Before the war, al regions and countries that borderd upon the were thine, for
peace by ye exchau^ge of things make al things common. See and behold how
great a thing you have done, the dominion which is chefelye thine, is now
scacely thine. And to besege a little town how many ingents of war and tents
are nedeful? And to overthrow a very town needs must you make and build a
cou^terfete, but yet thou might with less charge have builded a very town.
And to let thy enemy to comforth you as a banyshed man from thy country, do
sleep under ye cope of heaven. It would have cost ye less to baue builded new
walls, than to batter and throw the^ down with bombardes and ingentes of
war, that are builded. Here I dare not reke^ ne count what sommes of monye
have rune through the exactors, receuers, and Captens fingers, y^ which is no
small part. And if thou shulst revoke and call every singular thing to the
just accountes: I willingly would suffer thou shulst every where eiect me, if
you find not that peace might have been boughte for the half part of the
expensis. But if thou shulst remit any part of iniurye, thou woulste repute thy
self to be of a small courage. Yea there is no probatyon more certenne of an
abiecte, Note.
and of an vnkyngly mind, than to be revenged. Thou thynkest that sumwhat it
should diminyshe thy majesty, if having to do with some Prince bordering upon
the, and perchance thy kinsman, or affyne, and that in times past had done for
the, thou shulst remytte part of thy right. ^
But how much more abiectly doste thou despise thy majesty, when that now and
than thou shall be compelled to please the Barbarus co^panyes and vylest
dregs of all scelerate and myscheuous persons, the which shall with gold
never be filled nor satisfied? whiles that thou as meek and with prayers doste
send Ambasadours unto the Cares a most vile and hurtful people? ^ares.
whylst thou co^mittest thy life, and thy peoples goods and substance to their
faith that have neither consideracion nor holiness. But if peace shall beseme to
have any iniqitie, beware you think not thus, this I lease, ^
but I by peace so much. For a subtiler disputer shall say, I would if the thing
perticulerly pertained unto me, sone grant it. I am a prince and whether I
will, or ni^, I rule ye common wealth. He shall not litely co^mense nor begin war,
that looks upon nothing else, but that is publyke, but truly we se the
contrary, and that al causes of war be nouryshed and fed of those things, that
pertain nothing unto the people. Will thou defend this or that part of thy
dominion, what is this unto the people? Thou w^lt be reue^ged upon him that
has forsaken thy daughter, what is this to the commonwealth? to expende and
way these things, and to forese them, is the point of a very wise man, and of
a noble Prince. Who at any time has ruled more at large, or more nobly or
gloriously than Octauius Augustus? Augustus.
Atis also desired to give up and resygne his Empere, Atis.
if he had seen any other Prince more profitable for ^he common wealth. This
saying of a certain Emperor is of noble Authors merytoryously and worthily
praised. My children, says he, shall spare me, if any other can better govern
and counsel the commonwealth. These good wyls and minds the hethen show unto
the common well. But as concerning Christ's religion, christian princes esteem
christian people so litel, Note.
that either they will with the most grievous destruction of the world revenge
their cupidites and lusts, or else fulfill the^. Now I do here certain other
in this wise say the contrary, deniyng the^ selfs to be in sauegard, except
th^i may sharply repel the violence of ye wicked. Antoni^i.
Why were not the only Antonini the meke and the Philosopher among the
innumerable Emperous of Rome, invaded? but because no man rules more surely
than he, Note.
that is pressed and ready to give that over, that he gouerne^h for a common
wealth, and not for him self. And if another ye s^nse of nature, nor ye respect
of piety shall nothing move you, nor yet so great calamity, certes ye shame
of a christen name shall reduce your minds to concord. How great a portion of
the world do christen men possess? And yet this is that City sytuated upon
the high mountain, and made a spectacle both unto god and man. But what shall
we think, that ye enemies of a christen name do mean and speak, what infamy
they vomyte out against Christ, when they se that christen men do strive
among them selfs for lighter matters than the Et^nikes, more cruelly tha^ the
wicked, with more cruel ingents of war tha^ they? Whose inuencion was the
bumbarde and gunne, Go^nes.
was it not the inue^cion of christen men? And that the thing might be more
disdained, they name them by the names of the Apostles, and their Images are
graued upon them. O cruel derision. Shall Paul the continual exhorter of
peace, cast any deuelishe ingent of war against a christ^n man? If we desire to
bring the Turks to Christ's religion, let us first be christianes. Nor they
shall never believe it, if they se the thing that christ above al things does
most detest, to be no wherse more cruellye used, than among christen men. And
that Homere ye Ethnike does much maruyle at among Ethnikes, when that there is
a society of pleasant and sweet things, as of sleep, meat, drink, of
daunces, and musyke, and that of unlucky war there is no socyetie, and this is
most true among them, unto whom thee name of war ought to be abominable.
Rome that furious warrier in times past, ha^h seen at certain times her temple
of Ianus spard and shut up. Ianus temple.
And how does it agree that among you, there are no days vacant from war?
With what boldenes shall ye preach Christ the author of peace unto the^, when
that ye with continual dissension do strive among your selves? And now what
mind and courage think you, that your discord does add and give unto the
Turks? There is nothing more esye, than to overcome those, that are at
debate. Will ye be fearful unto them? Be at unity and concord, why do ye
willyngelye think your selves unworthy of the iocundite and pleasure of this
present life: and will ye fall from the felicitye that is to come? ^he life of
man.
The life of man of it self is subject to many mysfortunes, concord shall
remove a great part of the moles^iousnes and grefe, whilst that with mutual
officis the one either does comfort, or else does help and aid the other. If
any good thing chance, it shall cause the concord to be the sweter, and the
more common, whilst one f^end gives part unto his friend, and awe willer
reioyseth for his welwyllers sake. How vain things are they and how sone
shall they peryshe, for the which their is such a tumulte among you, death
unto al men is at hand, Death.
as well unto kings as unto ye commen people. What tumultes shall a vile wretch
styr up, ye shortly after shall vanishe a way as it were smoke? Eternity is at
hand. Whereto serves it to strive and labor for these things like unto
shadose, asthoug this life were immortal. O miserable wretches, yt believe not
that fortunate and happy life of the good, nor hope not for it, shameless
persons that promise the^ selves ye same to be the way and iorneye from the
wars, wha^ yt the life of the good, The life of the good.
is no another thing than a certain vnspecable communion of fortunate and happy
souls, seeing that now that thing shall fullye and perfectlye chance, that
Christ so diligently prayed his heavenly father for, that they might be so
joined together, as he was joined unto his father. Joan. ^^
And how can it be mete for this high concord, except that in the mean while
ye as much as ye may do, think upon it. And as an Angel is not suddenly made
of a stinking glutten, even so a companion of Martyrs and Saints is not
suddenly made of a sanguinole^t and bluddy warrier. Go to, there is shed enough,
yea more tha^ enough of christian blood, and if y^ be little, of human blood,
we have furiously enough stroue^ mutually to destroy each other. We hitherto
have done sacrifice enough to the furis and to hell, we have long enough fed
the Turks eyes, ye fable is endid. At the least wise at length let us after
the myseryes of the wars to long borne and sufferde, wax wise, whatsoever
hitherto has been done vndiscretelye and folyshely, let it be imputyd to the
destenye and necessity of things. Let thee obliuiousnes and forgetfulness of
thee euylls that be past, the which in time past have pleasid profane men,
please christen men, and here af^^r give your diligence with commen counsels
to the stody of peace. Uerye good cou^^^ll.
And so give your stody and diligence, that it may so be made and bound,
not with bands made of flax, but with adamantyne and sure bands, that it
never be broken. I call unto you O ye princes, at whose beck and commandment
the matters and busynesses of men most cheyfelye do depend, and that among men
do bear the Image of Christ: Knowledge the voice of your prince calling unto
peace, esteem that all the world weryid with long war, does desire this of
you: if it displease any manne, it is right and mete to give and to attribute
it to the publyke and common felycitye of all men. It is a greater and a watyer
matter, tha^ that may be neglectyd for light causes. I call unto you O ye
priests co^secratid unto god, express and declare that with al your stody, that
ye know to be most thankeful unto god, and re^oue that, that is unto him
most hatyd. I call unto you O ye divines, preach y^u the Gospel of peace,
sing continuallye peace unto ye people. I call unto you O ye Byshopes, that in
ecclesiastical dygnytye do excel other, see that your authority be of
power and force to bind Pea^e with eternal band^s. I call unto you that are
pryuate Magestrates, that your will be an aid and an help to the wisdom of
kings, and to ye mercy and justice of Bishops. I confusely call unto you
that are named by the name of a christen name, that ye with co^sentyng minds do
conspire and consent unto this thing. Show you here of what power that ye
concord of the multitude is, against the tyranny of the nobles. Unto this let
al men bring together all that ever they have. Let eternal things ioygne
them, whom nature with so many things has ioygned, and Christ with many mo.
Let every man with common stodies do, that equallye pertayneth to the
felicity of al men. Al things do inuit us to this. First ye sense of nature,
The things that in^yteih us to peace.
and (as I may sai) humanity it self. Furthermore Christ the Prince and
author of al human felicity. And besides al these things, so many
commodities of peace, and so many calamities of war. Unto this the minds of
princes, inclininge to concord, God as it were even now inspiringe them, do
call us. Behold that peasable and meke Leo, Leo,
playing the part of the vicar of Christ, has desployde and set forth his
ensign unto all men inuityng us to peace. If ye be true sheep, follow your
pastore. Frances the most christen french king, Fr^ncis.
not by title only, does call us, yt which is not greuyd to by peace, nor in
no place has any regard of his majesty, so he may provide and help the
common and public peace, teaching this to be truly a noble and a kynglye
work, to do well for man kind. Here unto does that most noble prince Charles
a young man of an vncorrupt indole and signyfication of virtue, Charles.
does call us. Nor the Emperor Maximilian does not abhore this. Maximilyan,
King Henrye the.viii.
Nor that noble king Henry of England does not refuse it. It is mete that
all other should wyllynglye ensue and follow the ensample of so great and
mighty princes. The most part of ye people detest war, and pray for peace. A
few whose wicked felycytie does depend of ye public infelicitie, does wish
for war, and whether it be right or no that their dishonestie should be of
more valor and force, than the will of all good men, judge you. Ye se that
hitherto there is nothing done by confederations, nothing auaunsid by
affinities, nothing by violence, nothing by reuengyng. Now on the other side
prove what placabilitie and benificence may do, war soeth war, and vengaunce
draws vengaunce. Now grace shall enge^der grace, and benefit shall be inuityd
by benefit, and he shall seem most kinglye y^ grants and forgoeth most of
his right. It succedeth not y^ is done by human stody. But Christ him self
shall prosper godly counsel, the which he being author and gide shall see to be
receiuid. He shall be present and favorable, he shall help us, and fauer the
fauerers of ye thing, that he so greatly fauerth, and public utility, shall
overcome private affections. And whilst peace is prouydyd for, and every
man's fortune made better, Princes kingdoms, if they rule those that be good
and religious, and raygne more by laws, than by arms, shall be amplifide: the
dignity of noble men greater and trueer, the quie^nes of preistes more
tranquil, the quietness of the people more plentiful, and their fertilytye more
quiet, and the name of Christ to the enemies of Christ's cross more ferefull.
And finallye every one shall be to ^che other, and al unto all loving and
pleasant, and above al things thankful unto Christ, whom to have plesid, is
the hiest felicity.

I have said.
IMPRINTED AT London, in Paul's Churchyard, by Ihon Cawoode, one of the
Prynters to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


