A modest mean to Marriage, pleasauntly set forth by that famous Clarke
Erasmus Roterodamus, and translated into English by N. L.

Anno. 1568.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star.

To the right worshipful Master Francis Rogers Esquire, one of the Gentlemen
pensioners unto the Queens Majesty, Nicholas Leigh wishes long and quiet
life, with much increase of virtue and worship.
WHEN I REMEMber (gentle Master Rogers) the ancient acquaintance and
friendship, and the daily and accustomed metings, recourse and familiarity
that (among the rest) did happen and pass between us in times past, in those
our young and tender years, and in those famous places of st^die, unto the
which we were by our friends appointed and then sent for learning sake. And
when moreover, I do remember, way, and consider therein on the one side, that
state and condition of life, in the which I was then, with that, which for my
part on the other side, I do now find and have long since felt and tasted of,
I cannot but reckon and think that time most happily passed which I bestowed
in the travail and study of good letters. For besides the inestimable fruit,
and the incomparable pleasure and delectation, that the Muses do bring unto
the studious, beside the sweet rest of mind, void of all worldly cares and
troubles, the fair and pleasant walks, which we there (with a number of
virtuous, and well disposed, and a sort of learned, civil, friendly and
faithful compan^ons) enjoyed, together with the wholesome and clean diet, not
infected with outrageous or any surfetings (a vice else where to much used)
what honest and godly exercises had we then there to the furtherance and
increase of virtue, and to the abandoning of vice? insomuch that in a manner it
has fared with me ever since my departing thence, as with one that being
expelled and exuled from a second Paradise, replenished and adorned with all
kind of flagrant and of most wholesome and sweet flowers and delights, is
presently fallen as it were into a dark and an yrkesome thicket of bushes and
brambles of the cares and troubles of this world, daily ready, not only to
molest and perturbe the quiet studious mind, but also so complete with an
infinite number of displeasures, damages, and dangers on every side that
(very much according to the ancient and wonted proverb) I may now justly say
vix fugiet Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim. Wherefore that man's saying
seemed not altogether void of reason, that said, that if there were any
choice to be had as touching the estate of man, the better part and the first
thereof was not to be borne at al, the next unto that was to die very shortly.
And yet by the way nevertheless, as he that has been once in any such kind
of Paradise or place of pleasure, as is aforesaid, has always now and then
some motions and occasions, to cast his sorrowful eye with a mournful mind
toward the same: even so I of late beholding and lamenting that changed
place and state of life, and in the mean season pervsing some pieces of mine
old exercises which I had then and did there (whereof I was always bold
partly to make you privy, as one among all others whose discreet judgment
and towardness in learning together with the great courtesy and singular
humanity and friendship, and the passing ready and great pleasantness of
wit, joined therewith was then certes not a little had in admiration and
embraced every where) happily I found certain loose papers of two Dialogues
of the famous and excellent Clarke Erasmus of Roterodame, by me translated into
english (partly for the pleasantness of the matter, as it seemed unto me
then, partly also for the proof and trial of my self what I could do in
translating, and lastly as the matter seemed sweet and pleasant, so not
altogether void of godly and wholesome exhortations and lessons, for all
sorts no less necessary than profitable. Which when I had with earnest view
perused, and having in mind diverse times to gratify your goodness with some
friendly token of remembrance, forthwith I thought (renewing my wo^ted
exercises) to dedicate these two Dialogues unto you. Whose knowledge and
learning I know, and gentleness therwithal to be such, that I am in an assured
hope that (until I may give better) ye will vouchsafe in the mean season
thankefully to accept these my recreations, and these few lines at my hands as
a pledge and a poor present of the continual remembrance, and the unfeigned
good will I bear toward you, and your virtuous demerites. Wherein
notwithstanding, albeit peradventure the exercise of study and learning, and
especially the matter it self therein contained may seem to be of very
small importance or pleasure, and rather otherwise different or something
disagreeable unto your vocation on every side, and also unto all such for the
most part as in the room and place of arms, are called toward the service
of the Princes Majesty, and of their Country (Rara enim inter Arma and
literas vel togas est amicitia vel societas) Yet I knowing the great reverence
and the singular regard and estimation that you do bear, and always have
borne toward the learned and toward good letters, for the pleasant and
fruitful knowledge that you your self have most happily and with great
dexterity both reaped and tasted among them in times past, I doubt not but
that (waying the worthiness of the Author of them, and accepting the faithful
endeavors of me the rude translator of them) you will be content to permit the
same to pass under your wing, and so much (I know) the rather for that they
both do tend to virtues purpose. The one of them being between a Woer and
his Feere, wherein albeit the natural ouerthwartnesse of the womanishe mind,
does now and then burst out as out of the frayler and weaker vessel, yet is
therein a godly kind of woeing without any scurilitie, very pleasantly,
lively, and plainly declared and set forth, to the good behavior and honest
inducement and furtherance of such as are yet to take that matter or enterprise
in hand, far from provoking any vice, as the manner and guise of a number of
lascivious Lovers and feigned woers now adays is, whose crafty and counterfeit
dealings, fond iestures and motions, and uncomely and vain communications and
idle talks is better to be passed over with silence than paper to be stained
therewith, or any time to be spent therein. The other is between a young man
and a light Woman, who in times past had been further acquainted then honesty
required, and he having been absent from her for a certain space, at last
repaired to her house, who after her accustomed manner and wont, began to
entise and allure him to their former follies, who perceiving her purpose
therein, discreetly and properly persuaded her by diverse and sundry godly and
virtuous reasons to leave and forsake that kind of life, as of all other most
detestable, and in the end making her thereby to loath her frail and
accustomed follies, brings her unto an honest and chaste conversation. Thus
the effect of the whole matter you have in few words. Accept therefore (I pray
you) this my simple doing in good part, weying my good will in the friendly
Balance of your accustomed gentleness, which I trust shall somewhat
counterpaise the unworthiness of this my so gross and rude a translation of
so worthy a writer. Vale.

Yours unfeignedly Nicholas Leigh.

To the Reader.
I HAVE (GENTLE Reader) set forth to thy view, two Dialogues of the Reverend
and renowned Clarke Erasmus Roterodamus: whose learning, virtue, and authority
is of sufficient force to defend his doyngs. But because I have changed his
eloquent style, into our English phrase: and thereby altered his liuerie, and
embased the perfect grace of his Muse, I am compelled to crave pardon of this
my doings, consider I beseech thee (learned Reader) that if it had still
rested in that Noble language wherein he left it, although thy knowledge had
yielded thee greater felicity than this my travail can, yet thousands, which
by this mine endeavor may draw out some sweet sap of these his pleasant and
fruitful doings, might (through ignorance) have wanted this piece of delyght.
Therefore the offense (if any be) is made to Erasmus a man of that patience in
his life, as I assure my self that this my bold dealing with him, can not a
whit disquiet his ghost. Harm to thee at all it can not be, for that I have
not digressed from mine Author. Pleasant and profitable I hope it will be to
many of my country folks whose increase in virtue I greatly desire. Then
suffer me I pray thee to rest with thy quiet and thankful judgment: whereby
thou shall urge me to attempt farther enterprise (perchance to thy delight.)
Thus assuring my self of thy lawful favor, I rest void of care of the
vnlearneds reproach, if they beyond their skill shall covet to chat. And
wishing to thee thy full delight in learning and to them increase of
knoweledge, I bid you both farewell.

FINIS.
Pamphilus, the Lover, Maria, the woman beloved.
GOod morrow cruel, good morrow ruthlesse, good morrow (I say) thou stony
hearted woman.

Maria. I wish you the same again Pamphilus as often, and as much as you
please. And by what name you like best to be saluted. But in the mean while it
seems you have forgotten my name, my name is Maria.


Pamphilus. It might more rightlye have been Martia.


Maria. And why so I beseech you? what have I to do with Mars?


Pamphilus: For as that God counts it but a pastime to murder and kill men,
even so do you. Herein yet more cruel then Mars, for you murder him that
heartily loves you.


Maria. Good words I pray you, where is that heap of dead bodies whom I
have murdered? where is the blood of them which by me are slain?


Pamphilus. One lifelesse body thou see present with thine eyes, if (pardie)
thou see me.


Ma. What say you man? do you both talk and walk, and yet dead? I pray to
God I never meet with ghostes more to be feared.


Pam. Thus thou make but a laughing matter of it. Nathelesse thou have rest
me woeful creature my life, and more cruelly do murder me, than if thou
should stab me into the body with a weapon, for now am I miserably torn and
vexed with long torments.


Maria. Yea good Lord? tell me how many women with child have lost their
fruit by meeting with you?


Pam. Yet this pale wanne color shows me to be more bloudlesse than any
shadow.


Ma. But this palenesse (thanked be God) is died with some Violet color, you
are even so pale as a Chery waxing ripe, or a Grape when he comes to his
purple skin.


Pam. Thus with disdain enough you mock a man in state rather to be pitied.


Ma. Why in case you believe not me, take the Glass, and believe your own
eyes.


Pam. I would wish no better Glass, neither (I suppose) is there any, more
clear, than that in which I presentlye behold my self even now.


Ma. What Glass speak you off?


Pam. Marie even your own eyes.


Ma. Ouertharter: how thou talkest always like thy self, but how prove you
your self to be dead? Do ghostes and shadows use to eat meat?


Pam. They do, but find no savor therein, no more do I.


Ma. And what, what do they eat I pray?


Pam. Mallows, Leekes and Lupines.


Ma. But you (I hope) let not to eat Capons and Partriches.


Pam. I grant, howbeit I feel no more pleasure in eating them, than if I
should crashe upon Mallows, or Beetes, without Pepper, wine and vinegar.


Ma. Alack for you good man, and yet you are in meetely good lyking, and do
ghostes speak also?


Pam. Even as I do with a very pewling and faint voice.


Ma. But not long since, when I heard you checking with mine other suter, your
voice was not very feeble pardie. Moreover I beseech you tell me this, do
ghostes use to walk? are they clad in garments? do they estsoones sleep?


Pam. Yea more than all that, they practice the act of kind, but after their
own manner.


Ma. Now by the faith of my body you are a pleasant trifler.


Pam. But what will you say, if I prove this by substantial and strong
reasons (I mean) my self to be dead, and you to be a murderer?


Ma. God shylde that (friend Pamphile) but let me hear your Sophistry.


Pam. First you will grant me this? (I suppose) that death is naught else but a
separation of the soul from the body.


Ma. I grant.


Pamphilus. But grant it so yt you revoke and call it not back again,
afterward.


Ma No more I will.


Pam. Secondly, you will not deny but he which reaueth the soul, wherein
consists life, is a murderer.


Ma. I consent.


Pam. You will I am sure grant me this likewise, which most grave and credible
Authors have affirmed, and by the consent and judgment of all ages has been
holden truth and allowed, (I mean) that the soul of a man is not where he
lives, but where he loves.


Ma. You must utter that after a more gross, and plain sort, for in good
faith I perceive not your meaning.


Pam. And I am the more sorry, and evil at ease, because you do not perceive
and feel this to be true, as well as I do.


Ma. Make me to feel it then.


Pam. As well might thou bid me, make an Adamant feel it.


Ma. Now truly I am a young wench, not a stone.


Pam. Truth, but more hard yet than the Adamant stone.


Ma. But proceed with your argument.


Pam. Those which are rapt in the spirit, or fallen into a trance (as they
call it) neither hear, nor see, nor smell, nor feel any thing, no though you
would kill them.


Ma. Surely I have hard say so.


Pa. And what think you to be the cause of this insensibilitie.


Ma. I would learn that of you which are a Philosopher.


Pam. Because (pardie) the soul or mind is in heaven, where it has that
which it vehemently loves, and is not present with the body.


Ma. And what is next? what conclude you upon this?


Pam. Ask thou what O cruel? even this necessarily follows, my self to
be dead, and thy self to be a murderer.


Ma. Why, where is your soul become and God will?


Pam. There it is, where it loves.


Ma. And who has rest it from you? why sigh you man? speak and fear not, you
shall not be hindered by me.


Pam. A certain cruel and pitiless maid, whom nevertheless I cannot
find in my heart to hate, being by her spoiled of my life.


Ma. Ah, a loving heart, ah gentle nature. But why do you not again take from
her, her soul, and serve her as they say, with the same sause.


Pam. The happiest in the world, were I, if I could make that exchange (I
mean) that her mind might come dwell in my breast, in sort as mine has
wholye dwelled in her body.


Ma. But will you give me leave now eftsoon a while to play the Sophister his
part with you?


Pam. Nay the Sophistresse part.


Ma. Is it possible that one and the same body both have the soul and be
without the soul.


Pam. Not both together or at one time.


Ma. When the soul is away, then the body (you say) is dead.


Pam. Truth.


Ma. And it lives not but when ye soul is present withal?


Pam. Be it so verily.


Ma. How comes this to pass then, that ye soul being there where it loves,
the body yet wherout it is departed, nevertheless lives? for if it lives in
one place, when it loves in an other, by what reason is it called Exanime
Corpus, as you would say, a lifelesse body, since it has life and sense in it.


Pam. By saint Marie you play the Sophistres meetelye well, howbeit you cannot
snarle me in such chicken bands. That soul which after a sort governs the
body of a living creature being in such case is improperly called the soul,
for in very deed it is a certain small portion of the soul, which remains
behind, even as the savor of Roses tarieth still in the hand of him, which
bare them, when ye very Roses themselves be done away.


Ma. I see well enough it is hard to take a fox in a pitch, but answer me to
this also. Is not he a doer which murthereth.


Pam. What else.


Ma. And is not ye party a sufferer, who is murdered?


Pam. Yes.


Ma. How comes it to pass then, that since he which loves is the doer and
she which is beloved is but the sufferer, she should be infamed for a
murderer, which is beloved. When as in very deed, he that loves rather
murthereth himself?


Pam. Nay, it is contrary, for he that loves suffers, she that is beloved
does.


Ma. That shall you never prove true with the consent of our chief Areopagites
of Grammar.


Pam. But this will I prove true by the consent of the whole Parliament of
Logitians.


Ma. But answer me to this again, love you with your will, or against your
will?


Pam. With my will.


Maria. Ergo, sithence it is in free choice to love, or not to love, whosoever
loves, is a murderer of himself, and wrongfullye accuses the poor wench
beloved.


Pam. Why? I say not that the wench murthereth because she is beloved, but
because she loves not again the party which loves her: for (truth it is) she
is guilty of murder, which might save a man's life and will not.


Ma. I put case a young man cast his love upon one, which he ought not to love,
or may not lawfully obtain, as an other man his wife, or a Virgin, which
has professed continual chastity, shall she love him again, so to preserve
and save her lover?


Pam. But this young man loves that, which to love is both lawful and godly,
and stands both with reason and equity, and yet nevertheless is cast away.
That in case you set light by the crime of homicide, I will aguilt you also of
sorcerie and enchaunting me.


Ma. Marry gods forbod man, what will you make of me a Circes ympe, a witch?


Pa. Yea and somewhat more cruel yet, than ever was Circes. For I had rather
be a groueling Hog or bear, then as I am, without life or soul.


Ma. And with what kind of sorcerie I pray ye do I destroy men.


Pam. By evil aspect.


Ma. Will you then that I hurt you no more with loking upon you?


Pam. Not so for Gods sake, but rather look more upon me.


Ma. If mine eyes be witches, how happens it then that other also do not
consume away, whom I look upon as often as you, therefore I fear me much, yt
bewitching is in your own eyes, not in mine.


Pam. Why think you it not enough to flea Pamphilus, except you triumph over
him being dead.


Maria. Oh queint handsome, nise dead body: when shall your funerals be
provided for.


Pam. Sooner than you think ywisse, except you remedy in time.


Ma. I remedy good Lord? am I able to do such a cure?


Pam. Yea surely: all were I dead, it lies in you to raise me up again to
life, and that with a light thing.


Maria. As you say, peradventure I might do it, if some body would help me
to the herb Panaces, whereunto they ascribe so great a virtue.


Pam. There needs none herbs to do it, only vouchsafe to love again, what
is more easy to be performed? nay rather what is more due and just? otherwise
you shall never acquit your self of manspilling.


Maria. And before what judgment seat shall I be arrayned, before the severe
Areopagetes and God will?


Pam. Not so, but before the tribunal seat of Venus.


Maria. Best of al, for they say she is a patient and pitiful Goddess.


Pam. Say you so, there is not one amongst them all, whose wrath is more to be
feared.


Ma. Why, has she a thunderbolte?


Pam. No.


Maria. Has she a threeforked mase like Neptune?


Pam. Not so.


Ma. Has she a spear as Pallas?


Pam. Neither: but she is a Goddess of the Sea.


Maria. I come not within her kingdom.


Pam. But she has a boy.


Maria. I fear no boys.


Pam. He is ready to revenge, and will pay home when he strikes.


Ma. And what shall he do to me?


Pam. What shall he do: the gods fore let him. I will prognosticate none evil
unto one, whom I bear good will.


Ma. Yet tell me I pray you, I will take no conceit of it.


Pam. Then will I tell you if you shall disdain this lover, who doubtless is
not unworthy your love, verily I believe, that same boy (peradventure at the
commandment of his mother) will thirle into your heart a lance embrued with
to bad a poison, whereby you shall set your affection miserably upon some
hoblout, who shall not love you any whit again.


Ma. Marry that were a plague in deed, of all other most to be detested.
Certes I had rather to die, than to be entangled in the love of one which is
deformed, and could not find in his heart to love me likewise again.


Pam. But it is not long time, since there was a right notable example of this
evil, which I now speak off, showed in a certain young damzel.


Ma. In what place, and I may be so bold as to ask you?


Pam. At the City Aurelia.


Ma. How many years ago?


Pam. How many years, nay, it is scarce yet ten months,


Ma. And what was the Maids name? whereat stick you?


Pam. Nothing. I knew her as well as I knew you.


Ma. Why tell you me not her name then?


Pam. Because I like not the luck thereof, I had rather she had had any other
name: She had even the very name that you have.


Ma. Who was her father?


Pam. He is yet man alive, and amongst the Lawyers is one of chief estimation,
and of substantial wealth.


Ma. Tell me his name also.


Pam. Mauritius.


Ma. His surname.


Pam. His surname was Aglaus.


Ma. Lives the mother yet?


Pam. She departed of late.


Ma. Of what disease died she?


Pam. Of what disease, quoth you, for mere sorrow and heaviness. And the
father himself albeit he is a man of a strong nature escaped very narowly.


Ma. And may I learn at your hand also the name of the mother.


Pam. With all mine heart, who is he that knows not Sophrona. But what mean
you by this questioning? Think you that I contriue fables for you.


Ma. Why should I think so, that is rather to be suspected in our kind, but
tell on, what befell unto this maid.


Pam. This damzell was come of an honest stock (as I have said) and wanted no
wealth to her preferment: for bewty and shape of body, also goodly to behold,
what needs many words, she was well worthy to have lien by a Prince his side.
She had a wooer, who earnestly besought her good will, a man for personage and
beauty not unlike her self.


Ma. And what was his name?


Pam. Alas, God bless me from the luck, his name also was Pamphilus, when he
had done all that he could, and assayed all ways possible to obtain her good
will, she still obstinately despised him. In fine, the young man pined away with
sorrow, and dyed. Not long after, this wench began to dote upon such a
handsome squire, as for his personage, I might more rightly call an Ape than a
man.


Ma. What say you man?


Pam. She was so far fallen in the brakes with him, that I am not able to
express.


Ma. What, so proper a wench with so unsightly a piece?


Pam. He had a head made like a sugar lofe, the hear thereof growing as it
were by stitches and that knotted, unkempt, full of scurfe and nittes, and a
good part of his scalpe was bared by the disease called Alopecia, Alopecia is
a disease that causes the hear to pill off.
his eyes sunk into his head, his nosethrils wide and turning vpwardes, a mouth
like an Oven with rotten teeth, and a stamering tongue, a scuruy beard, a bunch
back, a belly like a tode, and legs as right as a pair of horse ha^mes.


Ma. Marry sir you describe him to be a very Thersites? Thersites a Prince,
that came with the Greeks to the siege of Troy, which in person and condition
was of all other most deformed.



Pam. Nay besides all this, they say, he had but one of his ears.


Ma. Peradventure he had lost the other in some battle.


Pa. No surely, even in peace.


Ma. Who durst be so bold to do that?


Pam. Who but Dionysius that cutteth of ears at the Pillery.


Ma. Well, it may be yet yt his substance at home was such as made a full mendes
for all the deformity that you have spoken of.


Pam. Nay surely: he had vnthriftilye spent all, and ought more than he was
worth, with this suchen an husband does this so goodly a wench now lead her
life.


Ma. You have declared a thing much to be pitied.


Pam. Surely it is true, the Goddess Nemesis would so have it, Nemesis, the
Goddess of wrath or indignation.
that the injury of the young man, whom she despised might be requited of her.


Ma. I would rather wish to be destroyed with a thunderbolt out of hand, than
to be yoked with such a mate.


Pam. Therefore beware how you provoke this Lady, who reuengeth disdain, and
frame your heart to love him again, who loves you.


Ma. If that may suffice (lo) I love you again.


Pam. But I crave that love at your hand, which should be perpetual and to
love me as your own. I seek a wife, not a friend.


Ma. I know that well enough, Deliberandum est diu, quod statuendum est semel.
but that thing requires long deliberation, and much aduisement, which when it
is done, cannot be undone again.


Pam. I have deliberated upon it to long for my part.


Ma. Well (I reed you) take beede, least love who is not the best counselor
beguile you, for men say that love is blind.


Pam. Nay, that love has eyes which springs upon judgment: I do not
therefore take you to be such a one as you are, because I love you: but I love
you for that I plainly see you to be such a one.


Ma. Beware I say, you mistake me not, you may be ouerseene, if you had worn
the shoe, then you should perceive where it wringeth.


Pam. I must put it in a venture, although by many good tokens I conceive a
hope of better luck.


Ma. Why, are you skillful in signs and tokens, are you become an Augur?
Augurs be they which by certain signs in birds and beasts descrie things to
come.



Pam. Yea marry am I.


Ma. By what Augurall signs I pray you, do you conjecture that it shall be
thus? has the night Crow taken her flight before you?


Pam. She flies for fools.


Ma. What, have you seen a cowple of Dooues come flying toward you on the
right hand?


Pam. No such thing, but I have known for the space of certain years the
verteous and honest behavior of your parents, that is a bird not least to be
regarded (I think) to be come of a good stock. Moreover, I am not ignorant with
what wholesome instructions, and verteous examples you have been traded and
brought up by them. And truly good education is of more effect than good
Parentage. This is an other sign which moves me to conceive a good hope,
beside this, between my parents, which I hope I need not to be ashamed of and
yours, have (as I suppose) been, no small love and friendship. Yea we our selves
from our biggens (as they say) have been brought up together, and not much
unlike one unto another in nature and disposition. Now our age, substance,
estimation, and blood are as well between us two, as between both our
parents in a manner equal. Lastly that which in friendship is the chief
thing, your manners seems not the worste to square unto my mind and liking,
for it may be that a thing is simply and of it self right excellent and yet
not apt and meet for some use. How my manners frames unto your mind again I
know not. These, these be the birds (my Joy) which puts me in an assured
hope, that a conjunction between us two, shall be right joyful, pleasant,
stable, and sweet, so that you could find in your heart to sing that song,
which I so much desire to hear.


Maria. What song is that you would have me to sing.


Pam. I will teach you the tune thereof. Sum tuus, I am thine.
say you again, Sum tua.


Ma. Be thou mine.
The song in deed is short, but me thinks it has a very long end, and much
matter depends thereon.


Pam. What forces it for the length, so it be pleasant and sweet unto you.


Ma. I love you so well that I would not have you do that, whereof you should
herafter repent and beshrew your self.


Pa. I pray you never speak of any repentance.


Ma. Peradventure you should otherwise esteem of me, when either age or
sickness shall change this form or favor.


Pam. Why? this body of mine (O my dear) shall not always continue in this
estate, thus pressed and lusty, but I respect not so much this flourishing and
bewtifull house, as I do him that dwells therein.


Maria. What mean you by that you speak of him that dwells within?


Pam. Verily I mean your well disposed and virtuous mind, whose beawtie
always increases with age.


Ma. What, your sight is yet more pleasant than Linx, if you can epsy that,
through so many couerings.


Pam. Yea certes with my mind I do right well epsy your mind: moreover (I
say) in those children which God shall send us, we shall as it were, wax
young again.


Maria. But in the mean time virginity is lost.


Pam. Truth, in good faith, tell me if you had a goodly orchyarde plat, whether
would you wish nothing should therein grow but blossoms, or else had you
rather (the blossoms fallen away) behold your trees fraught and laden with
pleasant fruit?


Maria. How sliely he reasons.


Pam. At the least answer me to this: whether is it a better sight for a Vine
to lie upon the ground and rot, or the same to embrace a poale, or an elm,
and lode it full with purple grapes?


Maria. Now sir answer me to this again, whether is it a more pleasant sight
a Rose trim and milkewhite, yet growing on his stalk, or the same plucked with
the hand, and by little and little withering away?


Pam. Certes in mine opinion the rose is the happiest, and comes to the
better end, which withers and dies in the hand of man, delighting in the
mean while both the eyes and nosethrils, than the other which withereh on the
bush, for there must it needs wither also at length, even as that wine has
better luck which is drunken, than that which stands still, and is turned
into vinigar. And yet the flowring beauty of a woman does not decay forthwith
as soon as she is married, for I know some my self, who before they were
married, were pale colored, faint, and as it were pined away, who by the
friendly fellowship of an husband, have wared so fair, and welfauoured, that
you would think they never came to the flower of their beauty till then.


Ma. But for all your saying, virginity is a thing much beloved and lyked with
all men.


Pam. I grant you, a young woman, a virgin, is a fair, and goodly thing, but
what by course of kind is more unseemly tha^ an old wrinkled maid: Had not
your mother been contented to lose that flower of her virginity, surely we had
not had this flower of your beauty. So that in case (as I hope) our marriage be
not barren, for the loss of one virgin we shall pay God many.


Ma. But they say chastity is a thing wherein God is much delighted.


Pam. And therefore do I desire to couple my self in marriage with a chaste
maiden, that with her I may lead a chaste life. As for our marriage it shall
rather be a marriage of our minds, than of our bodies, we shall increase unto
Christ, we shall increase unto the common wealth. How little shall this
matrimony differ from virginity? and peradventure hereafter we shall so live
together, as blessed Marie lived with Joseph, no man comes at the first to
perfection.


Maria. What is that I heard you say even now, must virginity be violated and
lost, thereby to learn chastity?


Pam. Why not, even as by drinking of wine moderately, we learn by little and
little to forbear wine utterly, which of these two seems unto thee to be
more temperat, he that sitting in the mids of many dainty dishes, abstaineth
from them all, or he which forbeareth intemperauncie, having none occasion to
move him unto the same?


Ma. I suppose him to have the more confirmed habit of temperance whom plenty
always pressed can not corrupt.


Pam. Whether deserves more the praise of chastity, he that geldeth him
self, or he which keeping his members all and sound abstaineth from all
woman's company?


Ma. Verily by my consent the latter shall have the praise of chastity, that
other of mad folly.


Pam. Why? those which by vow have abiured matrimonye do they not after a
sort gelde themselves:


Maria. Verily it seems so.


Pam. Thus you see, it is no virtue to forbear women's company.


Maria. Is it no virtue?


Pam. Mark me this, if it were simplye a virtue to forbear the company of a
woman, then should it be also a vice to use the company of a woman, but
sometime it befalls that it is sin to refuse the act, and a virtue to use it.


Ma. In what case is it so?


Pam. In case the husband requires of his wife the debt of marriage, even so
often as he shall do it, especially if he requires it for the desire of
generation.


Ma. But what if he be fleshfond and wanton, may she not lawfully deny it him?


Pam. She may admonish him of his fault and rather gently persuade him to
bridle his affections, to give him a flat nay when he fraineth upon her, she
may not. Albeit I here very few men complain of their wyfes vncurtesie this
way.


Ma. Yet me thinks liberty is sweet.


Pam. Nay rather virginity is a heavy burden. I shall be to you a King, and
you shall be to me a Queen. And either of us shall rule the family, as we
think good, take you this to be a bondage?


Ma. The common sort calls marriage an halter.


Pam. Now on my faith they are well worthy an halter that so terms it. Tell
me I pray you is not your soul bound unto your body?


Ma. I think so.


Pa. Yea surely even as a bird unto her cage, and yet if ye should ask him the
question, whether he would be loosed or no, I suppose he would say nay. And
why so? because he is willingly and gladly bound thereunto.


Ma. We have little to take to neither of us both.


Pam. So much the less indaungered to fortune are we, that little you shall
increase at home with saving, which as they counteruayleth a great revenue, and
I abroad with diligence.


Ma. An household of children brings innumerable cares.


Pam. On the other side again, the same children brings infinite pleasures,
and oftentimes requiteth the parents natural pains to the uttermost, with
great ouerplusse.


Ma. Then to lead a barren life in marriage is a great misery.


Pam. Why are you not now barraine? tell me whether had ye rather never be
borne, or borne to die.


Ma. Certes I had rather be borne to die.


Pam. So that barrainnesse is yet more miserable which neither had, nor shall
have child, even as they be more happy which have already lived, then they
which never have, nor shall hereafter be borne to live.


Ma. And what be those, I pray you which neither are, nor shall be.


Pam. For he that cannot find in his heart to suffer and abide the chaunges,
and chances, whereunto all we indifferently be subject, as well men of poor
estate, as Kings, and Emperors, he is not to dwell here, let him get him out
of this world. And yet, whatsoever shall mischaunce unto us two, yours should
be but the one half thereof, the greater part I will always take unto mine
own self. So that if any good thing do happen unto us our pleasure shall
be dubble if any evil betide us, you shall have but the one half of the
grief, and I the other. As for my self, if God so would, it were unto me a
pleasure, even to end my life in your arms.


Ma. Men can better sustain and bear with yt which chances according to the
common course and rule of nature. For I see that some parents are more
troubled with their childrens evil manners, than with their natural deaths.


Pam. To prevent such misfortune, that it happen not unto us, it rests for
the most part in our power.


Ma. How so?


Pam. For commonly parents, which be good and virtuous, have good and
virtuous children, I mean as concerning their natural disposition, for doves
do not hatch Puthockes: wherefore we will first endeavor to be good our
selves, and our next care shall be, that our children may even from the
mothers breast, be seasoned with virtuous counsails, and right opinions, for it
skilleth not a little what licour you pour into a new vessel at the first.
Finallye, we shall provide that they may have even at home in our house a good
example of life to follow.


Ma. Hard it is to bring that to pass that you say. Difficilia que pulchra.
Godly things be hard.



Pam. No marvel, for commendable, and good it is. And for that also are you
hard to be entreated and won, the more deficile and hard it is, the more
good will and endeavor shall we put there unto.


Maria. You shall have me a matter soft and plyant, see you yt you do your
part in forming and shaping me as you ought.


Pam. But in the mean while say those three words which I require of you.


Ma. Nothing were more easy for me to do, but words be wynged, and when they
be flowen out once do not retire, I will tell you what were a better way for
us both. You shall treat with your Parents and mine, and with their will and
consent let the matter be concluded.


Pam. Ah you set me to woo again, it is in you, with three words to dispatch
the whole matter.


Ma. Whether it lies in me so to do (as you say) I know not, for I am not
at liberty. And in old time marriages were not concluded without the will and
consent of their parents or elders. But howsoever the case be, I suppose our
marriage shall be the more luckie, if it be made by the authority of our
parents. And your part it is to seek and crave the good will, for us to do it,
it were unseemly: virginite would seem always to be taken with violence,
yea though sometime we love the party most earnestly.


Pam. I will not let to seek their good will, so that I may always be in an
assurance of your consent.


Ma. You need not doubt thereof, be of good cheer (my Pamphile)


Pam. You are herein more scrupulus yet then I would wish you to be.


Ma. Nay marie, way, and consider you well with your self, before, whereunto
you have set your mind and will. And do not take into your counsel, this
blind affection borne toward my person, but rather reason, for that which
affection decerneth is liked for a ceaso^, but that which reason auiseth is
never mislyked.


Pam. Certes thou speak like a witty wench: wherefore I intend to follow
thy counsel.


Ma. You shall not repent you thereof, but how he sirrah there is now fallen
into my mind a doubt, which vexes me sore.


Pam. Away with all such doubts for Gods sake.


Ma. Why will you have me marry my self to a dead man?


Pam. Not so, for I will revive again.


Maria. Now, lo you have voided this doubt, fare ye well my Pamphile.


Pam. See you I pray that I may so do.


Ma. I pray God give you a good night, why fetch you such a sighe man?


Pam. A good night say you? I would to God you would vouchsafe to give me
that, which you wish me.


Ma. Soft and fair, I pray you your harvest is as yet but in the green blade.


Pam. Shall I have nothing of yours with me at my departure.


Ma. Take this Pomander to theere your heart with.


Pam. Yet give me a kiss withal I pray thee.


Ma. I would keep my virginity whole, and undefiled for you.


Pa. Why does a kiss take ought away from your virginity?


Ma. Would you think it well done that I should be free of kisses unto other
men?


Pam. Nay marry I would have my kisses spared for my self.


Ma. I keep them for you then. And yet there is an other thing in ye way,
which makes me that I dare not at this time give you a kiss.


Pam. What is that.


Ma. You say that your soul is already gone well near altogether into my
body, and a very small part thereof taryeth behind in your own, so that I
fear in time of a kiss, that which remains might happen to sterte out after
it, and then were you altogether without a soul. Have you therefore my right
hand in token of mutual love, and so fare you well. Go you earnestly about
your matters. And I for my part in the mean while, shall pray unto Christ,
that the thing which you do, may be unto the joy and felicity of us both. Amen


Of the young man and the evil disposed woman.
Lucrecia. Sophronius. Jesus mercy my old loving Frynde Sophronius, are you at
length come again unto us? now me thinks you have been away even a world
space, Truly at the first blushe I scarce knew you.

Sophronius. And why so mine old acquaintance Lucres?


Lucres. Why so? because at your departing you had no berd at al, now you
become a handsome beardling. But what is the matter my sweet heart: for me
thinks you are waxed more stern and grave countenaunced then to fore you had
wont.


Sophronius. I would gladly talk with you friendlye in some place aparte from
all company.


Lucres. Why are we not here alone (my lust?)


Sophronius. No, let us go our selves into some place yet more secret and
privy.


Lu. Be it so, let us go into my inward chamber, if ought you list to do.


Sophronius. Yet me thinks this place is not close and secret enough.


Lucres. Why? whence comes this new shamefastness upon you? I have a Closet
wherein I lay up my Jewels and array, a place so dark that uneath the one of
us shall see the other.


So. Look round about it, if there be any crany or rifte.


Lu. Here is not a cranye nor rifte to be seen.


So. Is there no body near that might listen and here us?


Lu. No verily not a fly (my joy) why doubt you? why go you not about your
purpose?


So. Shall we here beguile the eyes of God?


Lu. Not so, for he sees through all things?


So. Or shall we be out of the sight of his Angels?


Lu. Neither, for no body can hide him out of their sight.


So. How happens it then, that we be not ashamed to do that before the eyes
of God, and in the presence of his holy Angels, which we would be ashamed to
do in the sight of men?


Lu. What a strange thing is this, came you hither to preach? put ye on, one
of Saint Frances cowles, and get ye up into the Pulpit, and let us hear you
there my young Beardling.


So. Neither would I think it much so to do, if by that mean I might call
you back from this kind of life, not only most foul and shameful, but also
most miscrable.


Lu. And why so good sir? I must get my living one way or other, every man
lives and is maintained by his craft, and science, this is our trade our lands
and revenues.


So. I would to God (good friend Lucres) that you, voyding for a while this
drunkenness of the mind, could find in your heart rightly to ponder and
consider with me, the thing as it is.


Lu. Keep your sermond till an other time, now let us take our pleasure (my
good friend Sophronie)


So. All that you do, you do it for lucre and gains I am sure.


Lu. Therein you have gone nere the mark.


So. Well, you shall loose noparte of that, which you make your account upon,
I will give you even four times as much only, to lend me your attentive care.


Lu. Say on then even what you please.


So. First answer me to this. Have you any that bears you evil will?


Lu. Mo then one.


So. And ^re there not some again, whom you hate likewise?


Lu. Even as they deserve at my hand.


So. Now if it lay in thee to pleasure them would thou in faith do it?


Lu. Nay sooner would I give them their bane.


So. Very well, consider now, consider I say whither ought thou may do to
them more pleasant and better lyked, then to let them see thee lead this
manner of life, so shameful and wretched. On the other side, what can thou do
more to the grief and misliking of them, which be thy very friends in deed?


Lu. Such was my lot, and destiny.


So. Moreover, that which is compted to be the most hard, and heavy hap of
those which are cast out into Islands, or banished unto the people most in
human and barbarous, the same have you of your own free will, and election,
taken unto your self.


Lu. And what is that?


So. Have not thou of thine accord renounced and forsaken all natural
affections and loves, your father, mother, brethren, sistrene, aunt, great
aunt, and whomsoever beside nature has linked unto thee for they in v^^ye
deed, are full evil ashamed of thee, and thou dare not once come into their
sight.


Lu. Nay marrye, me thinks I have luckilye changed mine affectes, in that
for a few lovers, now I have won me very many, among whom you are one, whom
I have accounted off as my natural brother.


So. Let pass this light accustomed talk, and way the matter as it is, in
earnest. And first believe me this (my Lucres) she that has so many lovers,
has no love at all. They that resort unto thee, do not take thee for their
love, but rather for their lust, see how thou have debased thy self wretched
Woman. Christ held thee so dear, that he vouchsafed to redeem thee with his
most precious blood, to the end, thou might partake with him in his
heavenly kingdom. And thou make thy self a common Gonge, or muckhill
whereunto foul and filthy, scalde, and scuruie, does at their pleasure resort,
to shake off their filth and corruption. That if thou be yet free and not
infected with that loathsome kind of leprie, commonly called the french pockes,
assure thy self thou cannot long be without it. Which if it chance thee to
have, what in more miserable and wretched case then thou, yea, though other
things were as thou would wish (I mean) thy substance and fame, what shall
thou then be, but a lump of quick carraine: you thought it a great matter to be
obedient unto your mother, now you live in servitude, under a filthy bawd. It
went to your heart to hear the good aduertisements of your father, here you
must often times take in good part, even the stripes of dronkardes, and
madbraines, you could away with no manner of work, when you were with your
friends, to help toward your living, but in this place what trouble, what
continual watcking are you feign to sustain?


Lu. From whence (and God will) coms this new prating preacher.


So. Now I pray thee, have this also in thy mind. The flower of beauty,
which is the bait that allureth men to love thee, in short time it shall
fade, and decay. And what shall thou then do, unhappy creature, what
donghill shall be more vile, and unregarded than thou then? than lo, thou
shall of an hoore, become a bawd, yet every one of you comes not unto that
promotion, but if that befalls thee, what is more abominable, or nerer
reprocheth even to the wicked occupacion of the devil.


Lu. Truth it is in good faith, Sophronie in a manner all that you have hitherto
said. But how comes this new holiness upon you, who were wont to be
amongst all the little goods, yet one of the least, for no man repaired hither,
either oftener or at more untimely hours, than your self? I hear say you have
been at Room lately.


So. I have so in deed.


Lucres. Why men are wont to come from thence worse than they went thither. How
happens the contrary to you?


So I will tell you, because I went not to Rome, with that mind, and after
that sort, other commonly go to Rome, even of set purpose to return worse,
and so doing they want none occasions when they come there, to be as they
purposed. But I went thither in the company of an honest virtuous man, by
whose advise, in steed of a bibbing bottel, I carried with me, a handsome
little book the new testament of Erasmus translation.


Lu. Of Erasmus? And they say he is an heretic and an half.


So. Why has the name of that man come hither also?


Lu. None more famous with us.


So. Have you ever seen his person?


Lu. Never, but in good faith I would I might, because I have heard so much
evil of him.


So. Perhaps of them that be evil themselves.


Lu. Nay truly, even of reverend personages.


So. What be they.


Lucres. I may not tell you that.


So. And why so I pray.


Lu. Because if you should blab it out, and it come unto their ears. I should
loose no small part of my living.


So. Fear thou not, thou shall speak it to a stone.


Lu. Harken hither in thine ear the^,


So. A fond wench, what needs it to lay mine ear to thine, seeing we be
alone? except it were that God should not hear it. Oh living God, I see thou
art a religious whore, thou do thy charity upon Mendicants.


Lu. Well, I get more by these Mendicants and simple beggars, Mendicant Friars.
than by you rich folk.


So. So I think, they spoil and prowle from honest matrones to cast at whores
tails.


Lu. But tell on your tale concerning the book.


So. I will so do, and better it is. Therein Paul taught me a lesson, who
being endued with the spirit of truth could not lie, that neither whores, nor
whore haunters shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. When I had read this, I
began to consider with my self in this wise. It is a small thing, which I
look to be heir of by my father, and yet nevertheless rather I had to shake
hands with all wanton women, then to be set beside that inheritance, how much
more then does it sit me on, to beware yt my father in heaven does not
disinherite me of that far more excellent inheritance, for against mine earthly
father, which goes about to disinherite me, or to cast me off, the civil
laws do offer a remedy, but if God list to cast of, or disinherite, there is
no help at all. Whereupon, I forthwith utterly forefended my self, the use
and familiarity of all evil disposed women.


Lu. That is if you be able to live chaste.


So. It is a good part of the virtue of continency, heartily to couit and
desire the same, if it will not so be, well, the uttermost remedy is to take
a Wife. When I was come to Rome, I powered out the hole sincke of my conscience
into the bosom of a certain Friar penitentiarie, who with many words, right
wiselye exhorted me to purity, and cleanness of mind and body, and unto
the devout reading of holy scripture, with often prayer and soberness of life,
for my penance he enjoined me naught else, but that I should kneel on my
knees before the high alter, and say ye Psalm Miserere mei deus. And if I had
money to give in almoys unto some poor body a Carolyne. And whereas I meruayled
much, that for so many times, as I had confessed my self to have played the
brothell, he laid upon me so small a penance, he answered me right
pleasauntlye thus. Son (quoth he) if thou truly repent, if thou change thy
conversation, I pass not on thy penance, but if thou proceed still therein, thy
very lust it self shall at the length bring thee to pain and penance enough I
warrant thee, though the Priest appoints thee none, for example look upon my
self, whom thou see now, bleare eyed, palsy shaken, and crooked, and in
time paste I was even such a one as thou declarest thy self to be. Thus lo
have I learned to leave it.


Lu. Why then for ought that I can see I have lost my Sophronius.


So. Nay rather thou have him safe, for before he was in deed lost, as one
which neither loved thee nor himself. He now loves thee with a true love, and
thristeth thy salvation.


Lu. What advise you me then to do, friend. Sophronius?


So. As soon as possible you may to withdraw your self from this kind of
life, you are yet but a girl (to speak off) and the spot of your misdemeanour
may be washed away. Either take an husband (so doing we will contribute some
thing to prefer you) either else get you into some godly College or
Monestery which receives those that have done amiss, upon promise of
amendment, or at the leastwyse departing from this place, betake your self
into the service of some virtuous and well disposed Matrone. And to which of
these you list to enclyne your mind, I offer you my friendly help and
furtheraunce.


Lu. Now I beseech you with all my heart Sophronie look about and provide for
me, I will follow your counsel.


So. But in the mean while convey your self from out of this place.


Lu. Alack so sone,


So. Why not, rather this day than to morrow? namely since lingering it is
damage, and delay is dangerous.


Lu. Whether should I then repair, where should I stay my self?


So. You shall pack up all your apparel and Jewels, and deliver it unto me in
the evening, my servant shall closelye carry it, unto a faithful honest
Matrone. And within a while after, I will lead you out, as it were to walk
with me and you shall secretly abide in that Matrons house, at my charge, until
I provide for you: And that time shall not be long.


Lu. Be it so my Sophronius, I betake my self wholly unto you.


So. For so doing hereafter, you shall have joy.


FINIS.

