PREPARATION TO DEATH, A book as devout as eloquent, compiled by Erasmus
Roterodame.

Phil. 1.

MIHI VIVERE Christus est, and mori lucrum.

THE PREFACE. DESIDERIVS ERASMUS OF ROTERODAME, to the right noble lord
Thomas, Earl of wylteshyre, and of Drmanie, sends gretynge.
TO THE VERY PERfyte conclusyon of Christ's lore, your lordeshyp calls me,
most noble Earl, and yet more noble in the study of godlynes, than in the
ornaments of fortune, in that ye provoke me to add to my former books some
little thing, teachinge how a man ought to prepare him to death. For this is of
man's life the last part (as it were) of the play, whereof hangs either
everlasting bliss of man, or everlasting damnation. This is the last fight
with the enemy, whereby the soldier of Christ looks for eternal triumph,
if he overcome: and everlasting shame, if he be overcome. As tonchynge my
self. I have been hole in this business this great while, where as your
exhortation was, as who says, a spur to him that renneth. How be it at that
time I studied for mine own private comfort. But your goodness coueteth, that
also this fruit through us might be made commun unto many. Would god, that the
lord of his goodness will grant to your most holy requests, and to mine
endeavor a prosperous end, at least I will not wrestle against his will,
through whose instincte, I suppose this mine obsequye and service to be
demanded of your lordeshyp.

Fare ye well. At Friburge, the Lalendes of Decembre, the year of our lord, a
thousand, five hundredth, thyrty and three.

A BOOK OF ERASMUS OF Aotcrodame, how every man ought for to prepare him self,
to dye.
OF ALL DRADFVLL things, death is most dradfull, says a certain Philosopher,
of great Aristotle
fame, but which had not herd that heavenly Philosopher, which has taught us,
not only with words, but also with euydente examples, that a man perysheth
not by death of body, but is drawn in sondre, and that the soul is led
forth as it were out of a prison most paynful, in to blessed rest: and the
body also shall live again, to be partaker of the glory. He had not herd
this principle of the spirit: Blessed be the dead, which dye in the lord.
He had not herd Paul lametynge Apoc. 14.
and syghynge: I covet to be dissolved, and be with Christ. And, Christ to me
is life, and death is lucre. But it is nothing to be Phil. 1.
merueyled at, if they, which believe, that the hole man perysheth by death,
nor have not this hope, which only the faith in Christ works in us, either
bewail the death of other, or fear and abhor their own. This is rather to
be merueyled, that there be so many such as I am, which, wha^ they have learned
and do profess al Christis philosophy, yet so fear death, as though either
they do believe, that nothing of man remains after the brethe expired, or as
though they mystruste the promyses of Christ: or else as though they utterly
despair of them selves. The first propretie of these three is, of beastly
persons, such as Sardanapalus was. The second is of infidelles, which have
no trust in Christ, and the third is of them that be ignorant of gods
mercy. In this behalf they seem like to hethen persons, that be ignorant of
god. For he is ignorant of god, that knows not him to be of infynite mercy.
This without question, that the commun sort of men do thus fear at the
namynge of death, comes partly of the unsteadfastness of faith, partly of the
love of worldly things. He knows of no tremblyng, which in full trust says
with the spostle: Whether we live, we Romans 14.
live to the lord, or whether we dye, we dye to the lord. Wherefore whether we
live, or whether we dye, we be the lords. But that the lord ones has
received into his protection, can not peryshe. Out of this fountain springs
the voice of the prophet, wytnessynge his vnfearful mind, If I should walk in
the mids of the shadow of death, (...) 22.
I will not fear euyls, because thou art with me. For the faith full lord
never forsakes them; which yield them holly to his grace, but keeps them as
the most tender part of his eye. For he is lord both of life and death, to
whom nothing is dead, but all things live, which cleave to him by faith. Of
the weakness of faith is gendred the love of temporal commodities. For if
with our hole heart we believed the things that god has promised us by his
son Jesus, all the delectations of this world should sone be little
regarded, and death which sets us ever unto them with a paynefulle (but yet
a short) passage, should be les feared. The wise man cries: O death, how bitter
is thy memory? But what adds he? To Eccle. 41.
a man having peace in his substance. He says not, having riches, For
many good men have possessed richesse: but to him that has his quietness in
them. That that is spo ken of riches, the same is to be understand of honors,
pleasurs, wife, childern, kynsfolke, fre^des, of beauty, youth, good health,
brefely of all kind of commodities, which death plucketh from both good and
evil. The more ferventely we love a thing, the more paynefully we be plucked
from it. If thou be in love with any thing, thou Horace
shalt leye it down against thy will, says and certain wise pagane. Now,
he is in love with these temporal things, who so ever rests in them, as in
propre and perpetual goods, where as these are but borrowed and transytory, to
be laid down not only patiently, but also thankfully, so often as he
demands them again, which gave them. For in these worldly goods a man to
set his rest, this is to enjoy them, which he ought to use, and that also by
the way, and as it were in his passage: as the apostle aduertyseth the
Corinthes, It remains brethren, 2. Cor. 4.
that they that have wives, should be as not having, and they that weep, as
not weeping, and they that joy, as not ioyenge, and they that bye, as not
possessynge, and they that use this world, as though they used it not. For
the fashion of this world passes away. We be wayfarynge men in this world,
not inhabytantes, we be as strangers in Innes (or to speak it better) in
bouthes or tents, we live not in our country. This holle life is nothing
else but a rennynge to death, and that very short, but death is the gate of
everlasting life.

Amongst the Jews because contractes (...) 25.
and purchases were expyred and ended by a certain day, by the order of their
laws, how much shorter the space of time was, so much was the price of
things the lyghter. Than how much more ought al these transitory things be
of little regard, that are in danger of so many chances, which though no
casualtie plucked away, yet death plucketh away all from all men? Add
hereunto, that they, which run at a game, se how much space they have left
behynd them, and how much remains to the mark: And in times past they that
looked for the Jubilee, knew how long they might enjoy that that they had
bought. But there is no mortal man, which certainly knows, that he shall
live until the next day. We run, but having death in our fete, yea
carieng it about on all our body. We have received our life freely of the lord,
but condicionally, that we surrender it at every moment, when he demands it.
How though it chances us to live until extreme age, which to how few it
chances, every man knows, O lord god, what is the hole life of man, but a
very short rennynge place, wherein will we will we not, we run contynuallye,
sleep we, wake we, be we in wealth or in woe? The contynuall course of the world
carries us away like a boystous flode, although we seem to our selves, or to
other, to stand still. Than if prices of world ly things be esteemed by the
shortenes of time, how much more vile ought tho things to be, which have
not so much as one hour certain? Now the things that we lyttelle regard,
we lyttelle force though they be plucked away from us, as they why che be not
at home, but in strange countries, if any commodity appears unto them in the
way, or in their ynnes, they cast not their mind greatly thereto, because they
must leave forth with the thing that delyteth them, and if any inco^modite
chance them, they bear it easily, thinkyng thus, Here I dine, my supp is
ordained in an other place. The things that be seen (says Paul) be
te^porall, 2. Corl. 4
and tho that be not seen, be eternal. And this is a great part of the
Christen philosophy, which prepares us to death, that by the contemplation
of things eternal and heavenly, we may learn the despisynge of temporal and
erthly.

Plato iuged the hole philosophy, none other thing but a meditation of death.
He Plato.
called a meditation a preparation, and as who should say, an exercise to death,
none otherwise tha^ a young warrior, that shall in time coming fight with his
ennemy, exercyseth him self at a tylte. Which is a right wholesome saying, if
that which is spoken of the philsopher philosophically, be taken of christen
men christe^ly. For not the contemplation of mathematical forms, abstracte
from the mattiers, nor yet the imagination of Idee, which Plato devised,
causes us to dye well, but if with the eyes of feithe, we consider in our
minds the goods passing al man's wit, which god has promised by his son
Jesus to them that trust unto him, and the evils which he has thretnid to
infidels and disobedient. The One shall fear us from sinning, the other shall
provoke us to do well. I grant an eternal verity in certain humayn lerninges,
but such as procures to no man the true felicity. But here the promiser is
everlasting, everlasting is he, by whom he promises, everlasting be the
things promised, everlasting felicity they bring to the beleuers, and
everlasting infelicitie to the despisers. This meditation of death is the
meditation of the true life. And it causes not only, that the philosopher
promises, which is that the soul should depart from the body with less
heaviness, but also that with cherefulnes of heart, it should lepe merrily, as it
were out of a dark and painful prison, into blessed liberty, and into that
light so lovely, which is void of any night or darkness: For the body, which is
corruptible, accombreth Sap^. 9.
the soul, and the erthely habitation, depresseth the mind, reuoluing many
things. And therefore cries the prophet, Led out of prison my soul, that it
may confess thy name Lord. Psalm. 141.


The sum of man's felicity is to contemplate and praise his maker, redemer,
and governor. To this end is man created. This felicity of man is oftentimes
disturbed by the weakness of this body, which we carry about, subject to so
many necessities, to so many euyls, to so many peryls. In like wise also saint
Paul, accombred with the carnal habytation, pytyfully syghynge cries. O I
unhappy man, who shall deliver me from Rome. 7.
this body of death? For he saw them in high bliss, which dwelled in the house
of the lord, pray sing him world without end. Of this affection be men of
the right holiness, of whom though the bodies keep in earth, yet their treasure,
heart, and conversation is in heuens. But few men have this perfection and
strongenes of mind: It is not given to al men to say with Paul, Christ to me
is life, and to dye is a lucre. And, I covet to be dissolved, and be with
Christ. We being our selves weak, prepare this consolation to them that be
weak, unto whom yet thexamples of the perfyte lyuers be, as who says, pricks
and prouocations, to obtain the strength of the spirit. Wherefore this
meditation of death is through out all the life to be exercysed, and ever
among the spark of feyth is to be styred up, that it may encreace and gather
strength, to whom charytie annexed, shall draw unto it hope, which never
makes his master ashamed. But we have none of these our selfs, but they be
the gifts of god, with contynuall prayers and vows to be vowed for: if they
lack, and if we have them, to be augmentid that they may encreace. The
stronger that feyth accompanied with Hope and Charity is, the less is the
trembling. For that most part of us thus abhoire from the men tion of death,
it comes commonly of the unsteadfastness of faith. But on the promises of god
ought man to have most certain trust. For he is only he, which of nature
true, can not deny him self. To whom the noble psalmograph syngeth,
Euerlastingely lord thy word abides. In heaven and world In aeternia dn^e
pmanet. etc.
without end is thy troth. which also in the Euangel pronounces of him
self, Heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall not Coelum and terra
tra^sibunt. etc
pass. What has he promised? He has promised vyctorye of death, vyctorye
of flesh, of the world, and of the dyuell: He has promised remission of
sins, he has promised an hundrede times as much in this world, and
everlasting life in the next. But in what wise has he promised? By our own
ryghtwysenes? No truly, but by grace of faith, which is upon Christ Jesus.
And to the intent we should be the surer, he has annulled and cancelled that
first (...)
handwrityng, which Adam unhappily had described unto us, naylynge it to the
cross: and has given us his handwriting of grace which he has scaled with
his own blod, and has confirmed it with innumerable testimonies of prophets,
apostels, martyrs, and virgins, which with their blood alsoo have subscribed.
And the universal church of Christen men, and holy fathers also have
subscribed. He has more over added the erneste penye of the spirit, that our
trust should waver in no part. And the goodness of god not contented with
these, has vouchesafed to show unto all men an euidente and notable example
in his only begotten son. For that he has overcome, undoubtedly he overcame
for his members sakes, on whom he holly bestows him self. For what were we
sely worms of our selves? Christ is our Justyce, Christ is our vyctorie,
Christ is our hope and surenes, Christ is our tryumphe and crown. He was
borne a child, but (which Esai omitted not) to us he was borne, to us he was
given. In likewise for us he taught, for us he healyd diseases, cast forth
dyuelles, for us he hungered and thyrsted, for us he was blasphemed, for us the
time of death approaching, he was stricken with heaviness and werynes of life, for
us he swette blood, for us he was bound and beat, for us he dyed and revived,
finally for us he sytteth on the right hand of the father. Whiles he took upon
him all euyls due unto us, he delivered them unto us, that we should overcome
them. Now that he has broken their strengthes, and has added the
strongenes of spirit, according to the measure of our afflictions. He has
showed us the way how to overcome, he has added a desire of figh ting, to the
fyghters he ministers help. So he ouercometh in us, if so be that we tarry in
him. We tarry by faith and charity. If ye ask where this chyrograph or
handwrytynge that assures us, remains: I answer in the canonical
scriptures, in which we read the wordis of god, not of me^. To these no less
credence is to be youen, than if god had spoken them unto the, with his own
mouth, yea I dare boldli say somewhat more largely. For if god had spoken unto
the by some created lykenes, perchance, according to thexample of certain
good men, thou would have doubted, whether there were any disceite in the
thing. But all this doubt the perpetual consent of the catholyke church,
has clean take away from us. Than in this handwriting to study all our
life, is the best preparation to death. As thapostle says, that by patience
and consolation (...)
of scriptures we may have hope. Again; if a man demands, how and when
Christ overcame these, I answer, he overcame the flesh, and showed us the
manner of ouercomynge, where as he fearing and abhorrynge death, according to
the nature, which he took upon him, says to the father, But yet not as I
will, but as thou will. And in an another place he witnesses of him self,
saying, I came not to do my will, but his that sent me. Nothing is so
horrible to man's nature, that by the help of Christ is not overcome, if we
commytte and submytte us hole to goddis will: and in our most grievous storms
of tribulations have all times in mind the saying of the good father and king
Dauyd, It is the lord, (...)
let him do that seems best in his eyes. These words be not magical, but
they be stronger than all enchantementes, which who so ever pronounces with
his heart, and continues with this trust, he can not despair, though the hole
route of euyls with all the devils in hell should invade him. Almighty is he, that
fyghteth for us, and which speaks in the Psalm, with him I am in tribulation;
I will pluck him out, and I will gloryfye^ him. When thou herest, with him,
do not praise thyn own strength, but have an eye to the power of the helper.
When thou herest, I will pluck him out, be not desperate of mind, though
thou be somewhat long in tribulations. He will do without doubt, that he
promised: and he knows when it is expedient that thou should be lyghted of
thy euyls. When thou herest, I will glorify him, be thou assured, that as thou
were fellow with Christ of the Cross, so thou shall be fellow with him also
of glory. But remember what went before, He cried to me. It is thy part to cry
and to cry to the lord, not to the succors of this world, not to thy
strengthes and good deeds, but to the lord, which only may deliver the from
these euyls. Nothing is frayler than man, and yet no man can express, with
how many and how outrageous euyls and fearful myschefes he is besicged. For
to omyt thu^ders, erthquakes, see rages, ground openynges, wars, robberies,
wytchecraftes, who can reckon up all fourmes of diseses? And amongst these how
many be there, so horrible, and so paynefulle, that a man shall quake for
fear, to here them but named: of the which sort be the falling syckenes, the
palsy, the flayinge of the bladder, the fra^sye. I will not speak of the
often inuasio^s of Pestilences, which daily spring not only new and new, but
also worse and worse against all the remedies of the Phisitiens: so that it is
most truly spoken of the Poet. Mill modis leti miseros mors vna fatigat.

Only death with his cruel dart,

By thousand means make man to smart.

How is it possible, that we so weak both of bodies and of minds, can be able
to match and be good enough for so many outrageous storms? utterly we were
undone, though the burden of sin were away, if the hand of the lord helped
not our imbecillytye. Now remains an other myschefe, that is to wit the
world, which brings to good and godly persons, no small battle. I call
the world, the old man, with his acts and concupiscences. How be it under
the name of world, ye may, not vnconuenientely understand men given to
this world, which never have ceased, nor never shall cease, with their
uttermost power, to war against Christ and his disciples.

But unto this batayl Christ armeth us, saying, Be bold, I have vanquyshed the
world. But how far strange he was from the Joan. 19.
concupiscence of worldly things, he declares, when he says, The son of man has not where to rest his heed. For therein Luc. 9.
every manne rests his heed, wherein his mind is in quyete, and as it were
slepeth. And how violent and crooked this world is, they know, which ernestely
go about to live virtuously in Christ Jesu. He took upon him our concupisce^ce,
but none otherwise thanne he took sin, suffrynge for us punyshement, which
was due for our affections and acts. But all engyns and ordynaunces that this
world had, it threw upon our lord, as shame, sclander, awaytes, might,
tourmentes, deaths. What did not this world, to the entente it might
utterly quench the name of Christ? And so he lives and flouryssheth both in
heaven and in earth. Our lord has overcome, not that we should now sleep, but
that we should not despair. He has delivered unto us our enemy, not utterly
dead, but broken and vanquyshable, to thentent that we by our fighting may
have a crown of glory prepared for us. If thou ask, how this world may
be vanquysshed, John^ the inward disciple of Christ teaches. This is, quod
he, the victory which ouercometh the Joan. 5.
world, your Faith. Fight than faithfully, castyng all thy trust in the lord:
nor doubt not, but through his favor and aid thou shall be a conqueror.

Now rests sin, wherein unhappily we were borne, and after baptyme more
unhappily fallen into again, an heavy burdein, and such a burdeyne as causes
alsoo the soul to synke down to the bottom of hell. This burdeyne which was
to us importable, our lord vouche safed to take upon him, as Esaias prophesied,
The correction of our peace upon him, and by his wound we be Cap. 53.
healed. Also Thapostle, God made him, which did no sin, to be a sin forvs,
that 2. Cor. 5.
we might be made the justice of god through him. Sin is thouely thing that
gendreth hatredes betwixt god and man, as Esaias testifies. But the mercyful
father, wha^ Psalm. 59.
no sacrifyce could be found sufficient and strong enough to wasshe of the
sins of mankind, sent his son, a lamb without blemyshe or spot, with this
most pure oblation of sacrifyce, reconcylynge the world unto him. A man will
here say: If by Christ sin is taken away, how is it than, that all the life
of man is thus replenysshed with sin? For now I speak of good men to. He
took not clearly away syn, but he brake the strengthes of it, not that there
should be no sin in us, but that it should not reygne in us, as it reygneth in
them, which have not fyxed the ancore of their hope, in the lord Jesu, but
serve and follow their sensual appetites. And therefore Paul aduertyseth us to
beware, that sin reygne not in our mortal body. There is left unto us a
mattier, wherein to fight, but yet armours and weapons be ministered unto us,
with which we being defensed may overcome. So we be made the justice of God,
not by our own works, but through the grace of god. By whom? By him, whom he
made a sin for us, and of sin condemned sin.

Yet remains Satanas, the pare^t both of sin and of death, and prince of
these darknesses, whose power and malicious crafts never ceassynge, the
children of light fere, cryenge with a trembling heart to the father, Ne nos
inducas etc. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from that evil
might. This is that temptour and accusor of brethern, which after the saying of
saint Peter, renneth about as a rorynge lion, seeking 1. Pet. 5.
whom he may devour. But the lord has not only overcome, but alsoo has
taught us to overcome the assaults of this evil also. He oftetymes assailed
our lord, for that may be gatherid of Lukes wordis, which says, And he
departed from him for a time, but he departed always vanquysshed. How
vanquysshed? With the bucklar of scriptures repelled, with the sword of gods
word stryken through. Wherefore so often as he makes suggestion, and
atte^pteth us to the thing, which is merely contrary and repugnant to the will
divine, expressed in the sacre and holy volumes: cast a foyne at him with the
sword of gods word, and according to the ensample of, king Dauyd, with
five most clear and radyant stones, gathered out of the river of scriptures,
fell ye knave down to the ground. But before we join hands with this gyaunt
Solyath, let us first cast from us the armours of Saul, which is the cote
armor of pride, that is the trust of worldly wisdom, the confydence of our
strength and merytes, which lade us rather than arm us, let the staff of
faith be sufficient for us, which comfort and steyeth us in this our
peregrination, and the five words, which Paul speaks in the church. If he
be to busy, and call upon the to importunely, bid him auaunt Satanas, and
stand abacke. It (...)
is more right to obey god, calling to everlasting felycitie, rather than
the, entysing to eternal destruction. Here does faith play the chief and
principal part. And therefore says Peter, Whom resyst ye strong in faith.
Give credence to scriptures, and (...) 5.
repose thy holle trust in Christ, and victory is at hand. But there is a
kind of dyuels, which is not cast forth, but by prayer and fasting says
Christ. To here thou have other two weapons. It is probable, and a thing
lykely, that Satanas, where as he so often had assauted our lord in vain, in
the cross assayed and moved al his craftis, subtilties, and engens, when he
saw him approaching to his death. For this is the last conflict and battle, by
the proof and chance whereof, either eternal triumph is hoped and looked for,
or a perpetual shame is awayted. For he says, The prince of this world came
Joan. 14.
unto me, and in me he found nothing. Nor it is no doubt, but that which he
entreprised upon the lord, he dare entreprise also upon the members of the
lord. But in likewise as he was vanquyshed of him, so through him he shall be
vanquyshed in us. For wha^ he assayleth them, in whom Christ by faith and
charity does inhabit and dwell, he makes battle with Christ him self, in
whom so long as we persevere and abide, he shall take a fowler fall, and be
more shamefullye vanquysshed of us, than he was overcome of our lord him
self. All things can I do, Omnia possum in co qui me confortat.
quod the Apostle, in him, which enstrenghteth me. Satanas, with whom our
conflict is, is called the prince of this world, not that he has any
auctorite or jurisdiction over any part of the creature, but because in a
manner he reigns in those, which be lo uers of this world. But he which
protecteth and defends us, is lord of heaven and of earth, which with his
only beck can do more than all the swarms and rabyll of dyuels, with all
their instrumentis and lymmes. Only he could enter the house of that (...)
strong one, and bind him hand and foot, and bereue him of his vessels.

What temtations do yet remain? Death death I say, at whose mention all
things wax heavy. This neither with force can be shyfted of, neither with
fleing eschued, neither with craft and subtyl means dalyed away. The first
affection of nature is, that every thing should defend it self. But death
against this affection of nature, thretneth destruction, which so much is the
more detestable and to be abhorred, that it diuydeth. ii. which be most
conjoined and knyt together. For there is no strayter copulation or knot, than
is of the body and soul. This horror and fere also, our lord of his most
tender mercy, has mitigate and assuaged unto us. First in that he for our
sakes, dysdayned not the horror and trembling of death: and death it self,
yea and that sclanderous and shameful, and also bitter, to take upon him. Nor
he would not, that any of his saints, and of the holy men, were they never so
excellynge in virtuous living should be free, and be enfraunchysed against
death, not Abraham the faithful, not Moses famylyarly beloved, not Dauyd a man according to his heart, not any of the prophets, not John Baptist, of
whom remains so noble a testimony of our lord him self, not his mother sin
gularly beloved, not so much as that one of his disciples, whom before all the
rest, he loved entierly. Even from the first man, until the consu^mation and
end of the world, it was ordained and by fatal destenye prefixed, every man
ones to dye. And therefore the greeks call death in their langage moros, which
comes of the verb miro, that is to say, to allotte, because it is allotted,
distributed, and appointed to all men alyke and indifferently, to kings,
bishops, dukes, earls, barons, knights, esquiers, gentylle men, yomen, and
beggars. What impacience is it than, a man not to find in his heart to suffer
that euylle, which is common to such, so greatte, and so many? Doste thou
flee, with all the holy men to submytte thy self, and surrender that thing,
which will thou or will thou not, must be rendered and repayed to nature? He
that of nature was immortal, for the became mortal. And do thou, which art
borne to dye, and haste deserved death so often, require besides all other men to
be had immortal? Wherefore recount thou here with thy self, how many, and what
felawes of this sort and condition thou have: and so doing thou shall bear
more euenly and with a more quyete mind, thin allotte and state. Otherwise if
thou do, undoubtedly thou shall seem no less proud and presumptuous, in
disdainyng that thou shalt dye, than if a man would dysdayn, that he is borne,
or that he is created a man, and not an aungelle. This is the first asswagement
of death, which in my conceit, is not small. And it shall be made stronger,
if we justly account with our selves, what manner things tho be, which we
have left here behind us. For many fear death, only having regard to the
commodities, which they leave here behind. Than come in mind, the sweet
sight of the son, the most goodly ordynance of the fyrmament, the pleasant
hew of the springynge world, plays, feasts, wife, children, house,
gardeynes. But thou must open the other eye, wherewith thou may behold, how
much more of evils and inco^modities thou leauest behynd, than of plesures and
commodities: and in very those, which appear good and commodious, how much
calamity and bitterness is migled therewith. Reuolue in mind all the degrees of
life, consider how foul the conceyuing is, how perilous the bearyng, how
miserable the delyueryng and birth, in how many dangers of hurtes the infancy
is, in how great ieopardie of injury and wrong is chyldhode, how spotted
with vicious living is youth, with how many cares distracte is the man's age,
in what myserie and wretchidnes is old age, and this thing seriously reuolued
in memo rye, I stand in doubt, whether a man can find any one person so
happily borne, that if god would grant unto him to begin and come up again,
by the same steps, even from his conception, through out all the hole process
and course of his former life until age, to enjoy like pleasures, and to
suffer like displeasures, would take this proferre, annexed to such condition.
What notable blyndnes is it than, so greattely to be troubled, when that thing
is to be surrendered, which if it were lauful for us to begin a new, we would
refuse? I omit now the evils in which this life is so wrapped, that certain
hethe^ men iuged nothing to be yeue^ to man of the goddis, to speak after
their manner, more liberally and bountifully, than that they have addid unto him
a power and liberte to be reave him self of his life, so ost as shall be seen unto
him: And that noble poet douted not to pronounce, no living thing more
wretched than man. Than if thautoritie of the hethen prophet be light,
Ecclesiastes that godly and Ecclesiast.
holy person feared not to write, that Better is the day of death, than of the
birth.

Thus much have we spoken of euylles, now of goods and plesures, recount
with thy self, how many cares and thoughts, riches do bring, from which
now thou can not be plucked away: how much more gall than honey the wife
brings, for whose love thou fear now death: how much busynes and care
of mind bredeth the bryn gyng up of thy children? how much grefe and disworship
do their manners cause? Add to all these, the mind of man always decaying and
drawyng downward to wors and wors. For though not in all, yet surely in the
most part of men, the saying of Austyn is true. Qui mayor est etate, mayor est
iniquitate. He that is greatter in aege, is greatter in ^^^^^yn
wickedness.

Finally set on thy right hand the pleasures and commodities of this life:
and on thy left hand the incommodities, and consider the shortenesse of the
hole time that we live here. Infancy is not felt, chyldhod slyppeth away er we
be ware, youth is taken up with sundry cares, age crepeth upon us er we
perceive it. what is the hole sum of this life, but a minute to that
eternity, whereto we be assumpte, if we live well: and plucked down, if
otherwise? Of these thin ges an ernest contemplation is no light remedy against
the horror of death.

An other is (which is stronger also tha^ this) that the lord dieng for the,
has caused, that death, which heretofore was the passage to hell, is now the
yate to heaven: and which in times paste, was the beginning of everlasting
punishments, is now the entering to everlasting joys: so that now to them
that trust in Christ, death is not only no damage, but also a great auayl and
lucre. And to the end that no part of man should be myssed, he him self
arrysyng again with holy men a great multitude, has made us to have a most
assured hope, that the time shall come, when our bodies shall reuyue in the
last day, and than glorified, shall take again every one his gest the soul to
be from thensforth a solas, and no lengar a burdeyne. But of death forthwith we
shall have a place to speak more at large.

Now to accomplish the matter that we be in hand with, one evil is yet left
to speak of, more terrible and more horrible than all these gathered together
into one heap, I mean hell, from whens (they say) no man can return, which
swaloweth up all together, nor never yeldeth again, that it has ones
devoured. This is the puddell and dungeon of desperation, and (as the Apocalips
speaks) the second death. Let every man think with himself, what manner of
life that is, where is of all euyls the greattest, that is to say immortality,
where a greatte part of punyshement, is the felawshyp of devils and wicked
men, where is fire never to be quenched, to which ours, if it be comparyd, is
very ice. Add, that fire is there the least portion of sorrows, which sorrows
nevertheless be so great, that of man's wit they can not be compassed, no more
tha^ can the joy and felicity of them that be good. In evils be they never so
grievous, never so long, yet some comfort and asswagemente brings hope, as
it were a certain little star shyning afar of, in most thick and
profounde darkness, but hell with extreme euyls has extreme desperation
annexed thereto. wherefore the horror of this passes all horror: which yet
our most merciful redemer, to thentent he might mitigate and make less
paynful unto us, vouchsafed to take it upon him self. That in the gardeyn he
was so dismayed, and so taken with extreme peynfulnes of heart, that he swette
blod, was the infirmity of our nature. And that he, nailed to the Cross,
cryethe, My god, my god, why haste thou forsaken me? (...) 27. (...) 21.
Far from my health, be the words of my sins, seems to feel in his mind
the horror and fear of tourment and pain perpetual. For what remains to
them that be destitute and forsaken of god, but extreme desperation? Nor it
ought not to seem wonderful, that he took upon him this most heavy affection,
which also took upon him the sins of all men: so that either of these two
euyls inuyncyble to our strengthes, by his mercy he made vincible. Nor these
thin ges do not mynyshe the dygnytie of our redemer, but declare his
unspeakable charytie toward Mankind. Under the figure of him speaks Dauyd
in the Psalms, The sorrows of death have compassed me about, and the
flouddes of wyckednesses Psalm. 17.
have troubled my mind, and the snares of death have prevented me. We
deserved hell, he an innocent took the fear upon him for us, to thentent that
if like affection should invade our minds, either by reason of the prcuitie in
our own conscience of our wyckednes and manifold sins, or by reason of the
weakness of our nature, we should not cast away our selves nor to be falls
hearted: but fixyng our eyes on Christ, may, yea in despairing have good hope.
Though the flesh despair, though reasone despair, yet let faith even
from Hell cry to the lord, Like as Jonas, whatte time he was utterly in
despair, cried out of the Whaales bealye, and was herd. For that alsoo
shewethe the psalm, where as it follows by and by, In my tribulation (...)
etc.
I called on the lord, and to my god I cried, and he herd me out of his holy
temple. The temple of god is the church or congregation of good me^, this is
the tower of faith, Syon the city of our strength. Hither he that will cry
even from the deep pytte of hell (the spark of faith yet quick) he is herd.
Therefore when all the powers of man be drowned down unto hell, yet let faith
cry with most blyssed Job, Although ^
he kylleth me, I will trust in him. For this is with the faith master Abraham,
against hope to trust in hope. These than so great euyls, the goodness of our
lord, has not only mitigated and brosed, so that though they vex and
fear us, yet quench us they can not: but also the extreme damages, he has
turned into excedyng and great lucre. For what does sin hurt them, the which
do cleave unto Christ? what? but where that sin abounded, now abounds also
grace, and that he loves more, to whom more is forgiven. What avails Satanas
vncessingly vexing the me^bres of Christ Jesu? What? but that he does increace
their rewards, and makes their crowns more glorious? Yea more over, the very
cuyls, which according to the state of our mortalite be common as well to the
good as to the badde, the goodness of our lord has turned them, either into our
lucre, or into our medycine (how be it this is alsoo a lucre) he turns them
into our lucre and auantage, when we being clear from sin, bear them pacient
lie, gyuynge thanks to the lord for all. And into our medicine he turns
them, if any thing remains in us to be pourged, either by cuttynge, or
vsture, or by bitter potions. Of the which sort be, syckenes, poverty, age,
lack of father, lack of children, and other innumerable, with which the hole
life of man is round about beset. These, if they draw us to murmur, grudge,
desperation, or blasphemye, be the instruments of Satanas, and for remedies be
made poisons. But if for this only thing they be suffered, because they can
not be eschewed, for which consyderation, many that knew not Christ,
constantely suffered torments and death: they be the afflictions of nature.
But if we take them as it were of the hand of a loving father, obediently
and with geuynge thanks, recomptyng with our selves, how much more sharper
punyshmentes we have deserved, and how fell and cruel peynes Christ being an
innocent, suffered for us sinners, now they be none afflictions, but wholesome
remedies, or increasementes of heuenlye rewards. On the tone behalf, thanks
are to be youen to the most tender and gentle father, which (...)
chastises every child, that he receyucth in favor, other wyles with short
and soft remedies healyng our sores, that he might spare us in the world to
come. On the the other behalf, the bountyfulnes of our captain is to be
magnified and praised, which ministers unto his sowldyours a matter of virtue
or manhood, to the intent he might crown them more royally. On either side is
great lucre, oneles perchance it seems a small lucre, when a man is sick of
a capital and mortal syckenesse, drynketh bitter potions, and with a light
and short pain does both escape the peril of death, and enjoys a
perpetual swetenes of health: or when the sowldiour for the conflycte of one
little hour, attayneth great riches for all his life, and high honors. And
by this means also, our lord most merciful, draws all things unto him, if
only we lift up our eyes to that sign, which is set up on heyght. He
attracteth and draws unto him all our euyls, and tourneth them into our
profyt and his glory, of which he makes us partakers, that be graste in him
by faith. I pray you, what win they, which in their adversity tournyng
their eyes from Christ, grudge and murmur against god? Surely that grefe,
which of necessity is to be borne, they double, nay ten times fold so much
they make it unto them selfs, and the medicine by evil taking thereof, they
turn into pestiferous and mortal poison for them selfs. This undoubtedly is
the high and effectual philosophye, and the meditation of death, in which
if a man when he is hole and sound, be dylygentlye exercysed, death shall
not oppress him unprepared.

Of these that have been spoken, may be gathered. iiii. sundry sortis of
death, a spiritual, iiii. kinds of death.
a natural, a transformatorie, and an eternal. The death natural, is a
seuerance of the soul, from the body. The spiritual, is a seueraunce of god,
from the mind. For like as the soul is life to the body, so is god life to
the soul. This death spiritual has engendered the natural death (as much
as to the necessity atteyned) as is the religious opinion of the old divines.
Of both these two deaths is gendred the death eternal, or if ye will so call
it, the death of hell, when the death spiritual, and the death natural
come together. For after the death of the body, there is no place of
repentance.

There remains a death, by which we The death transformatorye.
be transformed from the image and form of the old Adam, into the image of
the new Adam, which is Christ our lord. This is a separation of the flesh
from the spirit. Nor here is no small wrastlynge, nor so much as any hope of
victory, if the spirit of Christ helped not the weakness of our flesh. But the
grace of him, in us has slain the old man, so that now we be led not with
our spirit, but with the spirit of god: nor we our selves live not, but
Christ lives in us. This most happy death, whether it has chanced to any
man fully, in this life, I can not say. Nevertheless the goodness of our lord
vouche safeth to supplye of his own, that that our imbecillytie can not do.
This death is to be coueted, and with all our deuoyr practysed and meditate
through out all our life. Like as saint Paul writes to the Corynthians:
Always bearyng 2. Corl. 4
the mortification of Jesus Christ in our body, that also the life of Jesus
might be manifested in our bodies. To the same he exhorts the Colossenses:
Mortyfye your members, Col. 3.
which be upon earth. He byddeth not pluck out the eyes, or choppe of the
hands, or cut away our preuey members, but what members? It follows:
Fornication, uncleanness, lust, evil concupiscence, and couetyse. The common
sort of men mourn for the^, the which dye, but blessed Paul to the Colossia
ns reioyseth this death. Ye be (says he) dead: and your life is hyd with
Christ in god. This death is mother of the spiritual life, likewise as sin
is the father of the spiritual death, and also of the death infernal.

But in these kinds of death, the most part of men behave them selfs
preposterouslye, and clean contrary to that they should do. At the mention
of the bodyly death, how tremble we for fere? They of old time hated Cypress,
for no other cau se, but that it was wont to be had in buryals, and also the
herb smallage, because graves were hanged about with it: And at this day there
be many, which at the savor of frank insence stop their noses, and use fell
curses and execrations, for because (as I suppose) at buryals fumigations be
made of it. But the spiritual death is more horrible, than six hundred
deaths of the body: and to this wylfully and with great courage we run,
gloryenge and bostynge, when we have done wyckedly, and reioysynge in things
most ungodly. We be dismayed, and beside our selves, when we be in ieoperdye,
that the soul should depart from our wretched body, which should live much
more happyly out of this prison: but how much more justly ought we to be
dismayde, when we be in peril, lest god the life eternal, will forsake our
soul? The house wherein any has dyed, is called co^tagious, pestiferous, and
funestall, and we stop our noses wha^ we pass by it: But the wise man
judges it far better to go to the house of mourning, Eccle. 7.
than to the house of feastynge. In mourninges we be naturally heuye and sad.
But this heaviness, because it is after a godly fashyon, works in us a steadfast
health and salvation. Whiles it warns us of the last time, and of the
things ensuyng the same, and calls us back to repentance, nor suffers us
not to sin eternallye. They be happyly present at a mourning, which so
bewail an other man's bodyly death, that they begin to be moon them selfs,
which be stryken with a more grievous death: whether than is better to devour
a bitter potio^, that by the pain of one hour, thou may gain perpetual
health of thy body, or else in a feast to drink pestiferous and venomous
sweet wynes, which with their short pleasure may bring to the drynker
sodeyne death? But of these things many men are so clear careless, that in
baudy cornars they singe and make merry as dronk as myse: Some make their
auaunt, and rejoice, which by fraud and disceyte have citeyned to riches: and
some triumph, which with wicked crafts, be risen to honors and promotions.
Do not the commu^ people call the wallowynge in stynkyng lusts and delicious
fare, a life? But tho that thus live, be twyse deed. First because they be
void and destitute of the spirit of god. Secondly because that even now all
ready they be the children of damnation and of the everlasting fire. For like
as the life of good men, deed in the flesh, is hyd in god, and shall appear
and show it self, together with Christ: so in these which have given them
selfs to the flesh, the death eternal is hyd, and shall appear in the last
judgment. Only hope does sever the sinner in this life from hell. For as
long as the breath is in man, so long he has hope of pardon and forgyuenes.
How be it we had need to take right good head, lest our hope which comes not
of faith and charity, deceive us. Thus some man flattereth him self: I am
young, I will take the pleasure of this world: when I come to aage, thanne will I
fall to goodness. But O thou hard heart, who has promised yt to come to age?
Another says: while I am in the flowers of my age, I will follow my lust and
pleasure, when I am married, than I will begin to be thryfty. But O thou
flatterer of thy self, how know thou, whether thou shall live until to
morrow? There is perchance some manne that thinks thus: I will at last make
my self a friar, or a monk, and than I will bewail my life evil spente, In
the mean while I will use the pleasure of this world. Admyt that life be
granted the, who has promised the, that thou shalt have this mind and will,
to forsake pleasures and embrace repentance? Can every man that will, give to
him self this mind? Only the grace of Christ is cause that a man can
repent, and come again to his heart. But he freely and at his own liberty
gives it to whom he wylleth, and when he wylleth. Certes, as touching the
sinner, he is now all ready in hell. Is it not a prodigious blyndnesse, that a
man being in so horrible state, will prefyxe him self a day, when to recent
him of his lyuinge? the which man if he should fall into a pyt, or be cast in
prison, would think all the have of them that should alucke him out, to slow.
Out of the pytte he would forthwith cry for man's help, and when he is set in
so great euyls, will he not (...) continent desire gods help, which only
rayseth the deed? Who so ever than in this life will diligently practice the
traniformatorye death, and vehemently abhor the death spiritual, and the
death infernal, shall less fear the death of the body when it approaches,
which does not sever us from god, but has joined us nerer to god, and makes
an end for evermore of al afflictions, with the which this life is on every
side vexed, and sets us over to everlasting rest. Thou will say, It
sets over to rest, but the sowles of good men. Troth it is. For the death
of sinners is most evil. Than while thou lyuest, and Mors pee catoru^ pes
sima.
art in thy flowers, do thy deuoire, that thou may be of the right wise men.
For rightwyse is also he, which with his heart acknowlegeth and damneth his
own unright wisenes, and fearing the perpetual fire, flees to the
saynctuarie of the mercy of god, and to holsom remedies of penance. But they,
which in all their life, even as though they were immortal, follow their
sensualle lusts, being utterly deaffe, and will not here the voices of god
so often and so lovingly provoking to repentance: what marvel is it, though
they be troubled, wha^ extreme necessity calls upon them? Than have they
enough to do with their sickness, which suffers them to do nothing else: with
the physicians, with their heirs, with them to whom they bequethe, and with
wayters for prays, with creditours and dettours, with wife and children, with
stuardes and servants, with friends and foes, with durges and buryal, with
confessions, dispensations, and censures, with restitutions and making amendis,
with sundry doutes of conscience, finally with the articles of the feythe.
Farther, with the world, whom because he has loved over much, he leaves with
euylle will: more over with the self death of the body, whereunto he is
unprepared, fynallye with the devil, which than layith about him with all his
engines and falsities: with hell, which than obiecteth and layth before him the
most ugly and bradfull furies. But to so great a rout of busynes, that moment
of time suffyseth not, but al diligence must be taken, that to that extreme and
most grievous conflyct a man come most light and void of all busynes. Some man
will ask, by what menes this may be. Let us here Ecclesiastes, yeuyng good
ounsaill: Remember (says he) thy maker in the days of thy youth before the
time of thy affliction comes. Let us here also Ecclesiasticus: Before the dome
get rightwisenes unto the, before syckenes, seek phisike, and before dome
examine thy self, and in the sight of god thou shalt find mercy. Before
sycknes humble thy self, and in time of infirmity show thy conversation.
This is ooutles a right holsom counsel, yea though the day of death were
known unto us. How much more the thing is to be done, sith every day to
every man is to be compted the last. While we live and be in health, let us
discuss, as much as we may, and ryd our manyfolde business, and er
syckenesse does fyxe us to the bed, let us dispose for our householde. The
first duty is to remember our maker, that by pure confession and repeutance
we may come again into his favor. Let us examyne our conscience, cutting of,
what so ever we find there hated of god, that when syckenes dryueth us to the
bar to here our judgment, we may find mercy. Who that in prosperity lift up
their styffe and stubburne necks against god, do we not se how they cast down
and humble them selfs, if any strong and sharp disease threteneth them to
dye? But how much more pleasant and thankful were it to god, if of our own
motion we did that thing betymes, whereunto siknes compels wha^ it is late?
Let us prostrate our selfs with the publicane, and with the synfulle woman
mentioned in the gospelles, in the sight of god, with tears, alms deeds,
prayers, and other good works, pacifieng goddis wrath and in time of syknes
such shall be our death, as was our life. Some do abhor from ma king their
testament, as though in it were some evil luck of death. But the making of thy
testament good felawe causes not the to dye the sooner, but safelyer. In this
behalf heppyer is the condition of them that be called relygious persons,
because they be free and void of all cares touching testamentes. But they,
which have children or brethren, or else any other heirs, let them provide,
that there grow no contention betwixt brethren and alies in the partition
of the goods. They that have no heirs, let them provide, that they leave
nar to them that come after, matter and occasyon of suite and riottous rapine.
Brefely, so let them, when they be in health, order, dispose, and dispatche
these mattiers, that they have no need in their syckenes to busy and vex them
selves with such manner unseasonable cares. More over if any man be wrapped in
any perplex and doutefull cases, as of matrimony, of censures of the church,
of vows, of restitutions, or reconciliations, let him rydde him self of such,
when he is hole and sound, nor let him not reserve any intanglynges until his
last bay. They do well, which when they lie byenge, command their
executoures to make for them restitution of their evil gotten goods: but they
do far more wisely, which when they be in health, do that thing them
selves, which oftentimes is committed to thexecutours in vain. Agein they do
well, which at the point of death, forgive all men their offenses, and pray
likewise, that they may be forgiven, if they have offended any person: but it
is far more thankful to god, and more sure to the quietness of conscience, if
they do the same wha^ they be in health, not for fear of death, but for the
love of Christ. They do well, which bequethe part of their goods, to the
relief of the poor: but it were a sacrifice much more thankfuller to god, if
after the rate of thy substance, would thy self releue thy poor neighbors.
For it comes not always to the nedy, which the deed assigned unto them: and if
it comes, it is now an others and not thyn, which is b^^owid. What, there be
many diseases of that sort, that they give no space of disposynge: nor I will
not now recyte the sodeyn and unthought on chances, which albeit they oppress
not al persons, yet all must look for them, because they may hap to all.
Like as it chanced to the folyshe man in the gospel, which promised him
self long and sweet life: It was said unto him, This night thy soul shall
be fette fro the. Al pray that they may escape sodayn and unprovided death.
For every where these words a man may here, From sodayn and unprovided A
subitanea and im (...)
death, deliver us lord, What is it, that these do pray for? Is every sodeyn
death detestable? No certes: For The ryghtwise man, with what so ever death
he be prevented, is in rest. For it can not be an evil death, beit never so
sodeyne, before whom went good life. Why rather pray we not thus? From an
evil life deliver us lord. But why be we not ashamed to call an unprovided
death, which daily thrusts it self into all our senses? from our chyldhod,
what other thing here we, than gronynges of them that dye? What other thing se
we, tha^ corses carried out? than pompes of mourners, than grauestones, tombs,
and titles of deed men? That if we be lyttelle moved (...)
with the deaths of strangers, how often does death pluck us by the ear
more nere, by the funeralles of alyans and kynssolke, which touch us by nygh
necessitude of nature: and of our friends, whom enterchaungeable love has
glewed unto us more straytly, than the bonds of nature do join any kynsfolke.
And if this also be to littell, how often has it monished our own selves of
our own frayltie? For who is there of us, that has not sommetyme be brought
into the danger of death, either by tempest, or robbery, or battayl, or
ruin, or pestilence, or sycknes? What way so ever thou turnest the, death
lies in await. The house is a sure refuge to every manne: but how many be
oppressed sodeinly with fallinges of houses? The earth is of the. iiii. ele
mentes most massy and sure, and yet does it not otherwhyles synke and swallowe
up hole cities? The very air, wherewith we brethe and live, oftentimes is
death, like wise as meat and drynk is. Finally hunger and thyrst, do they not
daily manace death, if thou take not a remedy? Farther, so often as man is
named, he is monyshed of death? For mortal creatures and men be of al one
sygnification. What other thing than do they, which pray to escape from
death unprovided, but accuse their own improuydence? For to unprepared
persons every death is unprovided, yea to him that is an hundred years old.
Call thou that unprovided, which thrustyng and shoting it self upon all
thy senses, doste not see?

So unprovided was the floudde to the wicked persons, which scorned Noe the
beadyll and summoner of Justyce, while Luc. 17.
he prepared his Arc, eating, drynkyng, ioynynge maryages, as though that
thing should not comme to pass, which God did threatten.

So unprovided fell the destruction to the Sodomytes, which mockyd Loath,
what time he departed from their City. The same should have chanced to the
Ninevites, had they not repented at the preaching of Jonas. Who so ever knows
that god is angry with him, at every moment let him look for vengeance, nay let
him eschew it rather by exaumple of the Ninevites and of Dauyd. Full terrible
and dradfulle is the ire of the lord, but if we cast down our selves with
all humility to repentance, in his ire he will remember mercy. The Ninevites
at the preaching of the stranger Jonas, were converted to penance. But we
being deaf at so many preachynges of our lord, desire and pray to be
delivered from unprovided death. By so many examples and parables of Noe, of
Loath, and of them, whom the fall of the tower in Siloa, oppressed unawares, he
cries upon our forgetful slouthfulnes, that we should be ready at every
hour. He adds the similytude of the night thief, of the faithful steward, of
the. x. virgyns, and so often he cries on us: Watch, for ye know not the
day, nor (...)
the hour, and comes there than any death to us unprovided? Yea there comes,
but to the retcheles and unprovided persons, or (to speak the thing better)
to the deaffe, blind, and vnsensyble, which neither do here our lord crienge
upon us, neither see the thing, that offreth it self to their cies, neither
feel that which on every side prieketh them. They pass not on that our lord
semith to speak of the last day of the world. For the last day of each man's
life, is his last day of the world. At the end of the world the universal
and general judgment shall be openly solemnysed, but the whiles the sowles of
each oone, so soon as they leave the body, receive their judgment, all though
it be unknown to us. And either day our lord would have to be unknown to us a
like. In this behalf also declarynge his most tender love toward us. For where
as we now see the insufferable vyolence, oppression, and extortion of rich
and wicked persons, what would they do, if they knew that they should live any
long while? On the other side, the weak in faith, as be the most part of
men, if they knew certainly, that they should live till they be old, would
differ until that time, the study of a more exact life. Again, if they were
certain, that but a few days of their life remained: they would live full of
pensiuenes and sadness, and should become more slache to many profitable
busynesses of the common welthe. Now the providence of the divine majesty,
has so tempered the matter, that unto all men death is so certain, that each
one knows no less certaynely, that they shall dye, than they know that they
were borne: and that neither the highest nor the lowest persons can flatter
them selfs with feign hope. Again, the day of death is so uncertayn, that the
lord would not have it know to his bestbeloued. By means where of it comes
to pass, that the wicked do less hurt the good men, and the good men so
absteyn from evil works, as though they should dye the day following, and so do
and exercise good deeds, as though they should live long. What then mean these
men, which run to pronosticatours, which divine by the inspection of a man's
hand, of the sterres, of the man's nature, of his birth, of the bealy, and
babylonicall numbres, and wytchecraftes, to thentent they may know the space
of their time? The Ecclesiastes cries, A man knows not his end, but as the
fysshes (...)
be taken with the hoke, and the birds be caught with the snare, so be men
taken in an evil time, when it comes upon them suddenly: and will we know our
end of them, which know not their own end? Shall men learn that thing of
vayn people, maugre Christis heed, that Christ the eternal verity would not
have known, because it is not expedient that it were known? whether both the
example of wicked Saul, please Christian men? For what did the wytch help or
profyt him, but that he should twyse dye?

Tho persons also be not evil, which desire of god some certain kind of
death, and pray that they may lie sick certain months, to the end they may
bestow, at the leest way, that time upon repentance and confession. More holy
is the request of them, which desire that death, whereby they may least trouble
their friends. For this comes of charity. But it is of a more steadfast and
sure faith, to commit unto god as well the kind of the death, as the space
of the syckenes. He knows what is most expedient for us, and will give,
that is best for us. The forms of death be innumerable, and am onge them some
be horrible, either in that they kill suddenly, which thing happens to some men
even in the feastinge, or in that they have sharp and long torments, as is
the palsy, and the yschiacc, or in that they have an abominable sight, as
they which choked up with tough flcum, wax black: or in that they take away
the use of the tongue, and the holenes of mind, as the apoplexis, the phrensy,
and certain fevers, and other peculiar forms, which make men to tumble, and
break their necks, or to leap into a well, or stra^gle their throtes with
some cord, or thrust the^ selfis into the guts, with some knyfe or sword.
For there be diseases, which do corrupt the inward weselles of the mind,
which persons be commonly called in the latyne tongue demoniaci, that is to
say, possessed with dyuels. But neither by these things a man is not to be
iuged, sith that Chrysosto thus does most louyngly comfort a certain monk,
which was possessed with a dyuell. How be it tho kinds of death, which have a
manifest color of wyckednes, is a good christen man's part to desire to
escape, and to abhor it. Contrary wise, sum we see have so gentle a
death, that they seem to sleep, and not to dye. But what facion of death so
ever chances, no man is thereby to be esteemed. No, not so much as of them,
which by the laws are for their myscheious deeds, put to execution, though
they chance to have a shameful death, we may not judge temerousely. For it
may be, that he, which for treason, is hanged, drawn, and quartered, passes
into the company of aungelles, where as an another, the which dyeng in a gray
friars cote, and relygiously buried, departs down unto hell. It is the
lord, which iugeth of these things. By sundry wyses god: exercises and
purges his servants: but (as I said) no evil death is that to be thought,
which good life spente before. Otherwhyles, they that dye most easily, go to
everlasting punyshmentes: and contrary wise, they that be myserably tourmented,
flee into rest. Sum wysshe to have fulle confession before they dye, last
anneylynge, and the receyuynge of their maker, not with an unlike mind as it
appears) that in old time some prolonged the time to be christened, till
their last day, and the baptyste, which should baptyse them, was not called
for, until that the phisytion confessed little help in his science. Why wyshe
we but ones that thing to chaunche, which daily ought and may be done of us?
For it is best counsayl, that every man before er he betake him to sleep,
dilygentely examyne his conscience: and if he find any crime committed that
day, let him knock his breast, and calling for the assistence of god, purpose
certainly to live a better life. Nor there is no cause why any man should here
say, I am let with sundry busynes, I have no leyser. To a thing so
necessary the fourth part of an hour suffyseth. It is not long to say, I have
sinned, Have mercy. And this is sufficient, so it be spoken with the heart. No
man commytting him self to sleep, is sure to awake. How great danger is it
than, in that state to sleep, in which if death oppress us, which is
brother german to sleep, we shall peryshe for evermore? So great peril may
be eschued with one short thought. This is daily to be done to god: but to
the priest, vicare of god. iii. or. iiii. times or ofter in the year with pure
confession to purge the conscience, should bring much tranquillity, and it
shall cause that the person, when he dies, shall not be troubled with the
scrupulosytie of confession.

Furthermore because in the article of death, the contemplation of our lords
death, and of the communion of the hole church, which is the body of Christ,
is a principal comfort, it were well done, in both to be dylygently exercysed
in the life, to thentent, the doing often repeted, may turn into custom,
custom into course, and course into nature. This shall be if that we, our
conscience being clean purged from all affection of synnyng, often receive the
mystical bread, and drink of the mystycall cup: sith that this sacrament
commends and declares unto us, two things, the one is, the most dear love
of the heed toward his members: and the other is, the most strayte felawshyp
of the members betwyxt them selfs. What so ever goodness is in the body,
proceeds from the heed Christ: and what so ever goodness is in the body, is
commun unto all the me^bres. Like as in the body of a living thing though
there be diverse members, ordained to diverse offices, yet the life yssuinge
from the heed, is spread abroad through all the members, with such an
inseparable felawshyp, that like as saint Paul teaches, if one membre be
grieved, that grefe runs unto all: and if one membre ioyeth, the glory is of
all in common. Doutlesse this is that is said in the Symbol of thapostels,
Sanctam ecclesiam sanctorum communione^, The holy church, the communion of
saints. For no streyghter is the grace of Christ in the mystical body, than
is nature in the body of a living thing. They do devoutly, which wha^ death
draws nere, do send to the monasterye of the Cartusians, or friars
obseruantes to pray for the sick person, but it is a stronger comfort, if
the sick man thinks, that the hole church is busy and thought full for him,
a membre thereof. When I say the church, how blessed and how mighty a company
do I mean, which includes prophets, apostels, so many swarms of martyrs and
virgyns, so many souls beloved of god. This hole company and felawshyp for
each membre of Christ being in ieopardy, prays contynually, and with merits
and prayers helps the sick person. Nor it is no matter to the, though that
thou see not the church with thy eyes: neither thou see thy soul, by whose
benefit all the members of the body live and be moved. The church can not be
pore, which is joined to so rich an heed, in which dwells al fullness of
divinity corporally, nor the membre can not be destitute, which is sustained
of so many thousands of saints. The tender love and bountyfulnes of the heed
toward us, principally witnesses the cross taken for to redeem us. The
memory and power of these things we do renew unto us, as often as with feith
and due reverence we do eat the flesh of the lord, and drink the blud.

And also we be admonyshed, that al be one body, which do eat the same
breadde, and drink of the same cup. Let no man than be false hearted,
although that the membre be weak and diseased, considering that it has an
heed, which is omnipotent: nor let him not think to be destitute and
forsaken, which is releued, kept, and sustained with the demerites and
prayers of the hole church. Wherefore who so ever, that in his life is
diligently exercised, in the con templation of these things, at his death,
they shall bring unto him more comfort. For than even of their own accord,
they shall run into his memory, as things famyliar unto the mind and soul.
Wherefore, after my mind and judgment, they devised a right good and godly
thing, which parted the history of our lords death in to certain hours,
as we call them: to the intent that chylderne might be accustomed to rehearse
and say every day a portion of it, with ycuynge of thanks. But they, which
ordained in the steed of it the service of our lady, though that they invented
a thing not ungodly, yet if a man might confess the truth, they turned
wine into water.

By these skylles and means it shall come to pass very well, that sodeyne and
unprovided death shall not oppress us. The sweet chylderne must be forsaken,
the dear wife, the well beloved fre^des, the approwed lands, the sumptuous
buyldynges, the ample goods. But the sowldiour of Christ has studied to
neglecte all these things, whose soul does watch as it were in the garnyson
of the body, and waytyng every hour for the Trumpette of his captayn, whereby
he is commanded to begin the battaylle, always ready to these words, Dispose
thy Esai. 38.
householde, for thou shall dye, and not live. He has his body not for an
house, but for a pauilyon, nor he hurdeth not there his tresure, but that which
suffyseth for his daily sustynance, he bears in his belte, always waking in
the watches, always having armours about him, against the sodayn invasions of
his ennemies, no hardness he refuses, so he may please his captain, to whom
he is sworn. A warfare, says Job, Cap. 7.
is the life of man upon earth. The mynder of this warfare is exhorted by the
wise man Syrach. Son, that comeste to the service Cap. (...)
of god, stand in ryghtwisenes and in dread, and prepare thy soul to
temptation. The service of god is a profession of a christen warfare. To
stand, is the propretie of a sowldiour in the field, prepared and bente to the
battle. Stand in rightwisenes, not in pride, which vanteth it self against
god, but in ryghtwysenesse. They sleep and lie down, which be the sowldiours
of this world. But the soldier of Christ stands bent to every good work.
The best work is, well to dye in the lord. For good living gives a great
imboldyng against the dyuell. Feyth has not learned to give place to the enmy,
hope can not be discomfyted, charity ministers fode to the stander. But sith
good life causes boldness, why is added in dread? If thou be rightewyse,
what do thou fear? If thou be not, how do thou stand? This dread is not
that father of desperation, of which speaks Solomon. Fear casts down the
sloth full person, and charity casts out fear, but Cap. (...)
the most good keeper of innocence. The fear of the sons is holy,
remainynge without end. Who that stands, says the apostle, let him se
that he falls not. And again, Thou by feyth do stand, do not look to
high, but fear. There is an holy dread of the lord, which prycketh to good
warkes, and dryueth away the man from euylle: and there is a naughty fear of
the servant, which entyseth him to slouthefulnesse, I feared, Matt. 24.
quod he, and went and did hyde thy talente in the earth. But fear, the felawe
of Justyce, causes is, distrustynge our own powers, more coragiously to work
through the aid of the spyrite, and more circumspectly to keep the gifts of
god. Beside this, every rightwisenes of men, be it never so perfect, trembles
so often as it is called to the bar of goddis Justyce, in whose sight neither
the sterres be clean, and in angels is found iniquity. Why than should not
we, which be weak, and dwelling in erthen tents, fear this Judgment,
sithe Job the allowed manne of god says: I feared all my works, knowing,
that thou Job. 4. and. 25.
spareste not the offendour. If I be washed as with the waters of snow, and
my hands shine as most clean, yet with fylthynesse thou shalt beraye me.
And Paul, a sowldyoure more exercysed thanne Job, 1. Cor. 4
says, I am preuy to my self of no evil, but not in that I am justified.
It folowethe, And prepare thy soul to tentation. Sundry be the forms of
tentations, by which god tries his men of war, but the most grievous
tentation of all is death. For than in good ernest, we must fight hand to
hand, nor there is no skypping away, but on both sides with all our might and
power, the maystrie must be tried. So that to this bickerynge man's mind must
always be preparyd. For what shall an vnexperte soldier do here, which never
fought with his ennemy, nor never assayd his strength, gyles, crafts, awaytes,
nor yet his own valiantnes? It is a great part of victory, to make war
with a known ennemy. So the most doughty sowdiour, or rather captayn saint
Paul, That we be not enuyronned, quod he, of Satanas. For we be not ignorant
of his wyly thoughts. What marvel is it, if he know 2. Cor. 2.
his wyles, which has so often coupled with him, exercysed in all kind of
peryls? Than is the fire put to, which declares what every man's work was,
and upon what foundation it was laid. And here we se otherwhiles chance,
which chauncethe in the warfare of the world. They that in the tents seemed
cowardes, and trembled at the herynge of the trumpe, in the very battle be
found most hardy: on the other side. they, which before ieoperdy seemed very
fierce, in the very point seem most fearful. So there be some, which when
they be hole, bost their quietness and vncarefulnes of conscience, and that they
be ready pre pared to death, yea and couete to flee out of this wretched world,
trustyng on a feith (I wot not what) that Christ has promised us life, and
for our sins has suffered, saying, that it forces not, what our works be,
whether good or euylle. But I fear lest many, which while they be in health,
boste this quietness and surety, do greatly tremble, when extreme peril
touches them, and that day is at hand, when the matter is showed not with
words, but with the troth. They hepe up, how great iniquite is it to dout of
the promises of god: but none do more tremble than they, which doubt not of
the promyses of god. For he that believes not, that hell is prepared for them
which live wickedly, but that death brings an end of all euyls, with an
extinguyshment of the hole man, does less fear ceathe. Faith than ingendreth
in wicked men, the dread of god, which is the beginnynge of wisdom. The
fear of god, that Job. 28.
is the wisdom, and to depart from evil, is the understanding. Also
Esaias. Of thy fear lord we have conceived, and as who Cap. 29.
says, we have trauayled with child, and have brought forth the spirit of
health. In Luke the third chapter, the people afeared at the preaching of
John Baptiste, which exhorted to repentance, saying, Now the axe is set
to the root of the tree, said: What shall we do? But onelesse they had
believed John, they would not have said, What shall we do? Likewise in the acts
of the Apostelles, the multitude feared with the preaching of Peter,
conceyuynge a dread by their beleuynge, with a prycked conscence, says to
Peter, and the other apostels: What shall we do, O brethren? they would not
have said so, if their feith ne were, pryckyng their conscience with the fear
of hell. This trembling in a man also that lives well, is not gendred of a
mystruste toward the promyses and co^minations of god, or of the not beleuyng
in the artycles of the faith, or of doubting of the power of the sacraments,
which they have of the death of Christ: but it ryseth of inward knowledge of
our wekenes, which is gretter than may be fully understand of us. Of singular
or particular things we be not co^streyned to be sure, how be it we may
despair of no person. As, for ensaumple, it is necessary to believe, that who
so ever receives with faith the sacrament of baptime, receives free
remission of all sins, but it is not necessary to believe, that this man
baptized is free from all sins. For it may be, that in this manne there is a
peculyar thing, which lets the general power of the sacrament. Likewise it
is of the sacrament of penance. It is a wickedness to doubt, whether he be
assoyled of his sins, which has rightly taken this sacrament: Yet it is no
point of heresy to doubt, whether this man or that man is assoyled, because of
peculiar impedimentes, we have no knowledge. I except a syngular and euydente
revelation, or irrefutable, authority, when there is no express authority of
scriptures, or of the agreement of the church to the contrary. This doutynge is
not an infydelitie, but a religious modesty, with his hole heart submitting him
self to the will and judgment of god, yea though he will damn the man. For he
shall not therefore be damned, but by this very submission he shall deserve
absolution, if to the religious tre^blyng be joined a trust that comes of the
mercy of Christ. The same is to be thought of the sacrament of the Altar. We
be bound generally to believe, that the priest, duelye doing his office, does
consecrate the body and blood of our lord, but it is no ungodliness to doubt,
whether this manne or that man did consecrate. For this is not to doubt of the
sacrament, but of the peculiar circumstances, lettyng the virtue or reason of
the sacrament. Likewise we believe of necessity, that men by faith and charity
toward our lord Jesus, obteyn everlasting health: yet it is lefull to dout,
whether this man or that be in the same state. How be it neither of other men
we ought rasihely to judge, and in our selves hope ought to increase, together
with the increase of love and feyth. The same must we think of the promyses
and manaces of scriptures. For the matter of doutynge ryseth not of god, which
can not ly, but of us. It is not unknown to man, how excedyng good things
god has promised, but to them that fear and love him. But who of us is there,
which has showed fear as dew to such a lord, and love, due and worthy for
such a parent? Wherefore they doubt not, whether god be true in his promises,
but whether we be worthy of his promyses. Faith, hope, charitiie, dread, be
gifts of the spirit.

Who tha^ knows, whether the feyth and cha ritie, which he has, be of this
sort of gifts, which make us the beloved of god, and whether they suffyse to
everlasting health? Likewise god by his son has promised forgiveness of all
sins, but ones by baptyme, if it be duly taken. Who is there of us, which
has not by many ways spotted the white garment, which was freely given us in
baptyme? There is prepared a remedy of penance, but to them, which with
their hole heart be converted to the lord. Here let every man examyn him self,
whether with his hole heart he be converted to the lord, whether he has an heart
truly co^trite and humbled, and if he has, whether it be after a sufficient
manner. The baptyste cries: Do ye fruytes worthy repentance. Who dare take
upon him, that he has in due form hatyd and detested his sins? God
thretneth wrath and hell to the breakers of his preceptis: and how often casting
away the fere of him, break we them? Whom shall thou find, which fears
not more the displesure of a prince or judge mortal, than of the living god?
Further, how often chances it, that manne loves more a man than god, suffering
for his mortal friend, that which he would refuse to suffer for Christ's sake?
certes I am this opinion, that I think the faith of good men, always to be
joined together with a devout and religious trembling. I except a few, whom
god would have to be counted perelesse, to be as examples, to styre all men,
but which, few can follow. They more certeynly hope for mercy of our lord,
which dread his in^^ Wherefore who that thus say, believe that thou shalt be
saved, and thou shalt be saved, do commyt double sin. For if they lack of
any manner says, the saying is ^^ and if they speak of the living faith, it
is folyshly said, believe, as who should say, it were in any man's power to
believe when he will, where as I stand in doubt, whether we be certain, if the
gift of faith be in us. Add hereunto, that man not only to other men, but also
to him self is often rymes unknown, where as nothing, be it never so hyd, can
disceyue the eyes of god. The heart of man is unsearchable of us, but no corner
of the heart is hid from him, which fourmed and made the heart. To us
oftentimes that appears holy and good, which is wicked in the eyes of god: and
pure, which is vnpure. So it happeth, that man thinks him clean from sin,
when unknowing he has a wounded conscience. Why should not this thing chance
unto us. ^^ that noble king in his Psalm says? Delicta quis intelligit, ab
occultis meis mun^^ Psalm. (...)
me domine. Who understands his offenses? from my hyd sins make me clean,
O lord. Wherefore the most surest sauegarde and saynctuary is, with a
religious fear to ^^ from the justice of god to his mercy, and with the
Psalmografe to say, Ne intres in iudicium cum seruo tuo, quia non
iustificabitur Psalm. 142.
in conspectu tuo omnis viuens. Enter not lord into judgment with thy
servant, for no living creature shall be justified in thy sight. No man than
can stand upright in this judgment, if our merits be examyned according to
the strayte rule of god, onles mercy be present in the judgment. And therefore
there went before, in the same Psalm, In thy truth here my petition, in thy
justice. In ueritate tua exaudi me.
Whosoever coueteth his petition to be hard, leueth contention: and who
coueteth his petition to be hard in the troth of god, has a distrust to his
own troth, knowing that only god is true, and every man a liar: and he that
requyrethe his petition to be hard in the justice of god, mystrusteth his own
justice. The truth and the ryghtwysnes of god, is Christ, the minister of
the evangelical grace. For by Moses was given the law, which has disclosed
our vnrightwysnesse, but grace is made by Christ Jesus, which has imparted and
communicate unto us his ryghtwysenes. We so often make a lie unto god, as we
break and transgress his laws, to which we be sworn at the fountstone of
regeneration: and so often we be unjust, as we acknowledge not our duty to our
maker and redemer, nay rather, we utterly renounce him, so often as we go back
from our couenauntes: but although we being falsely forsworn deny and
renounce him, yet he constantly is faithful, he can not deny him self,
allways true in his promyses, To thentent he might be justified Psalm. (...) Vt
(...) in (...) etc.
in his words, and vanquyshe when he is judged. The father hears our
petition in his troth, in which by his son he has unto us promised
forgyuenes of sins: and he hears not in our, but in his justice or
rightwysenes, for by his son he justifies every one that believes, purifyeng
our hearts with faith: Blessed be they then, which serve the lord in dread,
and rejoice unto Psalm. 2.
him with trembling. Why should not men, which be in subjection of sin,
fear him, whom the armies of aungelles fear? It is good to fear before
judgment, that in the judgment we may find mercy. Of humayne histories we
learn, with how great gladness, and reioysynge of heart saint Andrewe (...)
Andrew.
went unto the execution of the cross: But contraryly we find, that many,
which were supposed very holy men, at the time of their death, were sore
troubled with great fear, dredynge the judgment of god, and damnynge their
hole life before led. For it is showed of one, unto whom trembling at the
time of his death, when his brethern, which were about him said: what means
it, that thou art thus aferde, sithe thou have lived all thy life so holyly: he
answerde thus, O brethern, much diverse be the iugementes of men, and the
judgment of god. Like words it is said, that Benet, Bernarde, and Austyn had.
Wherefore one and the same faith, both causes fere, and ouercometh fere: it
causes, showing how great he is, whom we offend in many things: it
ouercometh, showing unto us Christ, whose charity purges our sins, and
grace supplyeth that our imperfectnes lacks. But as it is not always a sign
of a valiant courage or faithefulnes, not to fere death (for sometime it is
token of a brutyshe retchelesnes and lack of reason, sometime of an outrageous
and gyantyshe felnes: at the approchinge of death to wax fearful) is not
always a sign of distruste or of an evil conscience. Otherwhyles it is a mere
natural affection, according to the variety of bodies, which in some is more
moderat, and in other more vehement. Thus feared Ezechias death, a man which
with perfect heart walked before god, but he fered, not grutchynge and
murmuring against god, but with tears, prayenge it from him, and his prayer
was hard. I knew certain women, which at the only mention of death would
begin to tremble, and yet the self same women, when their death approached, were
most strong and most constant. For that fere and quyuering came not of an ill
conscience, but of a peculiar weakness of the womankynde, or of nature. The
affections of nature if they be overcome by virtue, do increase the victory,
they do not signify a mystrust. So a man shall se some wits standing in
their own conceyt, which do easyly satisfy them selfs in any manner of
thing. There be again wits of base courage, in nothing contentinge them
selfs, although they do a thing well: to whom if thou rehearse all manner
comfortes, yet they feel a remorse and a gnawynge in their mind, drawyng them
to mystruste, and hereby they conjecture, that they be not yet allowed of god,
because they never feel a quietness of conscience. But if we will distinct
nature from virtue, neither they do greatly trust unto their quietness, which
please the^ selfs in any manner thing, neither they cast away utterly their
hope, which have a mind ever suspectynge the worst. This is a vice of a
peculiar nature, and not of the will, which vice a man must not regard, if he
can not conquer it: and take that for a thing most ratified and sure, which
the spirit inwardly speaks, though the flesh be never so much against it.
I suppose that this is also natural, that men wha^their last day draws nere,
be so in manner transmuted, that they allow none of all those things, which
they did in their life, not because they be naught and ungodly, but because
they be humayne and going from the perfection. How be it against these
affections of nature we must fight with the strength of the spirit, all be it
by them we aught to judge, neither other men, nor yet our selfs.

But let us return to our former purpose, which was, to show by what means
weak souls (as the most part be) may be comforted, whom death makes all
dismayed and fearful, in whose life was much forgetfulness, much negligence,
much ceassing, and brefely many mo evil deeds than good deeds: and if there be
any good deeds, they be spotted with much rustynesse, so that to utter them
into the sight of god, were nothing else but to anger god. Either the mind
is not ready at all unto death, or else it is but lightly instructed. In the
very article of death, whatte shall we do to this man? No man is to be
despayred, so long as the breath is in him. The last battle is at hand.
The space is short, he nedethe spedye counsel. What I say shall we counselle
this manne, which is thus troubled not without great cause? First if he
have heirs, that shall succeed him, it were best to commyt all the care
touching the testament to them. First, this is a little compendiousnes. If not,
let him as brefely as he can dispatche this matter by a nuncupatory testament,
or if there be any better way. This done let him avoid out of his sight all
bablers of worldely goods, in which thing many men offend above measure,
which bring forth doubts unto the sick man, that lies a dyenge, of the
testament, and of externe things: Sometime also they compel him to subscribe
his name, and that refusing and unwillingly, detestinge their importunity, by
whom he can not be suffered to dye. Than which friends, nothing is more
unfriendly. Than, if the manner of the sycknes suffers, let him study to heal
his soul before the body, by short confession, but pure and void of disceyte,
and let him take of the priest with a full faith, and with high reverence the
remedy of penance, let him cry for the mercy of god, even from the bottom of
his heart, and take a purpose of amendment of life, if it chances him to
recover. Tha^ if happily the pressed be not at hand or ca^ not be gotten, let him
not forthwith (as some superstitious people be wont to do) despayr in him self,
and tremble: but let him with his heart confess him self to god, of his sins
and vnryghtfulnes, which of his mercy, will take the good will of the man instead of the very deed, and that which lackethe to the external signs of the
sacraments, he will vouchesafe to supplye of his own, by his peculyar grace.
By him doubtless all sacraments be of great virtue and operation, which be
in manner signacles of the divine goodness and benefycence toward us, but the
self same god, so often as necessity requires, does tender the salvation of
man without signs, only so that negligence and contempt of the sacraments be
away, and feythe, and a glad will be present. These things for this cause
be spoken, for that oftentimes we se some persons soore troubled in their
minds, if they thynk that they shall depart without confession to the
priest, without receiving of the sacrament of the altar, and the last
anneylynge. Yea and such manner of sayings we here spoken of very many, he dyed
like a christen man, he was four times confessed before death, and received all
the rites of the church. On the other side, we take up our hand, and bless
us, if we here that any man dyed without them. This surely is a christian man's
part, to wyshe, that he may lack none of the sacraments. For they be great
solacies and comfortes of the mind, and helpynges ges of our believe, and it
belongs to the synceritie and pureness of a Christen man, to accomplish (if
he may) all justice: But it apperteyneth more to a Christen manne to wyshe for
faith and charity, without which the other do nothing avail. But by these
outward things we ought not to judge any person, onles we certaynely know
that they were omitted and not done, by contempt, or which is as ill, by
negligence. Surely I doubt not, but that many neither assoyled of the pressed,
nor their maker received, nor aneyled, nor yet buried, after the rytes of the
church, have gone to everlasting joy and blys, where as some other, after
all the ceremonies of the church solemnly done, and also buried in the church
next to the high altar, be carried down to hell. Let them be instead of an
example, which suddenly do peryshe by tempeste of the sea, or by punishment of
laws, or else by some sodeyne syckenes. Wherefore unto such persons must be
added a confidence and trust, to thentent that they may certainly believe, that
they be no less assoyled, than if they were confessed to the priest, nor that
they receive no less spiritual grace, tha^ if they had received the body of
Christ, and the last anneylyng. Only let them have (as I have said before) an
ardent and brennynge faith, and a prompt will and desire. That if a pressed may be
gotten, and the violence of the sickness will not suffer a full and an hole
confession that should require many words: with an inward submission of heart
let him confess him self to be all together a sinner, and desire of the pressed
absolution with a meke heart, and with a full confidence let him think him self
assoyled. So often as necessity excludes us from the things that we covet,
god of his goodness accepts the desire of the mind. Wherefore they, which in
this state of things do trouble and vex the man with general confession, or
with often rehersall of his confession, with paynfull dyscussynge of the
circumstaunces, with the repetinge of every offense committed, whether they do
a godly thing I can not tell, surely in my judgment they do a thing out of
season. Than suffyseth one, and that short, but a sincere and pure confession
of the principal crimes, which comes to a man's mind, or if that can not be,
a brennynge affection and desire of confession. More over, if any man has done
him any offense, let him forgive the vengeance thereof with his holle heart. If
he be unworthy of forgyuenesse, yet Christ is worthy, for whose sake thou
ought lay down the affection of auengynge. Let him not then here
recompte how greatly he has been hurt of this man or of that man, but how
many offenses he him self requires to be forgiven and pardoned of god. If he
has offended any man let him go about as much as he may to be reconciled
unto him. If the other will not be at one, and forgive, let him pray god to
send him a better mind. He him self in as much as he has done all that in
him lies, is excused before god. If good works be required, there is no wark
more able to purchase the mercy of god, than for Jesus Christis sake, (and
according to the example of him, which hanging on the cross, prayed for
them, by whom he was put to death, and of whom he was with spiteful
scorns vpbraided) heartily and freely to forgive what so ever men have sinned
against us. And I can not say, whether there be any warke more hard and
uneasy to be done: and therefore principally it is to be desired of god. But yet
to this helps the very self syckenes, which breakethe the very wild
fyersenes of the humayne spyrite, and makes it more supple and easy to forgive.

Here it is the parts of them that be with the sick person, to drive from him
the common affection, whereby many think, that death is made to come the
sooner by confession, houselynge, and anneylynge: And let them persuade the
sick man rather (as the thing is in deed) that by these means there is more
hope to recover health, either because, that a sick mind doubleth the soore,
or because that not seldom the sycknes of the body, comes of the mind, or
finally because that god sooner will here the requests and prayers for him that
is reconciled, than for an vnreco^ciled person. Furthermore it is their parts
to get for the sick man such a priest as has a lernid tongue, that he may
with his communycation of words, sustain and comfort the weary sick man, and
which so can moderate his words, that neither by over much flattery he
deceyueth the sick person, nor by unseasonable austeritie and sharpnes he
cast him not into desperation, Nor break Esai. 42.
not the broken staff, nor quench not the smo king flax. For in either
behalf many men offend. Nor let them not rashely let into the sick man, all
manner of pristes, but these only, by whose speech he may be releued. Those
persons let them dryne out of sight, the whose sight may renew the affection
of synnynge unto the syck man, as his compaignyons, or of foul pleasures, or
of dycynge, or his mortal enemies.

The physicians help, let him neither despise utterly, nor have to much
confidence therein. Let his chief hoope be fyxed in god, which as he only
did first put the soul in the body, so he only takes it out, when he will.
Otherwhyles yet the physician is to be sent for, lest we seem to tempt god,
namely in sudden diseases, that kylle out of hand, which, of the phisytians
be called Morbi acuti. Let the multitude of physicians be put out, not only
for that, that likewise as it is said by a proverb of the greeks, That the
multitude of rulers and governors distroyed the country of Caria, so many
times the multitude of physicians kill many sick men, but also that their
offycious and busy cure, while that one counsayleth one thing, and an another
an other thing, and each desires at the peril of an another to be compted
very wise, and by that means medicines be heaped upon me dyeines, it comes
than to pass, that the sick manne has no leisure iustelye and fully to
regard the mattiers concerning his soul health. Doubtless, when peril
comes ouerfaste upon, the most valyant and strongest comfortes must be
given, at which time, many do flatter him, that is in the departing, ye and
many flatter them selves with vulgar remedies of none effect, as when one
counsayleth him, to co^mande his executours to bury him in the coote of such
or such friars or monks, or to make an auowe to god, that if he recover, he
will be professed in the order of the monks of Charterhowse. Why is not the
sick man rather monyshed to absteyne from such manner of vows, during the
time of his sycknes, and that it is sufficient, if he purpose to change his
life into better: and as touching the form of living, let him delyberate
with him self, when he is hole and free from perturbations and fear. For
Eccl. 5.
a foolysshe promise, displeases god. And that is foolyshe, which fear
extorteth of a distourbed mind. An other says, Dye without dread, I within
the space of a year will go to Jerusalem for the: or, I will crepe on my bare
knees to saint James: or I will go into saint Patrikes purgatory, which is in
Ireland. I knew a woman of noble birth and of high prudence, which by
testamente devised to a priest a good sum of money, to sing mass daily,
duri^g the space of a year at Rome, as though the masses at Rome were of more
holiness than the masses of England. And yet that money had been better
bestowed, if she had bound that priest never to go to Rome. For I know the
person very well, whom I judge rather to do sacrifice to Uenus than to god.
Other some exhort him to bye all the good deeds of some house of religion, or
of some order. I deny not, but there is great comfort in the communion of holy
men: but yet nevertheless, whether god will allow and ratify such
contractes, I doubt. After my sentence it is a more ready remedy ageinste
desperation, to put before the eyes of the sick perfone, the communion or
part taking of the holle church, which spredeth very far, conteynyng all
the good men from the beginning of the world, which have pleased god: In
which company be also the aungelles. This hole felawshyppe and fraternite,
with their vows and prayers does help the paciente, lokynge for a glorious
victory. Why than should he cast away his buckelar, which has so many
companies succouryng him? If the prayer of one religious house, causes the man
to hope, in this number be al houses. I speak not this, to thentent, that it
avails not to require the prayers of certain men, or that the prayers of few
be not profitable, namely if they come of a christen and; free charity, but
that to styre and pluck up the hope of the sick man, the contemplation of the
universal church is of greatter strength. For by this way his heart shall be
more confirmed. But the most puisant solace of all, is never to remove the
eyes of faith from Christ, which gives him self holly unto us, whom we
have a suter for us unto god, which never cesseth crienge, Come to me al Mat.
11.
ye that labor and be burdened, and I will ease you. In the hollownes of this
rock, let him hyde him, into this persons wounds, let the sick man crepe,
and he shall be sure from Satanas. Wherher to so ever that wyly serpent plucketh
away his mind, let him always have his eyes to that brazen serpent fixed on a
high pole, to the contemplatio^ of which, Paul calls back again the
Galatees, which for none other cause began to waver, than that they turned
their eyes from the crucifixe. The venomous bytynges of the fleing spirits
shall not noye him, if faith with vnmouynge eres beholds that sign of
everlasting health. Christ hanging on the cross is a sign of triu^ph, a sign
of victory, a sign of everlasting glory. For our sakes he fought, for our
sakes he overcame, for our sakes he wanne the triumph, only so that we have
the eyes of our faith intentyue and waking hereupon. In humayne wars it is
no little help to victory (which thing Alcibiades prayseth in Socrates) never
to wynke. But in this conflyct, which we have with our spiritual ennemy, the
hole hope of the victory is in the eyes. But there is much diuersifie in the
two batayles. For in the mundane wars it must be marked on every side with
intentife eyes, what the ennemy does: but in this battle we must be blind
and deaf at the assautes of the devil, and only have our eyes fyxed to the
sign of grace, and our ears lift up to the voice of our redemer. Satanas
casts tho things into our minds, which hepe up the ire of god: But Christ
hanginge on the cross, she weth tokens of mercy. The dyuel barketh against us
such things as would bring man down to desperation, Christ speapeth the
thing that plucketh man up to hope. For faith as it has eyes, so also it has
ears. The holy ghost requires of the soul both these two senses, which
says in the. xliiii. Psalm, Audi filia, and vide, and incline aure^ tuam.
Harken daughter, and see, and incline thine ear. Harken that thy spouse
byddeth and commands, and see what he pramyseth. And if that it shall seem
inconvenient, and a thing not lykely, that so great a felicity is prepared
for them, which set their trust in our lord Jesus, inclyne thyn ear, that
the things which pass man's wit and reason, for this self consyderation thou
may well believe, because it is the lord, which has promised it, whose mercy
is no less incomprehensyble, than is almightines. Of these ears makes
mention the. lxxxiiii. Psalm. I Audiam quid in me loquatur dominus.
will hear what the lord speaks in me. Harken not, what in the, speaks the
flesh, what the dyuel, what ma^s reason: for they speak nothing but
desperatio^, but hear what the lord speaks in the. For he speaks peace
unto his communaltie. The church is the communaltie of the lord, a nation
peculiar, and the people of acquisitio^: be thou of this people, and thou shall
hear the lord speakinge things of peace. It follows, And Et super sanctos
suos.
upon his saints, Here again man's infirmity falls down crienge, I am a
damned person, Alas, I am all laden with sins, what felawshyp have I with
saints or holy men? But he says not, Upon the holy me^ of the law or of
Moses, but upon his holy Sanctos suos.
ones. His holy ones be they, whom he has sanctified by his son. If thy
mind be not quieted, harken what follows, And upon them that be converted to
their heart. Do not Et in eos qui conuertuntur ad cor.
weye the greatness of thy crimes, only repent, and thou shall hear the lord
speking within the, peace. A word of peace was that which was spoken to that
notorious sinful woman, Thy faith has saved the, go in Luc. 7.
peace. Say with David, but say with thy heart. Peccaui domino, I have
trespassed the lord. With those two words thou shalt 2. Reg. 2.
turn the prepared and ready vengeance into mercy. Such ears had he, which
says, Sacrifice for my sin thou have not required, but ears thou have made
persite unto me. Of the eyes speaks the. xii. psalm, Illuminate mine eyes,
least at any time I sloumbre in death, least my ennemy should say, I have
greuayled led against him. Thou see here, that victory is in the eyes,
rather thanne in the hands. Death obscureth the eyes of the body, but there
shall be no cause why our ennemy shall glory and triumph upon us, so long
as faith shows light in the mind, never mouynge the eyes from Christ, that
was crucyfyed. Yea this hole Psalm goth about nothing else, but by the
contemplation of the divine mercy to resuscyte and raise up again, man that is
in agony and in danger of desperation. And therefore it follows, They that
trouble me, 'shall joy, if I be moved: that is to say, if I waver in faith.
Thou hear a great peril, but take a sovereign remedy, But I have trusted
in thy mercy. But how comes the hope of mercy? My heart shall rejoice in thy
saluatory, I shall sing in praise of the lord, which has done me good. The
saluatorie or Sa^y of god, is Christ, nor there is none other name, in which we
ought to be saved: as it is said in the fourth chapter of the acts. So great
virtue has the contemplation of Christ, which was crucified for us, that
desperation is turned into hope, and hope into gladness. And he which before
nyghe to desperation said: They which trouble me, shall rejoice, if I be moved,
now says, My heart shall rejoice in thy saluatorye. Thou haste hard victory,
now here the triumph. I will sing to the lord, which has given good things
unto me. Who has not his own good deeds to sing, let him sing the good
deeds, which god grants freely by his son. If we have trust in our own
good deeds, our adversary will thereof rejoice, but if in the lord Jesus we fyxe
the shote ancre of hope, our enemy will shrynke, like as the apostel
rejoicing, says in the. viii. chapter to the Romans, If god be for us, who is
against us? He also which spared not his Si Deus pro nobis quis contra nos.
own son, but for us all delivered him to the Jews, how will he not also
with him give all things unto us? who shall make any complaint or accusation
against the elect of god? God is he that iustifyeth, who is he that
condempneth? By this polycie and means it is so brought about, that sodeynely
things shall be turned and tossed up set down, and by the help of Christ
he shall bear away the victory, which seemed desperate, and the ennemy being
discomfyted and repelled, shall shrink away, which began right now to
triu^phe. This undoubtedly is the victory of faith, of which saint John^
speaks in the. v. Epistle, All that is engendered of god, ouercometh the
world, and this is the victory, which over comes the world, our faith. But
who is he, the which vanquysheth the world, but he that believes, that Jesus
is the son of god, who^ the father would that he should be a sacrifyce for
the sins of all mankind? In this degree so long as the souldyour of Christ
stands, how much so ever that our ennemy the dyuell leapeth about, how
much so ever he inuadeth us, we can not be overcome. But in this supreme and
last battle the enemy to his vttermoste powers attempteth to bring the
sick man into desperation, which is among all crimes most grievous. And
therefore than in especial, resystence must be made on the contrary side, with
all labor and means, so that the sick person be moved, taught, and
persuaded, to all such things that may induce and bring him to hope, and
confirm his mind.

To this thing shall help the image of the crucifixe laid right against his
eyes, which may ever among renew the infirm mind of the sick. And also the
pictures of tho saints, in whom our lord would have a memorial or monument
of his bounty and mercy to be notorised and publysshed: as of Marye
Magdaleyne, of Peter, wepinge after he had denied our lord, and of such like.
After this the rchersall of places of holy scriptures, which do set forth unto
us the immense mercy of god, and charity toward mankind, but namely tho
things, which our lord Jesus for the salvation of the world vouchesafed
both to bo and to suffer. There be innumerable such places, which may bring
great and strong comfort to a feeble and wauerynge mind. For in this article
of death the devil heapeth up to man's mind all that ever may extynguyshe
or put forth the spark of faith and of hope. He makes suggestion, how great
the majesty and justice of god is, which so often has been neglected and
defowled. He amply fyeth the softnes and bountifulnes of him, that so often has
been neglected and rejected, detortynge and wrasting that self thing for a
proof of desperation, which ought to nouryshe hope of forgyuenesse. He puts
in mind so many years evil spent, so many occasions omytted, which exhorted
to well doing, and if any thing were ryghtely done, he depraueth it, and
sclaunderously constreweth it to the worst. He tempts also and assayeth the
faith of the man, to thentent he might doubt of the authority of scriptures,
and of the artycles, which that the church has taught us, pro^ptyng into our
minds, the reasons of philosophers, and of heretykes, and perplexe and
doubtful questions, of the creation and redemption of the world, of the
immortalytie of souls, of the resurrection of bodies, of Christ, whether he
was true god and man, of the sacraments of the church, what strength they
have, of the prescience and predestination of god, wrastyng and wrything all
things to distruste and desperation, deprauinge also the testimonies of
scriptures to the same purpose, which thing he presumed to do also upon our
lord, the author of scriptures. Beside this, these things do help our
adversary in this behalf, as it were by occasion, that is to wit, the
peynfulnesse of the syckenes, the dread of death, the horror of hell, and the
natural weakness of the mind, and heaviness of heart, which the grievous
sickness causes. Wherefore to this inclination the ennemy is redye in his
assawtes, workinge all craft, and layenge all his ordynaunces and engyns, to
throw and drive to the ground, the weak and wauerynge person. But in like
wise as with sins a man ought not to struggle, but from consyderation of
them to turn away his mind to the grace of Christ, so with the devil we
should not dispute, but when he suggesteth and casts into man's mind wicked
and ungodly things, he must say to him, Abi retro Satana, So back Satanas. It
is not lefull for me to doubt of tho things, which the church, instructed by
the holy ghost, has taught, and it is also sufficient to believe tho things,
which I can not attain with my wit. They tell a certain thing, not out of
holy scripture, but nevertheless to the mattier that we go now about it is
sufficientely accommodate and mete, of two, whom the dyuell at time of their
death tempted of their believe: the one was learned in Philosophy, the other was
nothing but a Christen man, rude and unlearned: he assailed the first, how he
believed whether that Christ was god and man, whether that he was born of a
virgin, and whether he believed the general resurrection. And began with
reasons of Philosophy to demonstrate, that it was impossible to join tho
things in one, betwixt which there is no agreance, as betwyxt fynite and
infynite, create and increate. Furthermore that it is against nature, that a
virgyn should bring forth a child without carnal knowledge of man, nor that
(according to Aristotell the Prince of the Philosophers) there can be no
return from privation to the habyte.

What needs mo words? The man wauered, and was conuicte, and the dyuell
departed a victour. The other rude man, wha^ the dyuel asked him how he believed
of this and of that thing, he answered him with a co^pendious way, As the
church believes. Again when he objected, how does the church believe? Marye
quod he, as I believe. How do thou believe? As the church believes. How
believes the church? As I believe. From this rude and unprepared man so
disputations, but with simple faith stable and steadfast: the gostly ennemy
departed vanquyshed. This answer is good enough, to confound and drive
away the subtle and craftye ennemy the dyuell. But chiefly it is good in
obscure and doubtefull causes and matters. As if the ennemy will suggest, or
some other captious felaw, how may it be, that in three persons there should be
one god, and one essencie in number? and also by whatte means they be
distinct the one from the other? Let him make answer thus, Even as the
church believes. How can all one body be in diverse places, all at one time?
And how in the Sacrament of the altar may the true body of a man be
contained in so little a space? Let him answer, as the church believes. Again
what manner of fire is in hell, and how can a bodyly thing be an agent in an
vnbodyly substance? let him answer, as the church believes. Or if any thing
is to be answered, let him answer with few words, either out of the Creed,
(which daily ought to be rehearsed unto the sick man) or out of holy scripture,
or else by the spirit of faith. If Satan heapeth up the greatness of his sins,
let him turn him to god and say, Auerte faciem tua^ a peccatis meis. Turn thy
face lord from my sins, and look upon the face of thy son Christ Jesus.
Dyuell. The noumbre of thy A disputaty on betwyxte the Dyuell and the sick man.
sins do pass the gravel of the sea. Man. But yet the mercy of god is more
plentuous. Dyuell. How do thou trust to have a reward of rightwysenes,
which art all vnrightwyse? Man. My rightwysnes is Christ. Dyuell. Shall thou
which art all beclad in wickedness, go with Peter and Paul, to ever lasting
bliss? Man. No, but with the thief, to whom it was said on the cross: This
day thou shall be with me in Paradyse. Dyuell. How have thou this trust, which
have Luc. 23.
done nothing that is good? Man. Because I have a good lord, an intreatable
judge, and a gracious advocate. Dyuell. Thou shall be haled down to hell. Man.
My heed is in heaven. Dyuell. Thou shall be damned. Man. Thou art a barratour,
and a falls harlot, no judge, a damned fend, no damnour. Dyuell. Many legions
of dyuels wait for thy soul. Man. I should despair, if I had not a
protector, which has ouercom your tyranny. Dyuell. God is not just, if for
thy evil deeds he gives the everlasting life. Man. Nay, he is just that
keeps his promises: and I, long sythen, have appeled from his justice unto
his mercy. Dyuell. Thou flattereste thy self with vain hope. Man. He that is
verite can not lie, it is thy properte to be false of promyses. Dyuelle. Thou
see what thou leauest behind, but what thou shall have thou see not.
Manne. The things that be seen, be temporal, and the things that be not
seen, be everlasting, and he sees, and more than sees, which surely and
steadfastly believes. Dyuel. Thou departest hence laden with evil deeds and
naked of good deeds. Man. I will pray to the lord, that he will dyscharge me
of my euyls, and clothe me in his good things. Dyuell. But god hears not
sinners. Man. But he hears penitentes, and for sinners he dyed. Dyuell. Thy
repentance is to late. Man. It was not to late unto the thief. Dyuell. The
thefes faith was steadfast, thine wauereth. Man. I will pray to the lord,
that he will increase my faith. Dyuel. Thou doeste falsely persuade thy self,
that thou haste a merciful lord, which with so many euyls vexes and
punyssheth the. Man. He heals as a loving physician. Dyuell. Why than would
he that thy death should be so bitter? Man. It is the lord, he can not will,
but that thing which is good. Why should I, an unprofitable servant, refuse
to suffer the thing, that the lord of glory has suffered? Dyuell. It is a
wretched thing to dye. Man. Blessed be they, which dye in the lord. Dyuell. But
the death of sinners is evil. Man. He ceasseth to be a sinner, which with
hope of mercy acknowlegeth him self for a sinner. Dyuell. Thou leauest this
world. Man. From heavy exyle I depart into my native countreye. Dyuell. Thou
leauest behind the many great commodities and good things. Man. But many mo
evil things. Dyuell. Thou leauest thy richesse. Manne. They be other men's
that I leave, I bear mine with me. Dyuel. What do thou bear, sith thou have
no goodness in the? Man. That is trewly mine, which the lord has freely given
me. Dyuell. Thou forsakest wife and childerne. Man. They be the lords, I
commit them unto him. Dyuell. It is an hard thing to be plucked away from the
derely beloved. Man. Within short space they shall follow me. Dyuell. From thy
sweet friends thou art sundered. Manne. I go to sweter friends.

In as much as the most wyly and subtle ennemy, whom he can not draw to
desperatio^, entyseth and solliciteth them to a trust and confidence in them
selfs: to thentent that who^ he can not thrust down heedlong, he may brimge
up on a heyght, and so confound them: therefore against this no small daungier,
the sick man must be armed, defended, and protected. Likewise also as against
the daungier of desperation, it is a right sure and strong defense, the more
that the dyuell depresseth man by the conscience of his sins, the more to
lift up him self with the hope of goddis mercy and mystical society with
Christ: so against the ieoperdy of arrogance, it shall be a present and ready
remedy, to abject and humiliate him self with consyderation of his own
weakness. For who so ever in Christ is strong and haute, and in him self
humble and abject, can neither be thrown down of Satanas, nor yet confounded.
Such a certain thing we read in the old chronicles of saint Antony the
monk, whom the dyuell assauted by a (...)
thousand means, and yet he could never overcome him. On a certain time,
when that he had wrought and done all the polycies and subtylnesse that he
could deuyse, and all in vain, he confessed him self to be convict and
vanquysshed, saying thus: I labor all in vain, for if I deiecte the, and
show the thy unworthiness, thou do auaunce and lift up thy self: and if I
extol the, thou humblest and depressest thy self. Wherefore according to the
exaumple of saint Antony, if the dyuell say, Thou art worthy to sit among
the high seraphical saints in heaven, than let the sick manne make answer,
My worthynes is nothing, but that I acknowledge my unworthiness. Dyuell. Much
have thou prayed, thou have fasted much, thou have led a straight and a sharp
life, thou have dealt much to the pore people. Man. All that thou sheweste of
me, the dampened Pharisces do the same. If any manner of good work has come
from me, it is the lords and not mine. Dyuell. But thou art pure from those
vices, which reign in him or in him. Man. I have then cause to give thanks to
the lord, and not to love my self. For oules the lords mercy had protected
me, and if that like te^tation had fallen upon me, I should have committed the
same, or else more grievous.

With such praty answers the sick man must be armed, short and ready against
the crooked suggestions of the dyuell. Ensaumples of holy men must be called to
mind, but specially of such, in whom a notable mercy of the lord has been
declared, as in Dauyd, which augmented the sin of adultery with
manslaughter, and with two words he escaped vengeance: in the Nyniuites, in
Achab, in the prodygall son, in the publicane, whose rightwysenes the lord
preferred before the pharisaic all holiness: in Mary Magdaleyne, to whom the
lord said, thy sins be forgyuen the: in the auoutrous woman, to whom it was
said, Go and sin no more: in Peter, which thrice denied our lord: in Paul,
which did persecute the church of god, bynding and killynge all that professed
the name of our lord Jesus: in Cypriane, which of a southsayer was made a
martyr: and in many other mo, which from their ydolatry, from blasphe my from
horrible crimes, through their faith in Christ atteyned mercy and crowns. To
exclude desperation, and raise hope, the scriptures of the new testament be
more apt than the scriptures of the old. Nor it is no wonder, Moses feared
the Jews with commandments, Christ comforted all men by faith and grace.
The holy scriptures have not only exaumples, but also sayenges very many,
partly which cast on men a dicde, partly which comfort the ferefull. For upon
these two things in manner all the books of the prophets do run, heapinge up
unto them that turn away from god, the vengcance of god: and again
amplyfyenge the mercy of god to them that be converted to repentance. Either
of these medicines is wholesome, if it be taken wisely and in place. Those that
be terrible, and put men in fere, must be ministered to hole in body and sick
in soul, wild and dronken in the prosperity of this world, or cast into a
sleep with the delytes of this world, as it were with the herb called
Mandrake: to the entente that as by taking of Helleborus they may be brought
into their right wits: or by taking the herb Brassica, called Cole, they
may return to sobrenes: or myghtely cried on, and plucked, they may awake.
Those that cause hope of forgyuenes, must be given to tymorous and fearful
persons, specially in the danger of death. How be it neither to the one fear
must be so ministered, that there shall no hope of forgiveness be mixed to the
medicine, nor to the other asswagementes and comfortes must be so given, that
they shall be disceyued. For it is two things, to chastyse and to cast down,
to comfort and to flatter. Wherefore it forces not a little, what persons do
keep and sit with sick men. They ought to have always at hand sundry places
of scriptures, that either by the rehersall or telling of them, they may
establyshe and hold up the fayntynge heart of the sick person. To this
purpose certain prayers aptely made will help. For certain prayers go
about, which be made of unlearned persons, and by unlearned persons be taught
to sick folk. Hope being thus called up, yet remains the fear of
Purgatory, the which fear some men go about to mitigate and put out with
remedies, after mine opinion, nothing effectual. Some do promise to be sure
and redeemed from the fire of Purgatory by byenge of pardons: but I fear least
this be not, to succor and comfort the sick manne, but rather a mocking and
a mere dissimulation. They do better which by Masses and prayers of good men,
and also by alms deeds, counsel him to dymynish the pains of Purgatory. But
the stro^gest ^
remedy of all, is to aduertyse the sick man, as much as he can, to styre and
raise up his faith and charity toward god and his neighbor, with all his
heart to forgive al men, of whom he has been hurted and grieved, and patiently
to suffer for the love of Christ Jesus the pains of the syckenesse, and also
death, submytting him self holly in all things to the will and pleasure of god,
thinking that god will not judge two times upon one thing: and that Christ for
our sins has suffered great peynes on the cross. Out of these fountaynes,
and namely of his blood, let him fetch a refrigeration and asswagement of the
fire of Purgatory. And so mystrustynge him self, and trustyng upon the
exceeding mercy of god, the merytes of Christ, and the suffrages of all holy
men, with a contrite heart and religious trust let him say, In manus was
domine, commendo spiritum meum, Into thy hands lord, I commend my spirit.
There shall be no disdayn, though the sinner and weak man usurps the words of
his lord. For to that purpose our heed expressed these thingis in him self,
that we should follow him, which be his members. That if it please any man
also of the other holy men to fetch an exaumple, let him say with saint
Steven, Lord god take my spirit. Examples have a great virtue and strength to
move men's minds. For they show as it were in a glass, what is comely, and
what is otherwise: Lykwyse as also in other thi^gis we be more moved with those
things that we se, than that we here. Wherefore it has no small profyt to be
often present at men's deaths, to thente^t that we may despise that in them we
se detestable, and follow that is good and holy. For in that article of death
every man's faith appears what it is, and every man's conscience. But here shall
no example be found more perfyte than that, which the lord expressed unto us
in him self. For when that last night approached, against the storm of
temtation, which was at hand, he armed his disciples with the fode of his
most holy body and Mode, monyshinge us, that so often as we fall into
casualtie or disease, which thretneth death, forthwith should purge our
affections with confession, like as our lord washed the fete of his
disciples, and that done that we take reuerentely the body of our lord, which
meat may make our minds strong and vnvanquysshable against our spiritual
ennemy. Our lord made no testament, but instead of his testament was that
hole fyery sermon, which John specifyeth and teleth (...)
very diligentely, and the ordinance of the sacrament of the altar made in
memory of his death. Of a testament these words also do sound, which were
spoken on the cross, woman behold thy son, And to the disciple, Behold thy
mother. Wherefore of external things we ought to speak little, and much of
the thingis that make to faith and charity. For the words of them that we
are wo^t to be snatched up somdele gredyly, and to be printed more depely in
the minds of the hearers, partly that no man is thought to feign in that
ieopardy, partly that the mind wha^ it begins to be plucked from the body,
wherewith it is combred, oftentimes utters a glymmerynge, and a proof of that
liberty and knowledge, whereunto it goth. But let us return to the example of
our redemer. After his mau^dy, he departed from the house into the yard, and
his other disciples, there commanded to sit down, he took with him only three,
Peter, John, and James of Zebedei, to thentente that he might have the same to
be witnesses of his humayne infirmity, which to fore in the mount he would
have to be witnesses of his glory. To these he confessed thextreme heaviness of
his mind, which oftentimes is more grievous than the self death, which being
commanded to watch and pray, again he departed to pray. In the corporal
departinge of our lord there is a great mystery. Who prepares him to death,
must depart from all vrbane and domestical affections, cast away the care
of the publyke weal, utterly do away the thought of possessions, commend his
wife and childern to the lord, convey away him self from the trust of his
friends and kynsmen, not his most inward fre^des receive into the care of his
mind, he must be alone from couerte of house, which than will speak with
the heavenly father, wha^ extreme necessite approaches. Three times he monyshed
his disciples. when they slept, to wake and pray, that they enter not into
temptation. He enters into tentation, which gives him self into the power
of the temptour. But they that wake and pray, though they be stryken with
tentation, yet it passes away by and by. That which our lord spoke to the
three disciples, he spoke to us all. They slept, and therefore they fell into
tentation. Peter the most stro^gest of all denied his master, the other for
scare fled away, and would have denied him much more, if they had been in like
case. So in like manner in peril of death man's infirmity is overcome, onles
instantely, oneles with a pure affection, onles with an vnuanquyshed trust he
cries for the help of him, which only reuyueth the deed. Now how a man should
pray being in this state, our redemer vouche safed by his exaumple, to show
unto us. He bowed his knees: this was not enough, he fell down flat on his
face. From the ground he cried to his father so mightily, that his voice was
herd of the three disciples, which were a stones cast of, beside that they
were heuye with sleep. Two times he returned to prayer. iii. times he repeted
the self same wordis, Not as I will, but as thou. He boweth his knees, (...)
etc.
which submits him holly to goddis will: be falls flat down on his face,
which holly discontenteth him self, holly distrusteth his own strength and
good deeds, nor from any other where hops solace, than from the mercy of
our lord. Nor we may not despair forthwith, though comfort be differred,
again and again we must return to cryenge, not of the mouth, but of the
heart. For if the thing that our lord did outwardly, we follow spiritually,
the good angel will come and wype of the bloody sweatte from our mind, and
shall either deliver us from peril, or give strength to our spirit, that we
boldly may suffer death. Last of all we must with our lord all naked, ascend
upon the cross, far from all erthly affections, lift up to the love of the
heavenly life, that with saint Paul we may say, The world is crucified unto me,
and I to the world. Gala. (...)
And there nailed with three nails, feythe, hope, and charity, we must
constantly persevere, fyghtyng valiantly with our ennemy the dyuelle, until at
last, after we have vanquyshed him, we may pass into eternal rest, through
the aid and grace of our lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and
holy gooste be praise and glory without end. Amen.

FINIS.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAB. BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS. EXCVS.

ANNO. M. D. XXXVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO.


