AN EPISTLE, OR APOLOGY
OF A TRVE, AND CHARITABLE brother of the Reformed Church in favors of
Protestants, Papists, and those of the Reformation for a more moderat course
of proceeding in matters of Religion by searchinge the scriptures, and
examining their Spirits for the sense, and true meaning of them by a
peaceable conference, and such easy means as wear practiced in the
Apostolical, and Primitive Church for plantinge the faith, and rooting out of
error, tending to unity of Religion, loyalty to the kings Majesty, increase
of honor to him and his posterity, and good of the Commonwealth.

Worshipful and my loving brother in the lord, I have received your loving
aduertisements by writing, and I honor you the more as well for that I see
theareby your sinceare affection continued toward me, (...) also for your
singular zeal ever to maintain the gospel. In which respects (...) take in
good part your severe reprehension and distaste of the advice I lately (...)
for a milder course in matters of Religion, then has been for many years in
this Realm followed. Wheareas you protest to remain still my friend
(notwithstanding our difference in opinion touching this point) therein
appears your well grounded affection and love toward me and I could wish
that all our brethren would keep the same course of charity toward all men,
howsoever they differ from us in sense or opinion. So should we bear the mark
of true Religion, and by this badge be known to be Christ's disciples if we
love our Enemies. Christ commanded us to love our neighbor, and declared as
you know that the Samaritan was neighbor to the Jew, and thearefore not to
be excluded from his love, howebeit otherwise he could not communicate with him
in divine affairs. Your zeal is commendable in that you say with Paul:
Vtinam abscindantur qui v^^ conturbant, for with him you may so pray that they
which withstand and hinder the course of the gospel wear cut of and rooted
out: But in that you wish them to be cut of by the sword and I contrary wise
by the force of gods word, in this our opinions are different. Wherefore my
drift is in this Apoligie and defense, first to set down plainly my opinion,
and then to lay open the reasons that moved me theareto. And so to come to the
matter. I wish with you and pray as Christ himself did, that all the Kings
Majesty's subjects may be made one in Christ, to acknowledge all one god, to
embrace all one faith, to live under the rules of one law, and so to agree if
it may be in will and affection that we may be all, Cor vnum, and anima vna,
One heart and one soul, and this we both agree to be best not only in reguard
of the souls health, and eternal salvation, but also for the civil policy
and temporal government of his Majesty's Dominions. For whosoever would wish
or seek, to nourish division in any sort, as he cannot be of god so is he not
to be accounted a good governor, or right politician. In our last assembly at
London it was our prayer, as you may well remember, that the Kings Majesty
(exalted to so great a Monarchy and government of so many kingdoms diversely
sorted, and affected in religion) might have that gracious virtue of the
Adamant stone to draw unto him, and win to unity in faith the people of
diverse nations so committed to his charge. For who of us al does not desire
from his heart that the Protestants, and Papists of England which are many in
number, and the Papists of Ireland, where there are few or none other, and
the Nobility of Scotland, of the which no small number inclyne that way, would
come with us to the pure light of the gospel, and to our reformed Churches.
You remember the Profession of faith which to this intent, and purpose we
procured to be set forth in print at his Majesty's first ingresse into this
Realm, but it prevailed not, and had it not been the respect was borne his
Majesty, it had been controuled as it was misliked both by the protestant, and
papist. And since that to further and advance our cause, and to proceed in the
same purpose, we have in peaceable manner done what in us lies. Let us hold
on the same moderat course, and strive to prevail, not by the temporal sword
of his Majesty's power, but endeavor to overcome by the eternal sword of gods
holly word. Which though it be sweet, and not violent, yet is it a two edged
svvord that cutteth on every side and pierces more dieply to win the heart of
man and alter his understanding for planting the gospel, then any humane force
whatsoever. I agree further with you, that as it is a point of good husbandry
to weed the Corne-fielde before the weeds have ouergrowen the corn, so
likewise may his Majesty emploie his temporal sword that no Cockle be sown or
rise in the field of the lords Church under his protection, and that such as
begin to spring up may be times be cut of. In matutino interficiebam omnes
peccatores terrae. So did that holly king David, and pleased god highly theare
with. Thus much your arguments do prove sufficiently. For in this sense the
king bears the sword to destroy all sin, and sinners in matutino, that is
to say betimes while sin and sinful erroures are newly budding, and may be
cut of without hurt, and damage to the state of the good and faithful. And
it is our part to be watchful to discover them betimes, least if we sleep too
long they spring so high, and spread so far that whosoever should then
attempt to pull them up, should destroy much corn withal, and do more harm
then good. This then is the point whearein we jar. You think it needful
that the k. Majesty proceed to authorize, and establish our religion by the
sword, to repress all other sects by severity of laws, such as wear
practiced in the days of the late Queen against us, and against the Papists:
And I contrariwise am of opinion that such laws, and severity are in our case
unprofitable, and will hurt rather then help the advancement of our cause; and
I take this my advise to be better grounded then yours in the written word, to
approach nearer to the wisdom and course of gods divine providence, to be
more conformable to Christian humanity, to beseem better our prince for the
assurance of his estate and the advancement of his noble issue, and finally to
agree best with true civil policy for the sweet peace, rest, and repose of
this our Republique and increase thereof, as shall appear by the experience we
have seen with our own eyes and in these our days, as well in his Majesty's
Dominions, as in all Nations round about us.

That we have slept too long all writers agree, and that for many hundred
years: for who of us does not see that the weeds have ouergrowen the good
corn, taken so deep root and so far spread, that amoungst his Majesty's.
subjects there are two for one of a contrary faith and opposite to ours, and
that not in ceremonies only (for then we need not stir so much as we have
done) but in substantial points of faith yea as we esteem in damnable
erroures, which we have notified in our books as well against. D. Whitguift
and other Protestants as against the Papists.

To destroy all these that are in faith opposite unto us were overmuch
cruelty; to compel them to an external worship against their conscience were
no les dangerous and damnable for us then for them; to impouerish them by
statute Jaws were to impouerish our selves being so lincked to them as many
ways we are, yea it were a great weakening to the whole body of the estate to
the detriment of our sovereign Prince, and of the Common wealth: for the
wealth of the subject is the treasure of the king, and the multitude of his
people is his strenght and glory: Gloris Regis multitudo populorum.

These be the grounds that have moved me to approve and persuade a more
temperat course in matters of Religion, of which opinion though I have not
always been, and you (as you suppose) note to my shame, yet I hold it not
ignominius to chainge for the better upon these and others so grave
considerations as in this treatise I shall set down for your and others
satisfaction.

Saul when he stoned Stephan, and the other Martyrs had zeal but without
knowledge, so had I while I was of your opinion and confess with Paul,
Sapiebam vt paruulus my indiscreet zeal blinded my understanding, and in my
judgment there wanted ripenes and maturitie.

As you do now, so did I then storm within my self to see his Majesty ruled
by the Protestants not only in those Papisticall ceremonies of his coronation
and unction, but also in the whole course and practice of the Communion Book,
and administration of sacraments; that he should leave the wholle state of the
Church of England in the same sort as he found it, and take upon him the title
of supremacy in matters of Religion, a point highly blamed in king Henry 8.
by Master Calvin, (who without al controversy was one of the chiefest
instruments of the gospel) and therefore never as yet received by any of our
reformed Churches. At his Majesty's first coming to the Croune we exspected
nothing less then this sudden calm toward the Papists. They live in
peace and pay no more the Statute and that by commandment from the king.
Some that lost their lands and country are now restored to both with grace,
which made me vvonder at the first, and inter into due consideration of the
fact when (conferring with some of known wisdom and zeal) I understood
that the Marquis Rosne Lord tresurer of France sent hethet as Embassadoure did
amoungst other points very mainly persuade his Majesty not to force any of his
subjects in the business of Religion, himself being (as you know) a very good
Christian. And farther understanding how quietly our breethren in France live
togeither with the Papists under laws provided for that purpose, I find
that this Nobleman has dealt honorably with his Majesty, and given the same
advise by which the K. his Master vvonne France and established his Croune in
peace.

Let us then examine whether this advise agree with the word, and may stand
with the true zeal of the gospel.

It seems to me that without al reply the case is already over ruled and
resolved by Christ's express sentence. Matthew. 12. In the parable of the sea
desman who sovveed good seed in his field, and none but true doctrine. but
vvhilest men were a sleep the enemy of truth came and ouersovved the Cockle of
error: his servants had slept so long that the blade shot up and ouertopt the
wheat before it was espied: the zealouse ministers of the truth avvaking,
and seeing the field in this case, offered to go and root out the tares. Vis
imus and colligimus ea, say they. This is the question betvveene us.

Your aunsvveare would have been to those laborers in the lords harvest, Go
pull them up by the roots. but the lords aunsvveare was far otherwise: Let
them alone (says he) and let them grovve togeither until the harvest, Sinite
vtraque crescere vsque ad messem. Which by his own interpretation is the end
of the world. and he gives this reason thereof. Least in pulling up the
Cockle ye root up also the wheat.

If Christ will have it thus why do you blame my advise that a Christian
king should do the same rather then use the svvord of force and violence upon
any the like occasions.

The reason that our Savior alleges is in our case most pregnant and
weighty. For whereas in all his Majesty's Dominions men of all Religions are
so lincked togeither with us in blood, alliance, friendship, and otherwise
that in pulling up the one root the other combined therevvith must necessarily
follow or take some harm, in vvishing his Majesty to take that course of
violence we should not only vvound many that are near unto us, but also
greatly preiudise our selves as has appeared by the attempt to root out the
Papists in the late Queens days, when many of our own brethren were
brought with them to extreme calamity. The father being a Papist was
thrown out of his house, and spoiled of all his goods; his wife and children
undone and pressed with misery although they wear most zealous in the lord;
and we that had matched in their families were by these means defraunded of
our expected snccession to their goods and liuinges. When for the same cause
any one of calling lost his life or his goods or otherwise was but in
disgrace, did not all such loose their support as were lincked unto him or
depended upon him for their service, and advancement whereof great numbers
were no vveedes but very good Corn?

Wherefore I cannot like the reviving of such a course again, since as you see
it proceeedeth not from the spirit of our Savior but rather from passion, or
at the least from indiscreet zeal.

The vveedes I confess do hinder the growth of the good corn, and are there
with no less damage, then was the fruteles figtree in the viniard of the
lord. and yet the lord of the viniard was easily entreated to deal not by
threatenings to cut it down, but rather to dig about it and to dung it in
hope of fruit theareafter. Luc. 13.

Have we not seen many such trees chainged with time ad patience? What a
loss had it been then to have cut them of in their unfruitful season? we
should rather in the spirit of meekenes heartily pray for their conversion and
entreat delay of their confusion were they as sinful as Sodom, that so
doing we might be known to be the true seed of faithful Abraham.

If you say the trees in question are not oly fruitles but hurtful in the
viniard and in his Majesty's Dominions most dangerous; I aunsvveare that all
vveedes are hurtful in the corn yet not in all cases to be rooted out. Were
not the Iebusites hurtful when they annoyed the people of the lord with
their continual vvarres and scandalous idolatry? yet for other respects the
lord vvoulde have them remain in the land of promise with the Jews, Yea the
Jews (although they crucified the son of God) are suffered to live in
Christian contreies according to their law. We read that the Samaritans
were so unkind to our Savior, that they would nether receive him in their
towns, nor yet give him bread for his money. Whereat James and John (as they
thought of a good zeal) could have found in their hearts to have seen them
consumed vvth fire from heaven: But the lord rebuked them saying, You know not
of what manner spirit you are. The son of man came not to destroy men's lives
but to save them. Luc. 9.

This meek spirit of the lord I vvish were follovved of all in heart, word,
and deed, and not the overthrow of our adversaries in faith sought by the
arm of flesh. For they being with us al members of one body, and subjects to
one sovereign, we must account them as brethren and love them as our friends,
but much more because we are all children of one heavenly father, who
indifferently lets fall upon us from day to day the fruitful showers of
his blessing, and suffers his son to shine upon them also whilst they live
in this world, and may be this his favor in time be won, and converted.

God permits the Devil, to dravve from thence some good, and therein
shines more his wisdom and goodness, then if he suffered no bad at all in the
world. The spouse of god is Lilium inter spinas and the lily is most grateful
amoung the brambles: and who would cut of the pricking thorn to destroy and
loose the pleasant and sweete-smelling Rose? Since then there must be haeresies
and erroures in the world as Paul foretells us, and that God is glorified
by dravving much good from them for the purifying of his elect, (though it
were to be wished that no erroures were at all) let us in destroying them
use such svvette means as approach nearest to his divine wisdom and
providence.

Faith is the gift of god alone and is not to be beaten with hammers into the
head or heart of man. It depends not of man but of the election and free
praedestination. None comes to me (says Christ) but whom my father draws
who thearefore never used violence, but by his word and meekenes drew at
length all the world to him and his faith. Upon these grounds of scripture
and Christ's example the first and most learned of our profession have taught
that none may be compelled to the faith, and therefore have vvitten bitterly
against those who at our first appearing sought by svvorde and fire to root
us out. And can we for shame put in execution our selves what we condemn in
others, or is Doctrine to be altered with the exchainge of our state and
condition? what may his Majesty think of us, if now we recall that
doctrine which we have heretofore taught to be well vvatranted by gods
word? Christ his words are infallible, it is the heavenly father alone that
can dravve souls to Christianity, and it is the internal unction of his
spirit that teaches it and planteth it in man's heart. And thearefore in this
case let us lay force aside, and leave it to gods goodness to dravve those whom
he has elected, and in the mean time not to repine at the prudence of our
Prince if he use and employ all his subjects hovvesoeuer affected in Religion
to the strengthening of his state and benefitt of the commonwealth.

I deny not but that he must labor to dravve all his subjects to the truth;
but we differ in the means which I hold to be gods holly word.

We have taught to this effect that every man may read the scriptures and
search the truth of himself as god shall inspire him. and we hoped that by this
means all might find the truth and come to the unity of the same faith. But
we see it has not succeeded so well as we exspected. and I fear the cause has
been for that in times past the rigor of statute laws has as it were
fettered the gospel, and the book of Articles set down by a few heads
without conference with their brethren, has hindered our Christian liberty in
the interpretation thereof, with less show of truth then did before the
decrees of General Counsels, and the uniform consent of ancient fathers.
For in vain does a man read and search the truth, if he may not as freely
interpreate scripture as read it. And why should we forbid any to be heard in
his interpretation whereas in this time of so many sects and Religions both
within the Realm, and abroad we may as Paul says better judge of the truth
when we have heard with patience what every man can say and allege in his
cause?

He that commands us to try and examine the spirits whether they be of god
or no, would never give advise to extinguish them, or forbid us to know them
and upon what ground they rely. Some laws forbidding men to expound the word,
otherwise then it seemed good to the Church established by the late Queen,
were once in force, which laws howsoever they might seem tolerable in respect
of her, (whom The Apostle would not permit to speak in the congregation for
that she was a woman and not fit to judge in such matters if a conference had
been granted, she being less grounded in the knowledge of Gods law then our
selves) yet now in the reign of his Majesty who is profound in learning and
mature in judgment) free conference may be permitted for the liberty of the
gospel, as well in the free interpretation as in free reading of it, and the
contrary laws repealed as over violent in such a cause and prejudicial to
the bolting out of the truth, or at the least suspended until a Just trial be
made by a learned and amiable conference through all the points of our
controversies.

This wear a sweet way to come to unity, or if any force at all were to be
used in matters of faith, it should be rather to compel such as seem to be in
error to be present at such conference, then to force them without trial to
show outwardly to be of an other profession then in heart they are. Which how
fruteles a thing it is and might be prejudicial to the king and state the wise
Gouernoure Constantius father to our Constantine the great may teach us. Who
desirous to know what sort of Christianes he might best trust, set forth an
edict that whosoever should refuse to do sacrifice to the Idols should be
disarmed, dishonered, displaced, and suffer further punishment at the Emperors
pleasure. Whereupon some of his Christian Captains and soldiers did sacrifice
to the Idols: others standing constant in the faith wherein they were baptized
would neither chaing in heart, nor yet in outward show seem other then true
and faithful Christianes.

The wisdom of this Constantius (though then a Pagan) was such as he judged
those Christians, that denied their faith by this outward act of Idolatry,
most unworthy to serve him who of abase and servile fear had forsaken the god
they served: but cherished and highly honored the other, as men, that by
their Religion had learned to be faithful to whomsoever they had given their
trothe. This point of so deep consideration in a Pagan seems admirable, as
it is exceeding comfortable to us all to see how the lord has given the like
me asure of under standing to our king who amoung many instructions given the
Prince his son, observed the same ground for trial of his subjects, and
confessed himself that he never found any more faithful to him in all his
distresses then such as had been faithful to the Queen his mother, who were
not all (you know) of his Religion.

How certain a trial this is to discern loyal hearts, he will easily
perceive that looks into the state of our days, wheerein as we see more
sects and more inconstancy in belief then in any other age since Christ, so
withal we find less fidelity in friends, less trust in servants, and more
dissembling in all states then ever heretofore was heard or practiced. In the
later days says Christ many shall fall a way from the faith and think you
that in those days he shall find faith and fidelity of one man to an other?
In the same measure that faith is broken toward god in heaven, it will break
and fail assuredly toward man in earth. In matter of faith says Paul the
heart and to^ngue should agree togeither: Cord creditur ad iusticiam, ore
autem confessio fit ad salutem. And shall we advise our Prince who has been so
well brought up in the school of gods word, to use such means with his
subjects in matters of their faith as may separate their outward behauioure
from their inward conscience, or teach them to be disloyal to himself, by
forceinge them to be false to god in their Religion? By violence of laws he
may make many dissemble their faith with repining heart and grudge of mind to
their assured damnation, because therein they sin against their own
consciences: yet sure it is that as no man can alter his opinion as he list or
at his pleasure, so force can never chainge his faith until his grounds and
arguments shall be by better reasons convinced. The Princes security and
greatest force lies in the faithful hearts of his subjects, and the heart or
affection of man is never won by violence, and if we will bring all to the
course of the Primitive Church, we must note that then no violence was used to
establish the gospel. The scriptures wear searched, but the interpretations
were not restrained as you may see. 1. Cor. 14. and shall we now stop men's
mouths and tie them with statute laws to the judgment of afeawe and make
their opinions as a Popish Decree, and that too, before due examination and
trial?

In the Primitive Church the are arose a controversy whether the law of
Moises were still to be observed togeither with the law of Christ, for
appeasing whereof the Jews took one way not much unlike to yours, the
Apostles an other way such as I now persuade. The course of the Apostles was
conuenerunt Apostols and seniores: the learned in both laws held a council
and conference and resolved the question to the contentment of all the
Christians which were before of different opinion in the matter. This course
was then taken, and because Christ promised to be where Christians in his name
should thus assemble and confer togeither to find out the truth, the
Christians from that time in like case have taken the same course.

Pastors and Bushops of the whole world were called togeither in the first
council of Nice where that blasphemous Arrius (who denied Christ to be god)
was yet invited to the trial of his doctrine, and was heard, what he could
say for defense thereof; and so from age to age as heresies have risen in the
Church like course of conference has been taken to confirmethe faithful and
convert the misbeleeuers, even until these late days as appears by those
conferences which have been in Germany not only amoung the Papists, but also
amoung the followers of those notable reformers M. Luther and M. Calvin by
reason of the diversities of their opinions in matters of faith. The Jews
thought by vvhippes and threatninges to stop the mouths of Christ's disciples,
that they should not persuade nor speak in the name of lesus: but the more
they were forbid the more they spoke as it has also fallen out amoung us of
late years in England. Such Conslitutions therefore in my opinion are not
convenient. and as for my self, as I do not misdoubt the truth of my belief
or fear any conference or disputation with any contrary sect, so am I not
vvedded in such sort to mine own sense, that I altogeither disdaigne other
men's judgments in the true meaning of the scriptures, especially of those
most ancient and therefore most reverend assemblies from all coasts of the
earth where Christians lived, which being near to the time of the Apostles
could not but give great light what doctrine the Apostles had taught in those
contreyes, and in what sense the scriptures were delivered. In this sort did
M. Iuell Openly at Paul's Cross confidently challenge the Papists, and in
case that they should disagree from him in the sense and interpretation of the
scriptures, he was content to refer himself to the uniform faith of the
fathers in the first six hundred years. For it was not likely overthrown, or
that any but the Apostles could have that privilege to plant Christian
doctrine in all nationes of the earth as notes Tertullian. lib. de
prascriptionibus.

This Challenge of M. Iuells was accepted by his adversaries, and many a good
soul that had care of salvation and desire of the truth was much edified
thereby, hoping that by this means the truth vvoulde come to light, and which
were the primative faith and doctrine of the Apostles be easily discerned. And
when some violent heads persuaded that M. Iuells challenge should proceed
no further, but that the ansvveares of his adversaries should be be
proclamation repressed, many began to stagger and think that the truth was
rather on their side, for otherwise (said they) why should not the
aunsvveares be seen and read, especially vvheare M. Iuells replies were rife
in every man's hands. For most certain it is that the truth fears no trial,
and flies not the open pulpits and public disputations. The learned vvriters
took it then for a disgrace to their writings to be quitte by proclamation
which thing once (my self being in company at a dinner) was cast in M.
Iuells dish, and hence it proceeded that the aunsvveares of the adversaries the
more they were forbid the better they were esteemed to the disuniting of many
that were most earnest before with M. Iuell in his challenge, as the lord
Copley (so they termid him) D. Steeuens, and others. And if it shall please his
Majesty, that the said challenge by prosecuted and trial made for the truth,
especially amounge the learned in the public schools and universities, and
that not in one point only but in all, he shall give great satisfaction to
euey one that in this time of so many sects has care to find the truth. they
that have the truth shall be confirmed, and such as know it not shall more
easily find it by such afree search and inquisition.

Gamaliell is noted by Luke for a man of deep judgment and worthy Doctoure in
the law of Moises, and commended much for his politic advise given the high
priest, and body of the Council to take heed to themselves what they
intended to do touching the Apostles who seemed to them to teach a nevve
doctrine. For. said he, If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come
to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot destroy it, least ye be found even
fighters against God. And in this kind he gave certain instances in Theodas
and Judas of Galiley. For as the truth cannot be overcome, so errors and
haeresies cannor long stand but vvil at length of them selves perish. and it is
certain that heresies, which arise amoung Christians, are, as Augustine vvd
notes, like the little brooks which by great shovvers svvel up for a time
so mightily, as they seem to be great rivers, and run with such violence
that they bear away or shake very main foundations. To pass over these
torrents in their pride, it were too dangerous and rash an attempt, to seek
to hinder their current were no les folly. In patience these waters are
with pleasure seen to fall, because they proceed not from any true spring
as Rivers do. So fares it with al heresies, and teachers of error. They
destroy themselves at length though no force for the time can tame them, the
reason whereof is truly deliuerd by Christ in those words Eueri plant which
my heavenly father has not planted shall be rooted up.

By this then you see that violence is not the best means to plant or conserve
the truth, nor to destroy error. I could therefore vvish that an easier hand
were carried toward all of what Religion soever, and the rest left to God
who knovveth best the season and means to compass that which may be most for
his glory.

And if forrine examples may persuade aught, we see how the French King
although he be now no more of the Reformed Religion finds himself bound in
common humanity not to persecute them of the Religion, because he found them
allwaies faithful unto him and ready to maintain his title to the croune. If
this course of proceeding be esteemed honorable in him, how can any man justly
dislike that our king should maintain in their estate and dignity such of
this realm of England, as, notwithstanding diversity of Religion, were
always ready to make good his Right, and when time served received him
with all joy and gladness? And if for the fault of a feavve the vvholle number
were to be condemned, our party might exspect but small favor at his
Majesty's hand, amoung whom some have been found more forvvard against him
then amoung them, as may appear by the late conspiracy, wherein their
error was rather to chainge some proceedings then the King. besides that the
danger thereof was by some of the Papists first discovered to the state.

And now that this mild dealing is sufficiently proved not to be contrary to
the word, let us see a while what course is best in human and civil
policy.

The vvisest Princes and greatest statesmen endure within their dominions in
the case proposed, diverse sects and sorts of Religion contrary to their
own. Let us behold the experience as well of those that endure them, as of
those that have bent their sorces by violence to root them out; as first for
example, our late Queen was not of her self enclyned to force or constrayne
the consciences of the Papists her subjects, and with that moderat course
which she held in the beginning of her reign she gained the general good
liking of all parts, and lived in great security of her person: But when
she was once drawn by men of violent spirits to root them out by loss of
fortunes, liberty, and life, she found by experience that the more they were
afflicted the more their numbers daily increased, and her self put often in
fear as well of insurrections at home, as invasions from abroad under color
of relieuing men so grievously oppressed.

The greatest force that ever she used to root them out was about the year
of our lord. 1581. and inquiry being made in the year follovving of the
number of Recusants they were found by the bills of Sir Own Hopton then
Lieuetenant of the Tower and others in commission to have increased in the
circuit of that year ten for one. She assaied an other way by banishment of
some, loss of good, and life of others, yet left she at her death more
papists then when she first began those violent courses; besides huge numbers
of close papists and their well vvillers, amoung which are many of high
calling who in reguard that it concerns their souls and everlasting life
could not live but with a most fearful disgust. The vvarres also which have
been continued in Ireland against Oneale, Desmound, and Tirone have been
tedious, blooddy, and coastly, all which might have been avoided with carrying a
gentle hand over them, and suffering them according to their religion, which
notwithstanding is so firmly grounded in their hearts, as very few persons
of mark do at this time embrace the liberty of the gospel. besides that the
country has been in hazard to be lost and planted with a potent enemy.

You will perhaps reply that in Scotland our brethren had better success when
they took arms in the days of his Majesty's mother for the spreading of the
gospel: yet you must confess that it was but small discretion to set all upon
the uncertainty of a battle. Many like violent attempts have been practiced
in that Realm through zeal of Religion, but by clemency and moderation his
Majesty has not only escaped the dangers, but also made himself a peaceable
master and lord over them all, imitating herein that most renounced French
king Henry 3. who perceiving the fire of Civil wars to kindle between the
king of Navarre, who was of the Religion, and the house of Loraine would break
neither with the one nor the other, but favored them both so far, as in the
end he made himself peaceably head of them both, who afterward wholy
depended upon his will and pleasure. To continue yet further in the affairs
of France, they that have seen the success may witness that no violence
could work out them of the Religion in the time and reign of Charles 9. and
since the said King Henry's death the force of Spain joined with France
under the conduct of the dukes of Parma and Du Maine did not so much prevail
in France as did the Bushop of Rome his courteous entreating the now king and
his adherents although of a contrary Religion unto him. If the Pope will for
his more advantage yield to them in some things who were his greatest
enemies, what need we be so straight laced against our own Contreymen for
matters of religion? May not his Majesty's example of clemency toward the
Papists here, move some prince abroad to be favorable to our brethren? Is
not the Mass suffered at Rochell, and other like towns in France in hope
that they of the Religion may be likewise suffered in Paris and other such
towns in France? Have not our brethren in Holland offered to admit the
Papists to preach and say Mass in their Contreies, so that they might have
like liberty in all the other Provinces? If we have the truth why should we
fear that other Religions should have liberty with us? and why may not the
King do as the Queene-mother did in France who being a strainger in the
country, and at the death of her husband the government of the realm fallinge
into her hands during the minority of her children, did judge it the wisest
way for the maintenance of her authority, to keep still on foot the
oppositio^s which she found either by diversity of Religion or otherwise, and
to favor them all in such sort as still she might be able to curb the
stronger by supporting the feeble and weaker party.

Every little gouernoure in Faunce that has under his charge a town or
province where men of sundry Religions live, as the Duke Memorancy, the Duke
Bullion, Diguiers and the like takes the same course as the Queen mother did,
and so keeps his places or provinces at his devotion and in due obedience.
And at this day in France you see no undiscreetly zealous man in great
favor with the King or in high estate to govern, that by the moderation of
such as are not too forward the insolency of other (whom zeal may move to be
trouble some) may be repressed. And thus the country is kept in greater peace
and quietness then has been seen in France for 40. years before, and that
chiefly by the diligence and dexterity of two especial favorites of the
king, the Marquis of Rosne high Tresurer and Monsieur de Villaroy principal
Secretary, both of them of far different yet temperat humore in religion.

Now then let us see what success they had that took the contrary course of
violence. Truxes in these our days B. of Colen became a Lutheran, and desirous
to bring the country of his Electorship (and so in time the wholle Empire) to
Lutheranisme used no violence against his subjects that were Papists, until
Cassimer gave him contrary council, by which he clean ouerthrewe himself,
lived in banishment, died in beggary, and left the country without all hope of
ever enjoying the gospel again.

The zeal of the Archduke of Stiria was highly commended by the Papists for
his religious mind, but not for his indiscreet attempts in banishing them
that were of a contrary religion out of all his dominions except they would
become Papist like himself. and now it is evident that the moderat
government of his father was much better, who considering how dangerous a
neighbor he had, and the number of those who otherwise would have lived
discontended in his country, permitted them their religion and entreated them
no worse then his other subjects, whereby he ended his days in peace;
whereas his son, following a more headdy course of government, was the
occasion that some of his subjects departed their country and had entrecourse
with the Turk, others stayed and dissembled their religion, while Canisia
the key and stay of that country was delivered up by them to the Turk, who
the more freely spoiled all the land because the Archduke, having lost the
hearts of his subjects, vvanted men and means to resist him. A worthy but
lamentable mirror for all Princes to look in, and behold how perilous a thing
it is to use violence against whatsoever religion, but especially for England,
that so near at hand has such mighty kings, who perhapps would be glad of
the like occasions. We have sometimes supported their subjects against them
for zeal of religion, and therefore we have just cause to fear the like
measure.

If Charles 5. in Germany had not abated the flame of civil wars by his
conniuence and toleration, the French king had made as easy an entrance into
other parts of the empire as he did into those three Imperial tounes Metz,
Towle, and Verdun: but by the loss of these cities his successors have
learned to take a more mild course with their subjects of whatsoever
Religion, least they should open a more dangerous gap for the Turk the
professed enemy of the Empire, and all Christiendome.

The like toleration as in the Empire is also permitted in the kingdom of
Poland by reason of the Moscouit bordering upon them and in Dantzik (as you
know) there is public profession of both religions.

In Zuitzerland at the first heat many a blooddy battle was fought for
religion, but in time thy learned to join wisdom with zeal for conservation
of the state, and now they live in peace with all security tolerating within
their Cantons the one and the other Religion.

If the king of Spain had at first permitted liberty of religion in the low
contreis, he had spared many a million both of men and money, and enjoyed with
peace that, which he is never like to recover. In that glass likewise may we
see how ready Princes are upon such occasions to weaken the forces of other
Princes their neighbors, whose puissance they fear, or envy their glory.

But now let us look home, and we shall see Ireland ouergrowen with papasts,
who have not dissembled themselves as by the late vvarres appeared but
(especially at the Queens death when not only in the country generally, but
also in the chief tounes (where they were most restrained) made their
public processions after the papisticall fashion, where the Right honorable
the now Earl of Devonshire most sage and wise in his government, not by
force but fair means suppressing their fervor, conserved the Country in
peace and obedience to his Majesty, and we see that the king does not dislike
that course by his singular favor to Tyrone and his accomplices.

Scotland for the face of the Church is generally of our reformed Religion: yet
has the Papist part so great a sway in the country and so mighty a supporte
of the Nobility, that not many years since they encountered the earl of
Arguile in the field and gave him the overthrow. Howbeit they fled before
the face of the king when the came in person, leaving their houses and country
at his Majesty's devotion.

England is much more divided into sects especially into three, the
Protestants only allowed by authority in the Realm, the Papists who pretend
antiquity, and thirdly our selves who nolesse desire to reform the Protestant
abuses, then they have done the Papists. The state of his May sties
Dominions standing thus then as you see, what wise man can wish him to stuire
much against any? For what man may justly repine if he but only abstain from
violence? We may very well content our selves that our king is of our faith,
and will not suffer us and our doctrine to be either disgraced or defaced. and
a temperat course with the Papists may win them to be as ready as others to
withstand all foreine invasions or home insurrectio^s if either of both under
what pretext soever should happen. And in like case as was our Portugal
voyage, or upon any revolt of the Indians, or tumult in France, ten thousand
Papists would do more service in winning to them the inahbitants of those
parts (being as they are affected in religion) then thrice told so many of
us. Thus may you see what mildnes will do and how lately Repentance may
follow the green and unripe heads of Roboams young unadvised and violent
counselors.

I will add yet an example in the Monarchy of the Turk, who (governing
himself only by the light of natural reason as we may do when it is without
prejudice to the gospel) set down as a Maxim in policy to clime the better
to that greatness whereto he aspired, not to force the conscience of his
subjects, nor ever to chainge with violence the Religion in such kingdoms as
he might happily subdue. Whereupon some have more easily yielded unto his
conquest, and others oppressed by their own Princes, and perturbed with
civil wars have called the Turk unto them, and made him lord of the wholle
land which they would never have done, if it had been his custom to force
any against his conscience in matters of Religion.

Luther himself being pressed by the wars of Charles 5. dealt earnestly with
the Germans to call in the Turk, hoping that under his government he might
more freely preach the gospel. and for the greater glory of their nation, and
their Prince his aduanceme^t the French do best like the same course of
toleration in Religion, and have found by practice that they live in peace with
the exercise of both religions all most in all their tounes. not without
great hope that in revolution of times their king may have thereby a more
easy access unto the empire or to other states as occasion falls.

The States of the united Provinces have offered him such an entry into their
country as he should never have obtained, if there had been the least suspicion
of forcing their consciences, and in vain should he aim at the kingdoms of
Navarre, and Naples, or the Duchy of Millaine, were he an enemy to their
Religion. Why then might not our king take the like course for occasions or
pretensions abroad, and his safety at home, it being the readiest way to keep
al his forces united, and all his subjects in most dutiful affection toward
him and his rovall issue. For whosoever considers the multitude of his people
and their valor, how easily they are leauied, how speedily embarked for any
country, shall find that our king may with greater reason aspire to the
election of the Empire in case he did affect it then any other, or some of his
noble issue be chosen kings of Poland, or be ready to embrace any occasion
offered for the increase of this Monarchy.

The French king was glad to see our late Queen embarked in the wars of the
low Contreies, at what time perchance by reason of his trobles she might
have recovered the Duchy of Normandy, and perhaps the better part of France
as she was once resolud to have done by the advice of Duke Cassimer, and she
had gonne forward had it not been laid clearly before her eyes how odious
she had made herself unto that nation by persecuting her subjects at home
with taxations and torture. and to this purpose they published in print the
severe laws which she had made against the Mass and the Papists.

They that called in the Spaniard would have yielded more willingly to their
ancient Dukes of Normandy, had thy not been vvithdrawen with fear of loosing
the exercise of their Religion. And if France should fall again (as it may)
into the like danger upon some nevve occasion, were it not to be wished that
such parts their of as vvoulde seek to be under the government of a
strainger, might fall rather into our hands then any other?

By this you may perceive that the Marquis Rosne his conceit was not to our
disadvantage. For they of the Religion in France in time of civil vvarres may
give us an entry, and the other the rather for our alliance with many of
their Princes will give us a plancke to pass over for their relief.

I dwell not in these examples as desirous of war, for I wish his Majesty for
his more assurance at home to strengthen himself abroad in civil amity with
all, with France, with Spain, yea with the Pope himself. for it is no
wisdom to make light of any man's friendship. I wish his Majesty likewise to
entertain as he does all his subjects with sweet behavior to cut of all
occasions from foreine Princes to support his subjects or disunite his
kingdoms, which they never wished to see so united in one. His Majesty
therefore has great reason to cherish all indifferenly, and to put none out
of his English Arc, no more then Noah did out of his, where as you know there
were beasts of all kinds. Ireland was a great temptation to the Spantard,
and the French take little pleasure at this mariadge with Scotland, whence they
were always wont to have relief when our armies were in France.

All things are best preserved by such means as they are begotten. God has
made him our king without bloodshed, and with such peace he may reign more
assuredly then by any force or violence. The Turk as I have said got many
kingdoms by tolerating their Religions: but when there arose a new sect in
his own law, passion and presumption made him forget the Principle by which
he grew to be so great, and so he lost by one reuolte the half of his Empire
(which now the Persian enjoys) whilst by War and force he striued to
gain them. The means to apease dissentions are not rough speeches nor hard
vsages, which if in all quarells it be true (as Solomon says) then is it
much more in matters of understanding as are faith and Religion, wherein
whensoever vvillfullnes is joined, persuasion may perhaps prevail alone, but
force without reason never.

All violent proceedings engendre grudge of heart in him that is oppressed; and
provoke to revenge, if gods grace hinder not, and so commonly is of small
continuance because the subject (quitting thereby the natural affection due to
his Prince and country) seeks for redress abroad, and rests his affection
most commonly upon the open and professed enemy of the state.

Queen Elizabeth was highly blamed of all statesmen abroad that she being
too straight with her Papisticall subjects at home for the education and
bringing up of their children, gave them thereby occasion to seek to foreine
Princes, where they might suck from their youth affection to her enemies.
His Majesty in my poor opinion may do much better to call them home not by
threatninge Proclamations which hitherto we see could never prevail, but by
permittinge them at home such instruction as god shall inspire in their hearts
according to his eternal election, and predestination for every good guifte
and faith especially is from above. Force none to fly their country by
persecution, and fevve or none will go to be priested abroad.

Finally, in reason of state, if you will have his Majesty straight laced that
he may not look upon a Papiste, nor abide a Mass within hi Realm, where
shall you find in Christendom a worthy match for the Prince his son? No
daughter of France or Spain will come into England without their chappells
open after the Papists fashion. Shall we let Flaunders upon this scrupulous
point befall to Frannce, or shall not we rather seek it for our selves by
the marriage of a daughter of Spain? And whereas all the Croune of Spain may
descend upon a daughter both by their ancient laws, and the present
probability, shall we leave that garland to others and deprive our selves by
such nice points of all possibility to that succession? I tell you plainly
my conceipte, we should do his Majesty and the realm heering great wrong,
and very much hinder the propagation and course of the gospel.

Let us therefore here after use a more Christian and charitable proceeding
with them that differ from us in Religion if they cannot be persuaded by our
life and doctrine to be of our fellovveship and communion, let them remain a
gods name (as they are) Recusants. for to compel them by penal laws to our
churches or to receive the supper of the lord cannot be called by any pretext
an Apostolical resormation, for if our treasure be pearls indeed, why shall
we cast them before swine and dispense them to men unworthy? Paul says
that in such things we must shun them and not admit them so long as they
remain faithles. for as god and Beliall have no participation, so the
faithful and unfaithful may not have part togeither nor eat of the altar
of god and altar of Idolles.

Let us rather practice the means which we find in the word to reclaim
such as err, and in the mean time live in moral amity one with an other,
for the good and security of our king and country and the advancement of his
posterity, and abstain from all force for pressing of men's consciences. And
so to conclude, since this manner of proceeding by violence has often done
much harm and never good (as by sundry examples both at home and abroad is
evident) it is good we be not singular but conform our appetites and opinions
to the example of our savior, the inclynation of our sovereign, the wisdom
of his most honorable Council, and commone course of the vvholle world. And
thus much for the defense of my opinion and (as I hope, at least wise vvish)
reformation of yours. To which howsoever it shall please god to give his
blessing, yet accoumpt me still your friend and as faithful in the lord now as
ever.

FINIS.

