Effigiem Desiderij tibj Sculptor Erasmi Exprimit; Ingenium, Scripta diserta
suum


A dialoge or communication of two persons, deuysyd and setforthe in the late^
tongue, by the noble and famous clarke. Desiderius Erasmus entitled ye
pylgremage of pure deuotyon. Newly tra^slatyd into English.

To the reder.
Amongst the writings of all men, dearly beloved reder, not only of the
diuersyte of tongues, but also the noble drawghtes of so artificyall painted
figures, which have so lively expressed to ye quycke image, the nature, order,
and proporcyon of all states, as concerning the governance of a Christen
come^wealthe, that there is (as I suppose) no part of the scripture, which is
not so e^powndyde, furnysshed, and setforthe, but that every Christen man,
thereby ^ay learn his dewty to god, his prince, and his nebure, and so
consequently pass thourough the strayte pathe of the which scripture does
testyfye upon, very few can find ye entrye, whereby thorough faith in the
rede^ptyon of the world through ye blood of Christ the sone of god, to rain
with the father and the holy go^^e eternally, according to the promise of
Christ, saying. In my fathers hawse therbe many placys to dwell in, we will
come to him and make a mansyon place with him and I have and shall open thy
name unto them, that the same love with the which thou louydest me, may be in
them, and I in the^, and this is the kingdom of god so often mouyd to us in
holy scripture, which all faithful shall possess and inheret for evermore:
where as ye unfaithful, vnryghtswye, and sinner shall not enter in to the
kingdom of god, because, of chau^gynge the glory of good immortal in to the
image of a corruptyble man, and therefore so lycentiously he has suffrede them
to wandre in their clouds of ygnoraunce, preferrynge the lies and corrupt
judgments of man the veryte and the truth of god, rather serving the
creature then the creator, amongst all the parties of the which (as was
spoken at the beginning) this always not alonely in the new law, but also in
the old Testament was as a thing most abhomynable and displesant in the
sight of good prohybyte and forbyden: but our nature which has in him, the
dampnable repugnau^ce of sin against the omnypote^t power of good, left even
from owre first father Adam, is so enclyned to vices, amongst the which it
has not given the least part to this desperate sin of ydolatrye, against
the immaculate, and fearful commandment of god. Thou shall have no strange
Gods in my sight, that it is sore to be dreadde the same judgment to be gyuyn
upon us that was given upon the city of Ninyue to be absorped of the yerthe in
to the ire and venge^ a^^ce of good, which has been the cause that so many
writers b^^he of late days, and many years passede, have even to death,
resisted these dampnable bolsterers of ydolatrye, given their selves to the
cross in example of reformacyon to their brethren, both in wrytinge and
cownsell, exhorting the flock of Christ from soche profane doctrine,
amongst whom the noble and famous clerk Desiderius Erasmus has setforthe
to the quycke image, before mennys eyes, the supersticyouse worshype and false
honor gyuyn to bones, heddes, jaws, arms, stocks, stones, shyrtes, smokes,
cotes, cappes, hattes, shoes, mytres, slyppers, sadles, ry^ges, bedes, gyrdles,
bolles, belles, ^okes, gioues, ropes, raperes, candelles, boots, sporres (my
breath was almost past me) with many other soche dampnable allusyones of the
deuylle to use theme as gods contrary to the immaculate scripture of good,
morouer he notethe as it were of arrogancye the pryuate iudgmegt of certain
that of their own brain would cast out images of the temple, with out a comen
consent and authoryte, some there be that always seek halowes, and go upon
pylgramages under a pretense of holiness, whereupon these brotherhoddes and
systerhoodes be now invented, morouer they that have been at Jerusalem be
called knights of the sepulcre, and call one an other brethren, and upon
palmesondaye they play the foles sadely, drawing after them an ass in a rope,
when they be not much distante from the woden ass that they draw. The same
do they conterfayte that have been at saint James in Compostella. But they be
more pernycyouse, that setforthe uncertain relyques, for certain, and
attrybute more to them than they ought to have, and prostytute or set them
forth for filthy lukre. But now when they perceive, that this their da^pnable
A tresure box of ye Jews
Corbane does decay, and that their most to be lamented blyndnes and long
accustomed errors should be redressed, they, all fair both of god and man set
aside, rebelle and make insurrectyones contrary to the ordinance of good,
against their king and liege lord, provoking and allurynge the simple
comynaltye to their dampnable ypocrysye and conspyracy, myndyng and going
about to preuente our most sovereign lords judgment, not yet given upon their
Sodomiticall acts, and most horrible ypocrysy. But the word of the lord
which they so tyrannously go about to suppress with all the fauerours thereof
shall overcome and destroy all soch most to be abhorred and deceyuable
inuegelers and dysturbers of ye simple people to soch detestable treason. And
that it may so do to the terryble example of these and all other rebels and
most dysloyal subjects, and to ye great comforthe and co^solacyo^ ofh is
gracys faithful and true comens. I require him which brethethe where he
willithe and raygnethe eternal good to grant unto our seyde most dradde
soueraygne lord whose majesty as it euydently appears only applies his
diligence to the aduaunsynge and setting forth of the most wholesome documenth
and teaching of almighty god, to the redres of long accustom euylls and
damnable sects, to the supportacion and mayntenaunce of godly and alowable
ceremonies, to the suppressynge and most to be desired abolishyng of the
deuelishe and detestable usurped aucthoryties, dampnable errors and profane
abuses brought in by that mighty Golyas, that obdurated Phareo, that proud
Nembroth (whom god amend) the byshope of Rome, to grant (I say) unto his
hyghnes, such his godly aid and assistence, that his grace with his most
honorable counsel (against whom this arrogant conspyracy is now moved and
begone) may overcome and debelle the stud traytres as in times paste his
maie^^ye has pruden^y do other, that have hertofore attempted to perpetrate
and bring to pass like sedicyous mishief, and so to establishe the hearts of
his gracys true subjects that they may wyllyngly and according to their
duties, obey and fulfill his most lawful and godly ordened laws and
commandments whereby they shall not only do the thing agreeable to gods
will and teachynges, in yt he wills every soul to be subjected to the
higher power and obedyent to their prince, but also (to their great laud and
praise (shall show them self to be ready and confirmable to do their duties
in aydyng his excellent hyghnes to the reformacyon of all pernicious abuses and
chiefly of detestable ydolatrye, which is so much prohibited in holy
scripture and most displeasant to god, for which intent and purpose the said
most noble and famous clarke Dsiderius Erasmus, compiled and made this dialoge
in Laten, as it follows her after now lately translated into our mother the
Englishhe tongue. Avoid therefore, most dear readere, all abuses whereby any
inconuenyence may grow, other to the hynderaunce of gods word, to the
displeasure of thy prince, (whom thou art so straytly commanded to obaye, or
to the damage of a public weal, which above all vices is noted most to be
abhorred, not alonely of the most holy wryteres and expownderes of scripture,
but also of profane gentylles, which never perceived other thing than nature
enclyned their hearts unto, and so consequently to obtain the fruytion of the
godhode through the faith that was spoken of at the beginning to the which
the lord Jesus Christ bring us all with a perfaycte quyetnes, So be it.

A pylgremage, for pure deuocyo^.
MEnedemus. Signifies to forsake.
What new thing is it, that I se? do I not see Ogygyus my neybur, whom no man
could epsy of all these sex months before? yt was a sayng that he was deed, It
is even he, except that I be far deceyuyd. I will go to him, and bid him good
morrow. Good morrow was faynyd of an old king of Thebanes.
Ogygyus. Good morrow to you Menedemus.


Mean. I pray you from what contray do you come to us again so saffe. For here
was a great comunicacyo^ that you did sail streght to hell.


Ogy. No, thankyd be god, I have faryd as well syns I went hens, as ever I did
in all my lyffe.


Me. Well, a man may well perceive that all such rumors be but vanytye. But I
pray you what array is this that you be in, me think that you be clothyd with
cokle schelles, and be lade^ on every ^yde with bruches of lead and tynne. And
you be pretely garnyshyd with wrethes of straw and your arm is full of
Signifies bedes. Walsyngam is called para thalass^^ by cause it is ny to ye
see.
snakes eggs.


Ogy. I have been on pylgremage at saint James in Compostella, and at my
return I did more relygyously vysyte our lady of Walsynga^ in England, a very
holy pylgremage, but I did rather vysyte her. For I was there before within this
three year.


Me. I trow, it was but for your pleasure.


Ogy. Nay, it was for pure devotion.


Me. I suppose you learnyd that relygyo^ of the Grecyanes.


Ogy. My mother in law did make a vow that if her dougther should be delyueryd
of a man child alive, than that I should go to saint James on pylgremage, and
there to salute and thank him.


Me. Did you salute saint James alonly in your name, and your mothers.


Ogy. No, in the name of all owre house.


Me. Uerely I think yt your howshold as well should have prosperd, in case you
had not salutyd him at all. But I pray you what answer did he make to your
salutacyon.


Ogy. Nothing at all. But wha^ I did offer, me tought he did lawghe upon me,
and beck at me with his hedde, and did reche to me this cokleshell.


Me. Wherefore does he give rather such schelles, than other things.


Ogygy. For the sea, which is nigh unto him does mynystre plenty of such.


Me. O holy saint James, that both is a mydwyffe to women with child, and also
does help his pilgrims. But I pray you what new kind of making vows is that
that when a man is idle he shall put the burden upon an other man's bakke? In
case that you do bynd your selffe with a vow, that if ye matter chaunche
happyly which you have in hand, that I for you shall fast twyse in on weke,
do you believe yt I can fulfill your vow?


Ogy. No, I do not believe it if that you did vow it in your own name. It is
but a sport with you to mokke saints. But this was my mother in law, I must
nedys obey her, you know womenes affectyones, and I must obaye here is.


Me. If that you had not perfourmyd your vow, what ^opertye had you be in?


Ogy. I grant, he could not have had an accyon against me in ye law, but he
might fromhensforthe be deaf to my vows, orels pryuyly send some calamity or
wretchedness amongste my household, you know well enuffe the maneres of great
men.


Me. Tell me now what that same honest man saint James does, and how he
farythe.


Ogy. Much colder tha^ he was wontyd to do.


Me. What is the cause of it? His age?


Ogy. Oh you scoffer, you know well enoghe that saints wax not old. But this
new learning, which runnythe all the world over now a days, does cause him
to be vysytyd much less than he was wontyd to be, for if any do come they
salute him alonly, but they offer little or nothing, and say that their monaye
may bettre be disposyd amongste pore people.


Me. O a wykyd comunicacyon.


Ogy. Ye and so great an Apostle which was wo^tyd to stand all in precious
stones and gold, now sta^dythe all of wodde having before him skaresly a wax
candle.


Me. If it be true that I here, it is great ioperdy lest that same chance to
all the rest of the saints.


Ogy. I thynk it well, for there is an epistle abroad which our lady did write
upon the same matter.


Me. What lady?


Ogy. Our ladi of stone in Raurachia which is a certain cuntre.
She yt has her name of a stone.


Me. I trawe it is in Raurachia.


Ogy. That same is it.


Me. you tell me of a stony lady, But to whom did she write?


Ogy. The epistle does plainly show his name.


Me. By whom was it sent?


Ogy. No dowbt but by an angel, which did lay the wrytynges apo^ the aultre,
whereof he prechythe to whom it was sent. And lest there should be any
suspectyo^ of crafty co^uayence in you, you shall se the epistle written with his
own hand.


Me. Do you know so well the hand of thangell which is secretary to our lady?


Ogy. Ye why not?


Me. By what argument?


Ogy. I have read yt Is a scripture written on a grave.
Epithaphe of Bid which was grauyd of the angel: and the letteres agree in all
things. I have redde^ also ye obligacyo^ which was sent to saint Gyles as
does aper. Does not these arguments prove that matter to be good enoghe.


Me. May a man look upon them?


Ogy. ye and if you will swear to keep it preuy.


Me. Oh you shall speak to a stone.


Ogy. There be stones now a days of that name very ^lawnderous, that will hyde
nothing.


Me. you shall speak to a domme man, and you trust not a stone.


Ogy. Upon yt condycyon I will tell it, look that you here with both your
eyares.


Me. So I do. The epistle of our Lady.



Ogy. Mary the mother of Jesus to Glaucoplutus desirus of riches.
Glaucoplutus se^dythe gretynge. Insomoche as you follow Luther, you nobly
persuade, that it is but in vain to call apo^ saints, do ye well know for
that to be grettly in my fauore. For until this day I have almost be slain with
the importunate prayers of men. Of me alone they asked althynges, as who should
say my sone were always a babe, because he is so faynyd and payntyd apo^ my
breast, that yet he would be at my commandment and durst not deny my
petycyon, dredynge that if he deny my petycyon, that I should deny him myte
ate when he is a thurst: and veryoft they require that of me, which a shamfast
yongman dare scantly ask of a Bawd, ye they be such things as I am ashamyd
to put in writing. Now comythe ye marchauntman and he ready to sail into
Spain for a vantage, does committee his wives honesty to me. Than commythe
thet little preaty Nun and she castythe away her veil ready to run away, she
leuythe with me the good name of her vyrgynytye, which shortly she entendythe
to take monay for. Than cries the wykyd soudyer purposyd to rob and says,
blessed lady send me a good pray. Now co^mythe the unthrifty dyasser and
cryethe, send me good chance Lady and thou shall have part of my wynnynges:
and if the dyasse run against him, he blasphemes, and cursythe me, because I
will not favor his noghtynes. Now cries she that sellythe her selffe for
filthy lukre and says, sweet lady send me some costomers, and if I deny it,
they exclame against me and say, thou art not the mother of marcy. Moreover the
vows of some women be no less wykyd tha^ folishe. The maid cries and says,
O swet Mary send me a fair and rich husbond. The married woman says send me
goodly chylderen. Now laborythe the woman with child, and cries dear lady
dylyuer me of my bonds. Than co^mythe ye old wyffe, and says flower of all
women send me to live long withowt coghe and drynes. Now crepythe the dotynge
oldman and says, lady send me for to wax young aye^. Tha^ co^mythe forth the
philosopher and cryethe send me some argume^tis that be i^soluble. The great
pressed cryethe send me a fat benefyce. Tha^ says the bysshope keep well my
church. Tha^ cryethe ye hye Justice show me thy sone or I pass out of this
world. Tha^ says ye Cowrtyer send me trwe confession at the hour of my
death. The husbondman says send us temperate wether. The milk wyffe cryethe
out blessed lady save our catell. Now if I deny anythynge by and by I am
crwell. If I committee it to me sone, I here them say, he will what so ever you
will. Shall I than alone both a woman and a maid help maryneres, sawd years,
marchantmen, dyasseres, maryedme^, women with child, judges, kings, and
husbondmen? ye and this that I have said is the least part of my pain. But I
am not now so much trobled with soche busynes, for that I would heartily thank
you, but that this commodytye does bring a greater disco^modytye with him. I
have now more ease, but less honor and profett. Before this time I was called
queen of heaven, lady of the world, but now any man will skarsly say a^e Maria
or hayle Mary. Before I was clothyd with precious stones and gold, and had my
chaunges, and daily there was offeryd gold and precious stones, now I am skarsly
coueryd with halffe ^ gown and that is all beeyten with mysse. My yerly rentes
be now so small yt I am skarsly able to find my pore quere kepar to light a
wax ca^dle before me. Yet all this might be suffered, but you be about to pluke
away greater things, you be about (as they say) that what so ever any saint
has in any place, to take hit from the churches, but take heed what you do.
For there is no saint without a way to revenge his wrong. If you cast saint
Petre forth of the church, he may serve you of the same sauce, and shite up
heuyngates against you. Ye saint Paul has his sword. Barthylmew is not wtowt
his great knyffe. Saint wyllyam is harnysyd under his monks cloak, not withowt
a great spear. What can thou do against saint George which is both a
knight and all armyd with his long spear and his fearful sword? Nor saint
Antony is not withowt his weapenes for he has holy fire with him. Ye the rest
of the saints have their weapones or myschefues, which they send upon whom
they list. But as for me thou can not cast out, except thou cast out my
sone, which I hold in mine arms. I will not be seperat from him, other thou
shall cast him out with me orels thou shall let us both be, except that you
would have a temple withowt a Christ.

These be the things that I would you shall know ymagyne you therefore what
shall be your answer. For this thing pleasythe me very well. From our stony
church the calendes of Auguste, the year from my sons passion a M.CCCCC.
xiiij. I stony lady subscrybyd this with mine own hand.


Me. Trewly that was a soro and fearful epistle, I suppose that Glaucoplutus
will beware fro^he^sforthe.


Ogy. Ye and if he be wise.


Me. Wherefore did not that good saint James write to yt man of the same matter.


Ogy. I can not tell, except it be because he is so far of, and now a days
men be much searchyd for such matters, and in their iornaye their lettres
taken from them.


Me. I pray you, what god did send you into England?


Ogy. I saw the wynd maruelouse prosperouse thyderward, and I had almost
promised this to that blessed lady of Walsynga^ that I would seek her within.ij.
year,


Me. What would yo^ axe of her.


Ogy. No newthynges at all, but such as be comen, as to keep saffe and sownd
my household, to encreasse my goods, and in this world to have alo^ge and merry
liffe, and wha^ I dye everlasting lyffe in another world.


Me. May not owr lady grante the same at home with us? She has at Antwarpe a
much more lordly temple tha^ at Walsynganie.


Ogy. I deny not but it may be so, but in diverse places she grantes diverse
things, wether it be her pleasur so to do, or because she is so gentle, that
as concerning this purpose, she will give her self to our affectyo^es.


Me. I have hard often of saint James, but I pray you describe to me the
kingdom of Walsyngam.


Ogy. Uerely I shall tell you as shortly as I can. Yt is the most holy name
in all England, and you may find some in that y^e, that suppose thayr
substance shall not prospayre except they vysyte her with thayr offering every
year ones as they be able to give.


Me. Where does she dwell?


Ogy. At the uttermost part of all England betwyxt the North and the Weste,
not vary far from the sea, skarsly iij miles, the town is almost susteynyd
by the resort of pilgrims. The college is of Cano^es, but they be such as
has thayr name of the Laten tongue and be called Seculares, a kind betwyxte
monks and Chanones.


Me. What you tell me of Amphybyanes be things doutfull.
Amphybyanes, such as ye mo^stre Fyber is abeste of ye see and ye land.
Fyber is.


Ogy. No they be rather such as the A Cocatrice will kill a man with a look,
Cocatrice. But withowt dissimulation, I shall put you out of this dowte in
three words. To them that they hate, they be Chanones, and to them that they
love they he Monks


Menede. Yet you do not open this redle.


Ogy. I shall paynte it before your eyes, if the bysshope of Rome do shot his
thonderbowlt amongst all monks, they will than be chanones, and not monks,
but and if he would suffer all monks to take wives, tha^ will they be monks,


Me. O new partakeres, I would to god they would take away my wyffe.


Ogy. But to come to our purpose, the college has skarsly any other Re^ttes.
emolume^tes but of the liberalite of our lady. For the great offerynges be
kepyd stylle, but if there be any little some of monaye offerid that goith to the
comens of the company, and the master whom they call pryoure.


Me. Be they of a virtuous lyffe?


Ogy. Not to be dispraysyd, they be more virtuous tha^ rich of thayr yearly
renttes. The temple is goodly and goregious, but our Lady dwellythe not in it,
but yt was purchasyd for the honor of her sone. She has her own temple, that
she may be of the right hand of her sone.


Me. Upon the rightha^d? Which way does her son look than?


Ogy. It is well remembryd. When he lokythe to te West, his mother is apo^ his
right hand, but wha^ he turnythe him to the Este she is upon the left hand.
But yet she dwelly the not in that church, for it is not yet buyldyd all vpe,
and the wind runnythe through every part with open wyndowes and dowres, and
also not far of is the Occiane seye father of all wyndes.


Me. what do you tell me where does she dwell tha^?


Ogy. In ye same church which I told you was not all fynyshyd, there is a
little chapel seelyd over with wodde, on either side a little door where ye
pilgrims go through, there is little light, but of ye taperes, with a fragrant
smell.


Me. All these be mete for religyon.


Ogy. Ye Menedemus if you look within you will say that it is a seat mete for
saints, all things be so bright with gold, silver, and precious stones.


Me. You almost move me to go thither also.


Ogy. It sh^l not repent you of your iornay.


Me. Spryngithe there no holy oil?


Ogy. I trow you dote, that spryngythe not but out of the sepulchers of
saints, as saint Andrew, and saint Katere^, owr lady was not beried.


Me. I grant I said amysse, but tell on your tale.


Ogy. So much more as they persayue your deuocyo^, so much larger relics
will they show to you.


Me. Ye and peradventure that they may have larger offerynges, as is said that,
many little offerynges makythe a heavy box.


Ogygy. Her chaplenes be always at hand.


Me. Be they of ye Chanones?


Ogy. No, they be not permyttyd to be with her, lest that peradventure by
occasyon of that religyon, they should be plukkyd from thayr own religyo^, and
whylst they keep that virgyne, they regard very little thayr own virgynyte,
alonly in that inner chapel which is our ladies preuy chamber, there standithe
a certain Chano^ at the autre.


Me. For what purpose?


Ogy. To receive and keep, yt which is offeryd.


Me. does any man give against his will.


Ogy. No, but many men has such a gentle shamfastnes, that they will give
some thing to him that standythe by, other they will offer more largely,
which that would not do peraue^ture if that he were absent, yt standithe there.


Me. You tell me of man's affectiones, which I my selffe prouyd very often.


Ogy. Ye trewly there be some so given to our blessed lady, that when they
apere to putvpe thayr hands to offer, with a propre co^uayance, they stayl yt
which other men has given.


Me. Than let no man be there; will not our Lady shote her thonderbowlte at
such.


Ogy. Wherefore should our lady rather do so, than God hymselffe, whom they be
not affrayd to pluke out his robes, and break ye church walls therefore.


Mean. I am in a great doubt whether I should, rather maruayle upon thayre wykyd
boldness, or Goddys great ge^tlenes and long sufferynge.


Ogy. Apo^ the North part there is a certain gaate, but lest that you should
make a lie, it is not of the church, but of the pale that compassithe a bowte
the church yard, and that has a little wykyt, such as be in great men's
gaates, that who so ever will enter, must first putin his leg, not withowt
some ioperdie, and than bow down his hedde.


Me. It is ioperdie to goo through such a door, to a man's enemy.


Ogy. So it is, the sexten did tell me that there was ones a knight which
fleeynge his enemy, than aprochynge, did ride through ye wykyte, and than the
wretch dispayrynge in him selffe, upon a soden motion, did commend hymselffe
to ye blessed virgyne, which was than at hand. But now commythe the myrakle.
By and by that knight was all in the church yard, and his adversary was
ragynge at the door wtowte.


Me. And did he tell you so maruylous a myrakle for a trewthe?


Ogy. No dowte.


Me. But I suppose that he could not so lyghtely do that to you so a great a
philosopher.


Ogy. He did show to me in that same wykytte in a plate of coper, the image of
the knight fastenyd with nails and with the same garments yt the Englishmen
were wontyd to wayre at that time, as you may see in that old pictures, which
wylnat lie, Barboures had but little living at that time: and dieres and
websteres got but little monay.


Me. Why so?


Ogy. For he had a berd like a goote, and his cote had never a plyte, and it
was so little, that with strayte gyrdynge it maid his body to apere less than
it was. There was another plate, that was in quantyte and form like to a
cheste.


Me. Well now it^ is not to be doubtyd apo^.


Ogy. Under ye wykyte there was a grate of yrne, that no man ca^ pass theryn
but a footema^, for it is not conuenyent that any horse should tread after upon
y^ place, which the knight did consecrate to owr lady.


Me. Not withowt a good cause.


Ogy. From that part toward the Este, there is a little chapel, full of
maruayles and thither I went, there was I receyuyd of another of our ladies
chaplenes, there we knelyd down, to make our little prayeres. By and by, he
brought for the the ioynte of a man's finger, the greatyste of three, which I
kyssyd, and asked whose relyques they were, he did say that they were saint
Petres. What thapostle said I. Ye said he. Than I did better behold the
ioynte, which for his greatenes might well have be a Gya^tes ioynte, rather
than a man's. Than said I, saint Peter must nedys be a great man of stature.
But at that word, there was one of the gentlemen that stood by, that could not
forbere lawghynge, for the which I was very sorry. For if he had holden his
pease, we had seen all the relyques, yet we metely well pleasyd master Sexte^,
with gyuynge him.ii. or.iij. grotes. Before that chapel there was a little
howsse, which he said ones in winter time when yt there was little rowme to
cover the relics, that it was suddenly brought and set in that place. Under
that house there was a couple of pittes, both fulle of water to the brynkys,
and they say that ye spring of those pittes is dedicate to our lady, that water
is very cold, and medycynable for the head ache and that hartburnynge.


Me. If that cold water will hele the pains in the head and stomach, than will
oil putowte fire from hensforthe.


Ogy. It is a myrakle that I tell, good sir, orels what maruayle should it be,
yt cowld water should slake thirst?


Me. This may well be one part of your tale.


Ogy. They say that the fowntayne did suddenly spring owte of the earth at the
commandment of our lady, and I dilygently examenynge althynges, did ask him
how many years it was sithe that howsse was so suddenly brought thither. Many
years agone says he. Yet, said I, the wallys do not apere so old. He did
not denay it. No mor these woden pyleres. He cowld not denay but yt they were
set there not long agoo, and also the matter did plainly testyfye ye same.
Afterward, said I, this roffe which is all of read does apere not to be very
old, and he grantyd also, these greet bemes which lie ouerthwerte, and these
rafteres that hold vpe that howsse were not set long agone. He affyrmyd my
saying. Well said I seeing that no part of the housse is left but all is new,
how can you say that this was the house which was brought hither so long agoo.


Me. I pray you how did the howskeper, avoid hymselffe from your argument.


Ogy. By and by he did show to us the matter by the skyne of a bayre which had
hangyd be the rafteres alonge season, and did almost moke the symplenes of owre
wits that could not perceive so manyfeste an argume^te we being perswadyd by
this argument, askid pardon of our ignorance, and callid into our communycacyon
the heavenly milk of our lady.


Me. O how like to the sone is the mother, for he has left to us so much
blood here in earth, and she so much milk, that a man will skarysly believe a
woman to have so much milk of one child, in case the child should sukke none
at all.


Ogy. They say the same of the holy cross, which is showed in so many places
both openly, and pryuately, that if ye fragmentes were gathered upon one
heap, they would apere to be a just fraghte for a shipe, and yet Christ did
bear all his cross hymselffe.


Me. But do not you maruayll at this?


Ogy. It may welbe a strange thing, but no maruayle, seeing that the lord
which does encreasse this at his pleasure, is almighty.


Me. It is very gently expowndyd, but I am afraid, that many of these be faynyd
for lukre.


Ogy. I suppose yt God would not suffer hymselffe to be deludyd of such a
fasshion.


Mean. Yis, Have not you seen that wha^ both the mother, the sone, the father,
and the holy ghost has be robbyd of these sacrile gyous thieves, that they
woldnat ones move, or styre another with bekke or crakke whereby they might fray
away the thieves. So great is the gentles of God.


Ogy. So it is, but here out me tale. This milk is kepyd upon the hye aultre,
and in the myddys there is Christ, with his mother upon his right hand, for her
honor sake, the milk does represente the mother.


Me. It may be seen than?


Ogy. It is closyd in crystalle.


Me. It is moist tha^?


Ogy. What tell you me of moystenes, wha^ it was mylkyd more than a thousand
and five hunthrithe year agone, it is so congelyd, that a man would say that it
were chalk temperyd with the white of a egg.


Me. Ye, but do they set it forth bare?


Ogy. No, lest so holy milk should be defowlyd with the kissing of men.


Me. You say well. For I suppose yt there be many that kiss it, which be
another clean mouthyd, nor yet be pure virgynes.


Ogy. When ye sexten saw us, he did run to the aultre, and put upon him his
surplese, and his stole about his nekke, knelyd down relygyously, and
worshipyd it, and streghtforthe did offer the milk to us to kiss. And at the
end of the aultre we knelyd down devoutly, and the first of all we salutyd
Christ, and than after we called upon our lady with this prayer, which we had
maid ready for the same purpose. O mother and maid, which did give sukke with
thy virgynes teates the lord of heaven and yerthe, thy sone Jesus Christ, we
being puryfyed through his precious blood, do desire that we may attain, and
come to that blessed infancye of thy colombynes meknes, which is immaculate
without malice, frawde, or diseyte, and with all affectyon of heart does
couett and stody for the heavenly milk of the evangelical doctrine, to go for
the and increase with it into a perfaycte man, into the mesure of the
plentefulnes of Christ, of whose company thou haste the fruycyon, together with
the father, and the holy ghost for evermore, so be it.


Me. Uerely this is a holy prayer. But what did she?


Ogygy. They both bekkyd at us, except my eyes waggyd, and me thought yt the
milk daunsyd. In the meanseson the sexten came to us, withowt any words, but
he held out a table such as the Germans use to gather toll upon bridges.


Me. By my trothe I have cursyd very often such crauynge boxes, when I did ride
through Germany.


Ogy. We did give him certain monay which he offeryd to our lady. Tha^ I axyd
by a certain young man, yt was well learnyd, which did expownde and tell us
the saying of ye Sexte^, his name (as fere as I remember) was Robert alderisse,
by what tokenes or arguments he did know that it was the milk of owr lady.
And that I very feign, and for a good purpose desired to know, yt I might
stope the mowthes of certain newfanglyd fellows, that be w^tyd to have such
holy relyques in derysyon and mokage. First of all the Sexten with a froward
cowntena^ce would not tell, but I desired the young man to move him more
instantly, but somewhat more gently he so courtesly behauyd hymselffe, yt and he
had prayed owr lady herselffe after yt fashion, she would not have be dysplesyd
therewith. And tha^ this mystycall chapleyn, as and if he had be inspyryd with
ye holy ghost, casting at us a frounynge look, as and if he would have shote
at us ye horrible thonderbolte of the great curse, what need you (says he)
to move such questyones, when you see before your eyes so autentycall and old
a table. And we were afraid lest that he would have cast us out of the church
for heretykes, but that our monay did tempre his grea, te furye.


Mean. What did you in the meaneseason?


Ogygyus. What suppose you? We were amasyd as and if a man had stryke us with a
clube, or we had be slain with a thonderclape, and we very lowly axid pardon
of our folishe boldenes, and got us from thens. For so must we entreat holy
things. From thens we went in to ye house where owre lady dwellithe, and when
we came there, we saw another Sexten which was but a noues, he lokyd
famylarly as and if he had known us, and wha^ we came a little further in, we
saw another, yt lokyd much after such a fashion, at the last came the third.


Me. Perauenture they desired to descrybe you.


Ogy. But I suspecte another matter.


Mean. What was it?


Ogygy. There was a certain theffe yt had stole almost all owr ladies
frontlet, and I supposyd yt they had me in suspycyon thereof. And therefore when
I was within the chapel I maid my prayers to ourlady after this fashion. Oh
cheffe of all women Mary the maid, most happy mother, most pure virgyne, we
unclean, and sinners, do vysyte the pure and holy, and after our abylytye we
have offeryd unto the, we pray thy that thy sone may grante this to us, that we
may follow thy holy lyffe, and that we may deserve through the grace of the holy
ghost, spirytual^y to co^ceyue the lord Jesus Christ, and after that
conceptyon never to be separat from him, Amen. This done I kyssyd the aultre,
and laid down certain grotes for mine offering and went my way.


Me. What did our lady now, did not she make one sign, that you might know
that she had hard your prayeres.


Ogy. The light (as I told you before) was but little, and she stood at the
right end of the aultre in the derke corner, at the last the commumcatyo^ of
the first Sexten had so discoregyd me, that I durst not ones look vpe with mine
eyes.


Me. This^ pylgremage came but to small effect.


Ogy.. Yes, it had a very good and merry end.


Me. You have caused me to take heart of grass, for (as Homere says) my
heart was almost in my hose.


Ogy. When dynar was done, we returnyd to ye temple.


Me. Durfte you God and be susspecte of felonye?


Ogy. Perauenture so, but I had not my selffe in suspicio^, a gyltles mind
puttythe away fear. I was very desirous to see that table which the holy
Sexten did open to us. At the last we fownde it, but it was ha^gyd so hye that
very few could read it. My eyes be of that fashion, that I can another be
called Linceus is abeaste so quike eyed yt it will see through any wall
Linceus, another purre blind. And therefore I instantly desired Alldryge to read
it, whose redynge I folowyd with mine own eyes, because I would skarsly trust
him in such a matter.


Me. Well, now all doubts be discussyd.


Ogy. I was ashamyd that I doubtyd so much, ye matter was so plain setforthe
before our eyes, both the name, the p^ace. the thing it selffe as it was
done, to be breffe, there was nothing left owte. There was a mane whose name
was Wylyam which was borne in Parise, a man very devout in many things, but
pryncypally exceeding relygyous in searchynge forth relyques of all saints
thorowo with all the world. He after that he had vysytyd many places, contrayes,
and regyones, at the last came to Co^stantynenople. For Wylhelmes brother was
there byshope, which did make him pryuy to a certain maid, which had
professyd chastyte, that had part of our ladies milk, which were an
exceeding precious relyque, if that other with prayer, or monaye, or by any
craft it might be got. For all the relics that he had got before were
but tryfles to so holy^ ^ylke. Wyllyam would not rest there till that he had
got halffe of that holy milk, but when he had it, he thoghte that he was
richer than Croeseus.


Me. Why not, but was it not withowt any good hope?


Ogy. He went tha^ streght home, but in his iornay he fell seek.


Me. Jesus there is nothing in this world yt is other permanent, or always in
good state.


Ogy. But when he saw and perceived that he was in great ioperdye of his
lyffe, he called to him a frenchman, which was a very trusty companyon to him
in his iornay. And commaundyd all to avoid the place, and make silence, and
pryuyly did betake to him this milk, upon this condycyo^, that if it cha^syd
to come home saffe and sownde he should offer that precious tresure to our
ladies aultre in Paryse, which standythe in the myddys of the ryuere Sequana,
which does apere to separat hymselffe to h^nor and obaye our blessed lady.
But to make short tale. Wylyam is dead, and buried, the Frenchman maid him
ready to depart upon his iornay, and suddenly fell seek also. And he in great
dyspayre of amendynge, did commyth ye milk to an Englishma^, but not withowt
great instance, and much prayer he did that which he was mouyd to do. Than
dyed he. And ye other did take the milk, and put it upon an aultre of ye same
place the Chanones being present, which were yt as we call Regulares. They
be yet in the abbaye of saint Genofeffe. But ye Englishma^ obtaynyd the halffe
of that milk, and carried it to Walsynga^ in England, the holy ghost put such
in his mind.


Me. By my trothe this is a godly tale.


Ogy. But lest there should be any doubt of this matter, ye Byshopes which did
grante pardon to it thayre names be written there, as they came to vysyte it,
not withowt thayre offerynges, and they have given to it remyssyon, as much as
they had to give by thayre authorite.


Me. How much is that?


Ogy. Fowrty days.


Mean. Ye is there days in hell.


Ogy. Trewly there is time. Ye but when they have gra^tyd all thayre stynte,
they have no more to grante.


Ogy. That is not so for when one part is gone another does increase, and it
chansythe dyuersly even as the tonne of ^anaidus. For that althoghe it be
incontynently fyllyd, yet it is always emptye: and if thou be taking out of it,
yet there is never the less in the barell.


Me. If they gra^te to an hunderithe thousand me^ fowrty days of pardone,
should every man have elyke?


Ogy. No doubt of that.


Me. And if any have forty before dynar, may he axe other forty at after
sou^er, is there any thing lest than to give him?


Ogy. Ye, and if thou ask it tentymes in one hour.


Me. I would to God that I had such a pardon bag, I would ask but.iij.
grotes, and if they would flow so fast.


Ogy. Ye but you desire to be to rich, if yt you might for wyshynge, but I will
turn to my tale, but there was some good holy man which did give this
argument of holiness to that milk, and said that our Ladies milk which is in
many other places, is precious and to be worshipyd, but this is much more
precious, and to be honoryd, because the other was shaven of stones, but this
is the same that came out of the virgynes breast.


Me. How kno you that?


Ogy. The maid of Co^stantynople, which did give it, did say so.


Me. Perauenture saint Barnard did give it to her.


Ogy. So I suppose. For wha^ he was an old man, yet he was so happy yt he
sukkyd of y^ same milk, that Jesus hymselffe sukkyd upon.


Me. But I maruayle why he was rather called a honey sukker than a milk sukker.
But how is it called our ladies milk that came never out of her breast?


Ogy. Yes it came out at her breast, but perauenture it light upon the stone yt
he which sukkyd knelyd upon, and there was receyuyd, and so is encreasyd, and
by ye will of god is so multyplyed.


Me. It is well said.


Ogy. When we had seen all this, while that we were walking vpe and down, if
that any thing of valor were offeryd, so yt any body were present to see
thaym ye Sextens maid great haste for fear of crafty co^uaye^ce, lokynge apo^
thaym as they would eat thaym. They point at him with there finger, they
run, they goo, they come, they bekke one to an other, as tho they would speak
to thaym that stand by if they durst have be bold.


Mean. Were you af^rayd of nothing there?


Ogy. Yis I did look apo^ him, lawghynge as who should say I would m^^e him to
spe^ke to me^, at ^^ste he came to me, and a^id me what was my name, I told him.
He axid me if yt were not I that did hang vpe there a table of ^y vow written
in Hebrew, with i^.ij. year before. I confessi^ that it was ye same.


Me. Ca^ you write hebrewe?


Ogygy. No but all that they ca^nat understand, they suppose to be Hebrewe. And
than (I suppose he was send for) came the posterior pryor.


Me. What name of worshipe is yt? Have they not an abbate?


Ogy. No


Me. Why so?


Ogy. For they cannat speak Hebrew.


Me. Have they not a Bishope?


Ogy. No.


Me. What is ye cause?


Ogy. For our lady is not as yet so rich, that she is able to bye a cross,
and a mytre, which be so dear,


Me. Yet at least have they not a presedente?


Ogy. No verily. What lettythe thaym?


Ogy. That is a name of dignyte and not of relygyo^. And also for that cause
such abbayes of Chanones, do not receive the name of an abbate, they do call
thaym masters?


Me. Ye, but I never hard tell of pryor posterior before.


Ogy. Did you never learn your gra^mere before.


Me. Yis I know prior posterior amongst the fygures.


Ogy. That same is it. It is he that is next to the prioure, for there priour
is posterior.


Me. You speak upon the supprioure.


Ogy. That same did entertayne me very gently, he told me what great labure
had be about ye reading of those verses, and how many did rub thayr
spectakles about thaym. As often as any old ancyent doctor other of deuynyte or
of the law, resortyd thither, by and by he was brought to that table, some said
yt they were lettres of Arabia, some said they were faynyd lettres. Well at the
last came one that read the title, it was written in laten with great Romayne
lettres, ye Greek was written with capytale lettres of Greek, which at the
first sight do apere to be capytale late^ lettres, at thayr desyer I did
expownde ye verses in laten, tra^slatynge thaym word for word. But wha^ they
would have gyuyn me for my labor, I refusyd it, seeing that there was no^thynge
so hard that I would not do for our blessed ladies sake, ye though she would
commau^d me to bear this table to Jerusalem.


Me. What need you to be her caryoure, seeing that she has so many angels
both at her hedde and at her fette.


Ogy. Than he pullid out of his pur^^e a piece of wodde, that was cut owte of
the blokke that our lady lenyd upon. I perceived by and by through the smell of
it, that it was a holy thing. Than when I saw so great a relyque, putt of my
cappe, and feldowne flat, and very devoutly kyssyd it.iij. or.iiij times,
poppyd it in my pursse.


Me. I pray you may a man see it?


Ogy. I give you good leave. But if you be not fasting, or if you accompanied
with yowre wyffe the night before, I conceyle you not to look upon it.


Me. O blessed art thou that ever thou got this relyque.


Ogy. I may tell you in cowncell, I would not give this little piece for all ye
gold that Tagus has, I will set it in gold, but so yt it shall apere through
a crystal stone. And than the Supprioure wha^ he saw that I did take the
relyque so honorably, he thought it should not be lost, in case he should show me
greater mysteries, he did ask me whether I had ever seen our ladies
secrets, but at that word I was astonyed, yet I durst not be so so bold as to
demand what those secrets were. For in so holy things, to speak a mysse is
no small danger. I said that I did never se thaym, but I said that I would be
very glade to see thaym. But now I was brought in, and as I had be inspired with
the holy ghost, than they lyghtyd a couple of taperes, and setforthe a little
image, not couryously wroght, nor yet very gorgeous, but of a marvelous ^tue.


Me. That little body has small power to work myrakles. I saw saint
Christopher at Parise, not a cartelode, but as much as a great hy^le yet he
never did myrakles as far as ever I herd tell.


Ogy. At our ladies fette there is a precious stone, whose name as it is another
in Greek nor Laten. The Frenchema^ gave it the name of a tode, because it is so
like, that no man (althoghe he be conynge) can set it forth more lively. But
so much greater is the myrakle, that the stone is little, the form of the
tode does not apere, but it shynythe as it were enclosyd within that precious
stone.


Me. Perauenture they ymagyne ye symylytude of a tode to be there, even as we
suppose when we cut ye fearne stalk there to be an egle, and even as
children (which they see not indede) in ye clouds, think they see dragones
spyttynge fire, and hills flammynge with fire, and armyd me^ encownterynge.


Ogy. No, I would you should know it, there is no living tode that more
euyde^tly does express hymselffe than it did there plainly apere.


Me. Hitherto I have suffered thy lies, but now get the another what will
believe the, thy tale of a tode.


Ogy. No maruayle Menedemus though you be so disposyd, for all the world cannot
make me to believe yt, not and all doctoures of dyuynyte would swear it were
true. But that I saw it with mine eyes, ye with these same eyes, did I prove
it. But in ye meanseson me think you regard natural phylosophye but little.


Me. why so, because I will not believe ye a^^es fly?


Ogy. An do you not se, how nature the worker of all things, does so excel
in expressing ye form bewty, and color of thaym maruylously in other
things, but pryncypaly in precious stones? moreover she has given to ye same
stones wonderouse virtue and stre^kthe that is almost incredyble, but that
experience does otherwise testyfye. Tell me, do you believe that a Adam and^
stone would draw unto him stele wtowt any towchynge thereof, and also to be
separate from him again of his own accord, except that you had seen it with
yowre eyes.


Me. No verily, not and if.x. Arystoteles would persuade me to the contrary.


Ogy. Therefore because you should not say this were a lie, in case you here any
thing, which you have not seen prouyd. In a stone called Ceraunia we see ye
fashon of lightnynge, in the stone Pyropo wyldfyre, Chelazia does express
both the coldness and the form of hayle, and thoghe thou cast in to the hot
fire, an Emrode, will express the clear water of the seye. Carcinas does
counterfayte ye shape of a crabfish^. Echites of the serpente vyper. But to
what purpose should I entreat, or inuestygate the nature of such things which
be innumerable, wha^ there is no part of nature nor in the elements, another
in any living creature, other in planetes, or herbs ye nature even as it were
all of pleasure, has not expressyd in precious stones? Do you maruayle tha^
yt in this stone at owre ladies foot, is the form and fashon of a tode?


Me. I maruayle that nature should have so much lesure, so to counterfayt the
nature of althynges.


Ogy. It was but to exercise, or occupye the curyosytye of man's wit, and so
at the lest wise to keep us from ydlenes, and yet as thoghe we had nothing to
pass ye time with all, we be in manner made upon foles, upon dyesse, and crafty
iogeleres.


Me. You say very truth.


Ogy. There be many men of no small grauytye, that will say this kind of
stones, if that you put it in vynagre, it will swyme, thoge you would thruste it
down with violence.


Me. Wherefore do they set a tode before our lady?


Ogy. Because she has overcome, trod underfoot, abolyshyd all manner of
uncleanness, poyso^, pride, couytousnes, and all wordly affectyones that raygne
in man.


Me. Woo be to us, that have so many todes in owre hearts.


Ogygy. We shall be purgyd from thaym all, if we dylyge^tly worshipe owre lady.


Me. How would she be worshipyd.


Ogy. The most a^^eptable honor, that thou canste (...) to her is to follow her
living.


Me. You have told all atones. But this is hard to bring to pass.


Ogy. You say truth, but it is an excellen^e thing.


Me. But go to, and tell on as you begane.


Ogy. After this to come to owre purpose, the Supprioure showed to me images of
gold and silver, and said, these be pure gold, and these be silver and gyltyd, he
told the price of every one of thaym, and the patron. When I wonderyd,
reioysynge of so maruelouse riches, as was about our lady, than says the
Sexte^ because I percayue, that you be so virtuously affecte, I suppose it
great wrong, to hyde any thing from you, but now you shall see the
pryuytyes of our lady, and than he pullyd out of the aultre a whole world of
maruayles, if I should tell you of all, a whole day would not suffyse, and so
this pylgremage chansyd to me most happy. I was fyllyd even full with goodly
syghts, and I bring also with me this wondrous relyque, which was a toke^
given to me fro^e our lady.


Me. Have you not it prouyd, what valewre your woden relyque is on?


Ogy. Yis, yt I have, in a certain Inn within this three days, there I fownde
a certain man yt was bestraght of his wit, which should have be bownde, but
this woden relyque was put under his nekke pryuyly, wherapon he gad a sad and
sownd sleep, but in the morning he was hole and sownde as ever he was before.


Me. It was not the phrenysy, but the dronke^ dropsye, sleep is wontyd to be a
good medicyne for yt disease.


Ogy. Wha^ you be dysposyd to skoffe Menedemus, yt is best yt you get a
another manner of gestynge stokke than this, for I tell you it is another good nor
wholesome, to bowrde so with saints. For this same man did say, that a woman did
apere to him, in his sleep, after a maruelouse fashion, which should give him
a cup to drink upon.


Mean. I suppose it was Elleborum will restore a man to his senses that has
lost the^.
Elleboru^.


Ogy. That is uncertain, but I kno well yt man was well brought into his mind
again.


Me. Did you other come or goo by Sante Thomas of Cantorbury that good
archebishope.


Ogy. What else / there is no pylgremage more holy.


Me. I would feign here of yt, and I should not trouble you.


Ogy. I pray you here, and take good hedd. Kente is called that part of
England, yt buttythe upon France and Flanders, the cheffe city there of is
Cantorburye, in yt there be ij. Abbayes, both of thaym be of Saint Benedyctes
order, but yt which is called Saint Augustynes does apere to be the oldre,
that which is called now Saint Thomas does apere to have be the Archebyshope
of Cantorburys see, where as he was wontyd to live with a sort of monks elect
for him selffe, as Byshopes now adays be wontyd to have thayr howses nigh unto
the church, but aparte from other canones howses. In times paste both
Byshopes and Chanones were wontyde to be monks, as may be plainly prouyd by
many arguments. The church which is dedycate to Saint Thomas, does streche
vpe upon heght so gorgeously, that it will move pilgrims to devotion a far
of, and also with his bryghtnes and shynynge he does light his neybures, and
the old place which was wontyd to be most holy, now in respect of it, is but
a dark hole and a little cotage. There be a couple of great hye toures, which
do seem to salute strangeres aferre of, and they dow fill all the contray
about both far and nere, with the sownde of great belles, in the front of the
temple, which is apo^ the southe side, there stand graven in a stone three
armyd men, which with thayr cruel hands did sleye the most holy saint
Thomas, and there is written thayr surnames Tracy, Breton, and Beryston.


Me. I pray you wharfore do they suffer those wykyd knights be so had in
honor.


Ogy. Even such honor is given to thaym as was given to Judas, Pylate, and
Caiphas, and to the compa^y of the wykyd so wdyeres, as you may se payntyd in
the tables that be set before aultres. Thayr surnames be put to lest any man
hereafter should usurp any cause of thayr praise. They be payntyd before men's
eyes, because that no cowrtyer after this should lay violent han^es other apo^
Byshopes, or the church goods. For these three of this guard straight a^on that
wykyd act, went stark mad, nor they had never had thayr mind again, but
that they prayed to blessed saint Thomas.


Me. O blessed pacyence of such martyrs.


Ogy. At our enter in, lord what a pryncely place did apere unto us, where as
every man that will may goo in.


Me. Is there no maruayle to be seen.


Ogy. Nothing but the great wydnes of the place, and a sort of books, yt be
bownde to pyleres wherein is the gospel of Nicodemus, and I cannat tell whose
sepulkre.


Me. What than?


Ogy. They do so dylyge^tly watch lest any man should enter in to the quere of
iron, that they will skarsly fuffre a man to look upon it, which is betwyxte
the great church and the hye quere (as they call it) a man that will go
thither must clyme up many stayres before, under the which there is a certain
wykyt with a bar yt openythe the door upon the north side. There standythe
forth a certain aultre which is dedycate to our lady, it is but a lytleone,
and I suppose set there for no other purpose, but to be a old monument or
sign, that in those days there was no great superfluyte. There they say that
this blessed martyr said his last good night to our lady, wha^ he should depart
hensse. In ye aultre is the point of the sword that styryd about the brains
of this blessed martyr. And there lie his brains shed upon the yerthe, whereby
you may well know yt he was nere dead. But the holly ruste of this great I
devoutly kyssyd for love of ye blessed martyr. From thens we went under the
crowdes, which is not withowt his chaplaynes, and there we saw the brain
pan of that holy martyr which was thraste quyte through, all the other was
coueryd with silver, the ouerparte of the brain pan was bare to be kyssyd,
and there with all is sethforthe a certain leden table having grauyd in him a
title of saint Thomas of Acrese. There hang also the sherte of heir, and his
gyrdle with his heren breches where with that noble champyo^ chastnyd his body,
they be horrible to look upon, and greatly reprove our delycate gorgeousnes.


Me. Ye peraue^ture so they do the monks slotefulnes.


Ogy. As for that matter I ca^nat affirm nor yet deny, nor yet it is no point
of my charge.


Me. Ye say truth.


Ogy. From thens we returnyd in to the quere, and upon ye north side be ye
relyques showed, a wonderouse thing to se, what a sort of bones be brought
forth, skulles, jaws, thethe, hands, fyngres, hole arms, wha^ we had
worshipyd thaym all, we kyssyd thaym, that I thought we should never have maid an
end, but that my pylgremage fellow which was an unmeet companyon for such a
busynes, prayed thaym to make an end of seething forth thayre relyques.


Me. What fellow was that?


Ogy. He was an Englyshma^ called Gratiane colte a man both virtuous and well
learnyd, but he had less affectyon toward pylgremages than I would that he
should have.


Me. One of Wyclyffes scoleres I warrante you?


Ogy. I think not, althoghe he had read his books, how he came by thaym I
cannattell.


Me. He dysplesyd master. Sexte^ greuofly.


Ogy. Tha^ was there brought forth an arm which had yet the red flesh upon
it, he abhorryd to kiss it, a man might se by his countenance that he was
nothing well pleasyd, and than by and by master Sexten put up his relyques.
But than we lokyd apo^ the table which was apo^ the aultre, and all his
gorgeousnes, aftrewarde those things that were hid under the aultre. there was
nothing but riches exceeding, a man would account both Midas and Cresus
beggars in respect of those riches that there was set abroad.


Me. Was there no more kissing the^?


Ogy. No, but an other affection and desire came apo^ me.


Me. What was that?


Ogy. I syghed yt I had no such relyques at home.


Me. Oh a wicked desire and an evil thought


Ogy. I grant, and there^fore I axyd, forgyfnes of Saint Thomas before I
removed one foot, to depart out of the church. After these thus we were
brought in to ye reuestry, o good lord what a goodly sight was there of
vestme^tes of velvet and clothe of gold, what a some of candlestykes of gold?
We saw there saint Thomas cross staff, there was see^ also a read ouerlayed
with silver, it was but of a small wight, unwrought, nor no longer then would
retch unto a man's mydgle.


Me. Was there no cross?


Ogy. I saw none at all, there was showed us a robe of sylke treuly, but sowed
with cowrse threde, garnysshyd with another gold nor stone. There was also a napkyn
full of swette blody, where with saint Thomas wypyd both his nose and his face,
these things as monume^tes of ancient sobernes we kyssed gladely.


Me. Be not these things showed to every body?


Ogy. No for sothe good sir.


Me. How happened it that you were in so good credens, that no secret things
were hyd from you?


Ogy. I was well acquyntede with the reverend father Gwylyame warham the
archbyshope. He wrote.ij. Or.iij. words in my favor.


Me. I here of many that he is a man of syngler humanite.


Ogy. But rather thou would call him humanite it self if thou dydest well
know him. For there is in him soche learning, so virtuous lyffe, soche pureness
of maneres, that a man cowld wyshe no gift of a perfayte Byshope in him, that
he has not. From thens afterward we were ladde to greater things. For
behyndethe high aultre, we asce^dyd as it were in to a another new church,
there was showed us in a chapel the face of the blessed man ouergylted and with
many precious stones goodly garnysshed. A soden chaunse here had almost marred
the matter and put us out of conceyte.


Me. I tarry to know what evil chaunse you will speak of.


Ogy. Here my companyo^ Gratia^ got him little favor, for he, after we had
mad an end of praynge, inquyred of him that sat by the head, herke, he said,
good father, is it true that I here, yt saint Thomas whyl he it lived was
merciful toward ye poer people? That is very true says he, and he began to
tell greatly of his liberalyte and compassyon that he shewede to the poer and
nedy. Then said Gratia^: I think that affection and good mind in him not to be
chaungyde, but yt it is now much better. Unto this granted ye keeper of the
head, again said he, then in as much as this holy man was so gratyouse unto ye
poer, when he was yet poer, and he him self had need of monay for ye
necessarys of his body, think ye not that he would be content, now that he is
so rich, and also nedethe nothing, that if a poer woman having at home
chylderne lakynge mete and drink, or else daughters being in danger to lose
there virginite, for defaute of there substance to mary them with, or having
her husband fore syke, and destitute of all help, in case she asked ^y^^ns,
and pryuyly stole a way a small porcyon of so great riches, to sukkre her how
should, as and if she should have it of one that would other lean, or give it to
herre? And when he would not answer that ^epyd the golden hedde, Gracyane, as
he is somewhat hasty, I, says he, do suppose plainly, that this holy man would
be glad, if yt he, now being dead, might sustain the neces^iye of pore
people. But there master parsone begone to frown, and byte his lyppe, with
his holowe eyes like to A mo^ster yt has snakes for hears upon her hedde.
Gorgone ye monstre to luke apo^ us. I do not dowbte he would have cast us out
of the temple, and spytte apo^ us, but that he did know that we were comendyd
of the archebyshope. But I did somewhat myttygate the manes ire, with my fair
words, saying that Gratiane did not speak as he thoghte, but that he gestyd
as he was wontyd to do, and stoppyd his mouth with a few pens.


Mean. Treuly I do greatly allow your goodly fashion, but oftentimes ernestly I
consider, by what meaynes they may be aco^pted without fault and blame, that
bestow so much substance in buyldyng churchys, in garnysshynge, and enrychynge
them without all mesure. I think as touching the holy vestmentes, and the
silver plate of the temple there ought to be gyuyn, to the solemn seruys, his
dygnyte and comlynes, I will also that the buyldyng of the church shall have
his majesty decent and conuenyent. But to what purpose seruyth so many holy
water pottes, so many ca^dlestyckes, so many images of gold. What need there so
many pair of organes (as they call them) so costely and chargeable? For one
pair can not serve us: what profyteth ye musical criynge out in the temples
yt is so derely bought and paid for, when in the meaneseson our brothers and
systers the lively temples of Christ liynge by the walls / dye for hungre and
cold.


Ogy. There is no virtuous or wise man, that would not desire a mean to be
had in these things. But in as much as this evil is grown and spronge up of
superstityon beyond mesure, yet may it better be sufferde, specially when we
confyder on the other side the evil conscience and behauyor of them that robb
the churchys of whatso ever iuellys there may be found, these riches were given
in a manner great men, and of pryncys, the which they would have bestowede upon
a worse use, that is to say other at the dyce or in the wars. And if a man
take any thing from thense. First of all it is taken sacrylege, then they hold
there hands that were accustomed to gyfe, beside that morouer they be allured
and mouyde to robbynge and vaynynge. Therefore these mean be rather the kepers of
this treasures the^ lords. And to speak a word for all, me thynket it is a
better sight to behold a temple rychely adourned, as there be some with bare
wolles, fylthy and evil fauorde, more mete for stables to put horses then
churches for Christen people.


Me. Yet we read that Byshopes in times paste were praysede and commended
because they sold the holy vesseles of their churches, and with that money
helped and releued the nedy and pour people.


Ogy. They be praysede also now in our time, but they be praised only, to
follow there doing (I suppose) they may not, nor be any thing dysposede.


Me. I interrupte and let yowr co^munycatyon. I look now for the co^clusyon of
ye tale.


Ogy. Gyffe audyence, I will make an end shortly. In the mean seson comyth
forth he that is the cheffe of them all.


Me. Who is he? the abbot of the place?


Ogy. He werythe a mytre, he may spend so much as an abbot, he wa^ted nothing
but ye name, and he is called prior for this cause tharchebyshope is taken in
the abbotes sted. For in old time who so ever was archbyshope of ye dyocese,
the same was also a monk.


Me. In good faith I would be content to be namyde a Camelle, if I might spend
yearly the rentes and reuennes of an abbot.


Ogy. Me semede he was a man both virtuous and wise, and not vnlearnede Duns
divinity. He opened the shryne to us in which ye ^olle body of the holy man,
they say, does rest and remain.


Me. Dydste thou see his bones.


Ogy. That is not convenient, nor we cowld not come to it, except we set up
laders, but a shryne of wod couerede a shryne of gold, when that is drawn up
with cords, tha^ apperith treasure and riches inestimable.


Me. What do I here? the vilest part and worst was gold, all things did
shine, florishe, and as it were with lyghtnynge appeared with precyouse stones
and those many and of great m^ltitude: some were greater than a gowse egg.
Diverse of ye monks stood there about with great reverence, the cover takyn a
way, all we kneled down and worshyped. The pryor with a white rod showed us
every stone, adding thereto the french name, the value, and the author of the
gift, for the cheffe stonys were sent thither by great princes.


Me. He ought to be a man of an excedyng wit and memory.


Ogy. You guess well, how beit exercise and use helps much, for even the
same he does oftentimes. He brought us again in to the crowdes. Our lady
has there an habitacyon, but somewhat dark, closed rownde about with double
yren grates.


Me. What feared the?


Ogy. Nothing I trow, except thieves. For I saw never any thing more laden with
riches synse I was borne of my mother.


Me. You show unto me blind riches.


Ogy. When they brought us candelles we saw a sight passing ye riches of any
king.


Me. Does it excede our lady of walsynga^?


Ogy. To look upon this, is richer, the secret tresure she knows her self,
but this is not (...), but to great men, or tospecy all friends. At the last we
were brought again in to the reueitry, there was taken out a cofer covered
with black lether, it was set down upon the table, it was set open, by and
by every body kneled down and worshipyd.


Me. What was in it?


Ogy. Certain torn rags of lynnen clothe, many having yet remaining in
them the token of the fylthe of the holy man's nose. With these (as they say)
saint Thomas did wype a way the swett of his face or his neke, ye fylthe of his
nose, or other like fylthynes with which man's body does abownde. Then my
companyon Gratian, yet ones again, got him but small favor. Unto him an
English man and of famyly are acquayntenance and beside that, a man of no
small authorite, the Prior ga^^ gentylly one of the lynne^ rags, thinking
to have given a gift very acceptable and pleasant, But Gratian there with
little pleasede and content, not with out an euydent sing of dyspleasure, took
one of them between his fyngers, and dysdaynyngly laid it down again, made a
mock and a mow at it, after the manner of puppettes, for this was his manner, if
any thing lykede him not, yt he thought worthy to be despysede. Where at I was
both ashamed and wonderously afraid. Notwithstondynge the Prior as he is a
man not at all dull wytted, did dyssemble the matter, and after he had caused
us drink a cup of wine, gentylly he let us depart. When we came again to
London.


Me. What should ye do at London: seeing ye were not far from the sea co^t, to
seal in to yowr cuntre?


Ogy. It is true. But that see cost I refused and gladely did fle from it, as
from a place that is noted and more evil spoken of it, for robbyng. stelynge,
and untrue dealing, then is of dangerouse ioperdy in the sea, be that hill
Malea where many ships be drowned and utterly destroyed for ever. I will tell
the what I did se the last pass^ge, at me coming over. We were many carried in
a boat from Calys shore to go to the ship. Amongst us all was a pour yo^ge
man of France, and barely appayrelled. Of him he demanded half a grote. For
so much they dow take and exact of every one for so small a way rowing. He
allegede poverty, then for there pastyme they searched him, plucked of his
shoes, and between the shoo and the soul, they fownde x. or.xij. grotes, they
took the^ from him laughyng at the matter: mocking and scornyng the poer and
miserable Frenchman.


Me. What did ye fellow than?


Ogy. What thing did he? He wept.


Me. Whether did they this by any authoryte?


Ogy. Suerly by the same authoryte that they steyle and pycke strangers males
and bowgettes, by the which they take a way men's pursys, it they se time and
place conuenyent.


Me. I meruayll that they dare be so bold to do soch a deed, so many lokynge
upon them.


Ogy. They be so accustomed, that they thynk it well done. Many that were in
the ship lokede out and saw it also, in the boat were diverse English
merchants, which he grudged against it, but all in vain. The boteme^ as it
had been a tryflyng matter reiosed and were glade that they had so taken and
handelyd the miserable Frenchman.


Me. I would play and sport with these see thieves, and hang them upon the
gallows.


Ogy. Yet of such both the shores swarm full. Here tell me, I pray the. What
will great me^ do, when thieves take upon them to enterprise soch masterys.
Therefore, her after I had lever go forty myllys about, the^ to go yt way,
thoffe it be much shorter. Morouer even as ye going down to hell, is easy
and leyght, but ye coming from thens of great dyffyculty, so to take
shyppynge of this side the sea, is not very easy, and the landynge very hard
and dangerouse. There was at London diverse maryners of Antwerpe, with them I
purposed to take thesee.


Me. Has that cu^tre so holy maryners?


Ogy. As an ape is ever an ape, I grant, so is a maryner ever a maryner: yet
if thou compare them unto these, yt life by robbynge, and pyllynge and
polling, they be angels.


Me. I will remember thy saying, if at any time I be dysposed to go and se
England. But come again in to ye way, from whens I brought the out.


Ogy. Then as we whent toward London not far from Canterbury, we came in to a
great hollow and strayt way, morouer bowyng so down, with hyllys of either
side, that a man can not escape, nor it cannot be auoyed, but he must needs
ride that way. Upon the left hand of the way, there is an alms house for old
people, from them runnyth on out, as soon as they here a horseman coming, he
casts holy water upon him, and anon he offers him the over lether of a
shoo bownde abowte with an yerne whope, wherein is a glass like a precyouse
stone, they yt kiss it gy^ a piece of monay.


Me. In soche a way I had lever have an alms house of old folks, then a
company of strong thieves.


Ogy. Gratian rode upon my left hand nerer the alms house, he cast holy
water upon him, he took it in worth so so. When the shoo was proferred him, he
asked what he meant by it, says he, it is saint Thomas shoo. There at he fumed
and was very angry, and turned toward me: what (says he) mean these bestes,
that would have us kiss ye shoes of every good man? Why do they not like wise
give us to kiss the spottel, and other fylthe and dyrt of the body? I was sorry
for the old man, and gave him a piece of money to co^forthe him with all.


Me. In mine opynyo^ Gratian was noe all to gether angry with out a good cause.
If shoes and slyppers were kept for a toke^ of sobre living, I would not be
much dyscontent there with, but me thynkes it is a shameful fashyon for shoes,
slyppers, and breches to be offered to kiss to any man. If some would do it by
there own fre will, of a certene affectyo^ of holiness, I think they were
whorthy of pardon.


Ogy. It were better not to these things, if I may say as I think, yet out of
these things that cannat forthwith he amended, it is my manner if there be any
goodness theryn, to take it out, and apply it to the best. In ye meanseson that
contemplacyo^ and sight delited my mind, that a good man is lykened to a
sheep, an evil man to a venemouse best. The serpent after she is deed, ca^
stynge no more, notwithstondyng with her evil savor and poison she infecteth
and corruptyth other. The sheep as long as she is a live norrysheth with her
milk, clothet with her wolle, makyth rich with her lambs, when she is dead
she gives us good and profitable lether, and all her body is good meat. Even
so, cruel men, given all to the world, so long as they live be unprofitable
to all me^, when they be dead, what with ryngyng of bellys, and pompyouse
funeralles they grieve them that be on live, and often times vex there
successors with new exactyones. Good men of the other side at all assais be
profitable to all men, and hurtful to no man. As this holy man, while he was
yet alive, by his good example, his doctrine, his goodly exhortatyons prouokyd
us to virtuous living, he did comfort the co^forthlesse, he helped ye pour,
ye and now that he is dead, he is in a manner more profitable. He has builded
this costly and gorgeouse church, he has caused great authoryte thorough out
all England unto the order and presthode. At ye last, this piece of the show
does sustain a company of pour people.


Me. This is of my faith a godely co^templacyo^, but I maruayll greatly, seeing
you ar thus minded, that ye never did vysyte saint Patryckes purgatory in
Yerlande, of the which the common people boost many wonderouse things, which
seem to me not like to be true.


Ogy. Of a suerty there is not so meruelouse talking of it here, but the thing
it selffe does fare excede.


Me. Have thou been there than, and gonne through saint Patryckes p^rgatory?


Ogy. I have saylede over a river of hell, I went down unto the gates of hell,
I saw what was do^e there.


Me. Thou do me a great pleasure, if thou will wotsaue to tell me.


Ogy. Let this be the prohemy or beginning of owr communycatyon, long enough
as I suppose. I will get me home, and cause my souper to be made ready, for I
am yet vndynede.


Me. Why have you not yet dyned? is it because of holiness?


Ogy. No of a truth, but it is because of envy and evil will.


Me. Owe ye evil will to yowr belly?


Ogy. No, but to the couetyse tauerners ever catchynge and snatchynge the
which when they will not set before a man that is mete and conuenyent, yet
they are not afearde to take of strangers that, which is both unright and
against good conscience. Of this fashyo^ I am acustomed to be auengede upon
the^. If I think to fare well at souper other with mine acquayntauns, or with
some host somewhat an honest man, at dinner time I am sick in my stomach, but
if I chance to fare after mine appetyte at dinner, before souper also I begin
to be well at ease in my stomach.


Me. Are ye not ashamede to be taken for a couetouse fellow and a nygerde?


Ogy. Menedeme they that make co^t of shame in soche things, believe me, bestow
their money evil. I have learned to keep my shame for other purposys.


Me. Now I long for the rest of yowr communycacyon, wherefore look to have me
yowr geste at souper, where ye shall tell it more conuenyently.


Ogy. For sothe I thank you, that ye offere yowr self to be my gest
vndesyred, when many hertely prayed refuse it, but I will give you double
thanks, if ye will soupe to day at home. For I must pass that time in doing
my dewty to my howsehold. But I have counsel to either of us much more
profitable. To morrow unto me and my wife, prepare our dinner at yowr house,
then and if it be to souper time, we will not leyue of talking, until you say
that ye are weary, and if ye will at souper also we will not forsake you. Why^
claw you your head? prepare for us in good faith we will come.


Me. I had lever have no tales at all. Well go to, you shall have a dinner, but
unsavory, except you spyce it with good and merry t^les.


Ogy. But here you, are ye not mouyd and styrrede in your mind, to take upon
you these pylgremages?


Me. Perauenture it will set me a fire, after ye have told me the resydew, as
I am now minded, I have enough to do with my statyons of Rome.


Ogy. Of Rome, that did never see Rome?^


Me. I will tell you, thus I go my statyons at home, I go in to the parler, and
I se unto the chastlyuynge of my daughters, again from thense I go in to my
shope, I behold what my servants, both men and women be doing. From
thense into the kytchyn, lokynge about, if there need any of my cownsell, from
thense hither and thither observing how my chylderne be occupied, what my
wyffe does, being careful that every thing be in order, these be statyons
of Rome.


Ogy. But these things saint James would dow for you.


Mean. That I should ^e unto these things holy scripture commaundethe, that I
should commyt the charge to saints I did read yt never commanded.


God save the king

FINIS.

