Amoste Pythye and Excellent Epistell to anymate all true Christians unto the
Cross of Christ / Translated out off ffre^che into ynglyshe by Robert
Pownoll. With a preface to the Reader.

Mark. 9. Every man shall be salted with fire: and every sacrefice shall be
seasoned with salt.

Imprinted. An. M.D.LVI.

Robert Pownoll unto the Christian Reader wyssethe the grace / mercy / and
peace off God the ffather to be multiplied / by the merytes off Jesus Christ /
trought the communication off the holy Ghost. Ame^.
How necessary the cross yo unto christian.
AS there is no thing more requysite, necessary, and profitable for the
co^fyrmation off a Chrystian lyffe (O here Reader) then the Cross and
persecution: So is there no thing, in these days, more fered, shouned and
avoided, and that off thosse that would becounted constant christians and ernest
gospellers, shuche is their imbecillite, weakness and folymnes: myche like unto
little children, who customablye do desire the sweet meatte that does anoye
the^, and fle from the bitter thing that may do them good. For truly the
Cross and persecution (if we will put chyldyshnes apart, The worthiness of the
Cross expressed by dyvers similitudes.
and wisely way the worth^nes thereof) It is that sovereign tried treacle,
that quenches the deadly degested poison, off self love, wordly pleasure,
flesly felycyte and carnale securyte. It is the only worthy worm poison, off
ambysio^, covytousnes, fornycation, dronckenes extorcion, uncleanness, lysencious
lybertye, glotony, wrath, stryffe, sedycion, sects, malice, and shuche other
like wreched wayward worms. It is the only profitable plowght whosse property
is, not only to Rote up all briers, brambelles, Thysielles, Thorns and wedes,
out of the earthly heart and co^cupisence off mortal men, but also to prepare
and yield the same apt to ressayve the seasonable seade of christ's sowynge in
his gospel preaching. It is the hard hamuier that beats off the Rotten Bust
from the excellent Anchor off a chrystian fayght, preparynge the same to all
good excercyses, which other ways would consume away.

It is that fyrye flamynge ffor^ace that puryfyethe the good gold, in burning
up all the drowsye dross off ma^s dyssayvable lusies. It is the proynige
knyffe where with the rotten, dry and droppynge branches off the the vine of a
christian lyffe is cute away, which by co^tyne wa^ce might vterly wast, and
yield the same unfruitfully. It is that savorye salt that consumethe away the
corruption off chrystians, in seasonynge their lyffes ^o all profitable uses.
It is that true towche stone, that tryethe gold from copper, the true from the
counterfeit, and the fine, from that which is basse. ffynaly to conclude. The
cross and persecution is that floryshynge flayse and fan, that pourgethe and
delyverethe the good corn off a chrystian lyffe, from all chafe off
corruption, wherewyth before it was covered, O profitable Instrument. The
Cross can not be spared.
O necessary Towel, O excellent excersyce that cannot be spared in a
christia^lyffe. For yff a poisoned person, maywa^t treacle? Yff Iron may want
the hammet? The earth the ploughte? The gold the furnace? And the corn the
ffayle and fan? Then may a Christyan man want the cross and tribulation? or
else not. Wherefore thesse things well co^sydered, with what alacryete off mind?
Iere. 16. Math. 20 Marc. 10.
With what desirous affection? And with what ernest zeal? Ought we to embrace
this incomperable jewel, this sovereign medecyn, this comfortable cup off
the Cross and tribulation? The comode^tes that the cross brinegeth unto
christians.
wherein with out all doubt the lord has prepared a draught for his saynctes
to drink (all thought some what tarte and bitter unto the flesche) yet is it
most comfortable and pleasant unto the soul. For it is unto her a most
profitable purgation off power able to purge away the pampred pleasures off
the fylthy flesh ready to infect her. Yea it is the only comfortable
conseruatyue that does conserve her from all infectyve eayres, deadly poysone,
and contagious sycknes off sin, the only dystruction off man kind. Eccle.
38. Math. 9. Marc. 2. Luc. 5.
For look how necessary the physician is unto the Sick, the byttynge corsyve
unto the festured sore, the sharp lancere unto the molyfyed matter. Even so
with out al co^paryson the cross and tribulation, is more necessary unto a
christian. Forby it the sycknes off sin is removed, the festred sore of
flesly lust is cured, and the superfleous humors of eartly pleasure are cut a
way. Wherefor yff we were not all to gyther void off understanding, and more
insensyble then the brut besies, yea yff we were not more carnal then
spyrytuall, more worldly, then hevenly, we would not forsake so wholesome a
salve, as servethe ffor all dyseases. For by it the world is crucy fyed unto
us, Galat. 6. Roma. 8. Roma. 5.
and we unto the world, by it we are made like unto the image off the son
off God. By it our fayght is incresed, our patience excersysed, and our hope
augmented. By it we are known both within and with out, to our selves and to
other men. By it we are asserteyned of our salvation, Roma. 8.
for yff we suffer with christ, we shall reign with him. Fynaly to conclude,
by it we most enter into the kingdom off God, for it is written, by many
tribulatio^s we most enter into ^h^ kingdom off heaven. Act. 14. Math. 7.
It is that only narow strayte way that leads unto lyffe. Wherefore my
ffrynde, yff thou desire to lyve and not to dye. Yff thou desire to be saved
and not to be condemned. Math. 10.
Yff thou desire to have christ to confess the, and not to deny the, before
his father and his angeles. Yff thou desire to follow the son off God into
his kingdom, and not to be expulsed thens. Give ear then unto this sentence
for therein he teaceth the, the only way unto the same, say^ge, he that will
follew me let him take up his cross and follow me. Math. 16. Marc. 8. Luc.
9.14 how we should follow christ
Whereby it is apparent that we can not ffollowe christ, but by berynge a
Cross, not the cross off the tower off gold and sylver, nor yet the
papisticale cross of Idolatrye which so many now a days do follow. But the
cross off persecution aflyction and mortyfycation, Johan. 14
For yff Christ be our way (as he says he is) unto his father and that
beside him there is no^ other but bye ways tendynge to perdictio^. The onlj
narovve vvaije (...)
The^ is it off necessite, yff we will come unto eternal glory, that we do
travayll that way that he has gone before us, in pasynge his fotsteppes. The
kijngdo^ of heaven, die the cross and tribulation.
For yff he our hedd be entered into the kingdom off God by non other way,
but by cross and tribulation, can we his members enter any other way? Who
ever saw the hedd go into a place one way, and the members a another way
vnlese they were devyded and cut of? Math. 27 Marc. 15. Luc. 23. Act. 1.2.
Jesus Christ entered into the kingdom of his father, by Ignomyne, Reproffe,
shame, sklander, Revylynge persecution. affliction and Cross, and can we his
members, (yff we do contynew the members of his body) enter any other way? no
truly. For then were there away besides the little narowe way, which he has
showed us. Then were thesse his saymges tried untrue. Whereas he said unto his
dysciples and in them to us. Yff they have persecuted me, Ioh. 15 Math. 10.
Ioh. 16. (...) Reg. 22 Psalm. 80. Psalm. 30. Psalm. 44.
they shall also persecute you. Yff they have called the master off the howsse
Beelzebub, how myche more shall they call the howshold servants so. Dure porsio^
in this lyffe is to weep and morn. To taste the bread off aduersyte and the
water of troble. To be as sheppe appointed to the slaughter. Thesse are the
daynty dyshes that God has prepared for his chyldrin to ffede on in this
world, To the end that in the world to come, Ioh. 16. Apoc. 7.22.
they may laughe and rejoice, having al tears wyped a way ffrom their eyes,
and ffede with the celestial ma^na and water off lyffe, in triumphynge over
their enymes. For in this world (as says S Paul) we are judged and
afflycted, 1. cor. 11. All thoughs we are in this world condemned. jet in the
world to co^ we shall be glorified Luc. 16.
be cause we should not be condemned with the world. Whereby it is manifest
that to seek to enjoy the quyetnes off this world is no thing else but to
seek to be condemned with the ungodly, whosse por^^^n is here to laughe and
reioysse, and here after to weep and wayle. As it apperethe by the hystorye of
Dyves, to whom Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lyffe time
ressayvest thy pleasure, and contrary wysse Lazarus ressayved pain, but now is
he comforted, and thou art ponyshed. So that to lyve here in pleasure and
securite with delectasion in the same, is no thing else but to ressayve pain
with out comfort in the lyffe to come. Wherefor dear reader fle from all
earthly joy and pleasure, as from a most pestilent poison, for all thought the
present taste thereof be pleasant, yet is the end theroff eternal damnation to
as many as delight there in. Be vvare of the vain
Stop thyn ears at the swet singinge of thesse byssevable Serenes Lest thou
being lulled a sleep there by, Psu^^^on of vvordlj me^ to ^ijxe thij heart on
ertlij thijng. Dani. ^. Apoc 18. Math. 7.
thou peryshe euerlastyngly. Be ware, be not dyssayved with the melodious
musycke and pleasat armonye of this world which serves for no thing else but
to allure the from God, unto the devell, from the narowe pathe off salvation
unto the broad way off damnation, From the true honorynge off God, unto all
kind off idolatrye, and from the right religion, unto servyle supersticion.
Learn to be warned (as says the proverb) by an other man's harm. Let the
woeful traged ye off our first father Adam serve to admonyshe us: for the old
serpent the devell has not forgotten his accustomed tryckes to temple us as
hs tempted Adam, with the apple off wordly pleasure, securyte and case, Gene. 3.
the which all thought it have a pleasant taste in the mouth, yt is it very
bitter and damnable to the soul. And therefore our hedd and master Jesus Christ
the secou^d Adam and fountain off al wysdom would gyve no place unto shuche
suttell assautes off the devell, Math. 4.
but said unto him, heus from me Satan thou adversarye and tempter. O that we
would learn of this our scholmaste^, The world js no le^ger to be embraced,
then
to bide the world farewell, when as we cannot enjoy the same with a pure
consyente in the fere off God, vvhi^lles we may pocesse christ with the same.
and obediently to bend our backs to bear the borthen off christ's cross in
the confession off his word. And to the end thou may the better he incorraged
patiently to bear the cross that it shall please christ to charge the with
all. I have (according to mine accustomed rudnes) translated this excellent
epistle out off the french into our Inglyshe tongue. The co^te^te^ of this
Epi^ t^ll.
The Authors name, I know not. To commend it, I need not, for good wine
nedethe no banner. First read, and then Judge. Off this I am sure, that in hit
thou shall learn (yff truth may teach the) to throw done thy self under the
mighty hand of god i^ wyllyngly submyttynge thy self unto his will, which is
the first prynciple off true chrystianyte. Thou shall also serve, what is the
will off God toward his church, and how he has entreated her from time to
time. Finally, because I will a void prolyxite, (beside plenty off other
pyththy matters) in hit thou have abreffe Somacye and gatherynge together of all the comfortable places of the scryptures, that may sarve to induce us patiently
to suffer afflyction for the testimony of the truth, in what sort it shall
please the eternal God, our most dear and lovynge father to lay the same upon
us. Yff thou art any thing thereby comforted and strenthened (as I am sure thou
shall be, yff thou read the same with a syngle and pure mind, and not by cause
thou would be counted a reader off many new books, but because thou desyrest
to be edyfyed by them) gyve the glory unto God, Red not for novelties sa^^e
but to be edified.
who has wrought shuche worthy works in his creatures. And I dout not but
here in thou shalt find thine expectacion, to thy synguler consolation. The
name off the Lord be praised who has made both heaven and earth, and in
dyspyte off his enymes has prepared a resting place for his church.

AMEN.
THE EPISTEL.
AMONGST OTHER NEcessary things that Jesus Christ the alone Savioure off the
world, and the only true and perfyte master of the universal church, has
commanded us to ask of God his father and ours throught him, we find written
that he has expresilly commanded us all ways to say (Dure father thy will be
done) And as this prayer ought not to prosede from the mouth only, Math. 6.
Luc. 11.
so is it necessary that the mouth do all ways speak off the abondance of
the heart, Math. 12.
that is to say not faynedly, but perfectlye and intyrlye, all wares desiring
the accomplyshynge off the good will off God our celestial father. Being all
ways ready to gyve thanks and to rejoice when we shall se the will off God
accomplyshed, either upon us, or upon any other, either in prosperyte or
adversyte, the which all ways the flesh does abhor. For that prayer that
is void off this unfeigned desire, being presented unto God, is not only a
mere Ipocresye, but also a plain mocking off his majesty. Math. 6.
But on the other side this devyne and chrystean desire does yield our prayer
all to gyther, impoluted and perfy^e before the lord. For all things duly
co^sydered, there are dyvers vrge^t causes, that ought all ways to move us, to
besyre the performance off the will off God our most benynge father. Do we not
know perfytly, that the lord has made all things according to his own
pleasure, Gene. 1. Eccle. 39.
for him self? So not we understand that all things were created by the will
off the lord God only? Yff it be so then that all things were made by the
only will off God? What othere thing ought we to desire, but only that this
his will be accomplyshed and performed? The which can be non other, but good
and Just. Yff we were wysse I naught to understand this perfyt lesson, that
the lord God does preche unto us, by the example and mynystration off all his
other creatures. The^ would we most wyllyngly and gladly desire to se the
accomplyshment off this his will upon us, in all things that it pleases him to
do with us. We are not ignorant off this, that God has not created his
creatures, to the^d they should be subject to vanyte (that is to save) to
mutacion and corruption, and to the abus off the vnbelevers. For it is most
certain that all the creatures on their behalf do rather desire not to be
subject unto ifydeles, Romans 8.
then to be subject, for naturally they do desire all to gyther, to enjoy
their perfyte state wherein they were created. But, when as (after their
fassion) they do consider, that God has so ordained it, that for a time they
should serve the wicked and vnbelevers, they bear with out repynyng this
miserable seruytude, for the honor off him that has subjected the^ there
unto, in hoping most certainly that ons they shall be delivered from that
bondage, all thought they do neither for se the time, when, not the means,
how. Now then I would demand off you, brytherin most derely beloved, not in
Adam, 1 Cor. 15
in whom is no thing but perdyction, but in Jesus Christ in whom only is oire
perfyte salvation, Act. 4. Hebre. 2
standythe it with any equity or reason that all other creatures obaynge the
good will of God the lord, that we should gaynsaye and obstynatly with stand
the same, when as he does with us according as it best pleases hi^? Truly God
is more unto us, then he is unto all other his creatures, for he is our
father, and we are more unto him, then all his other creatures, for we are his
chylderne, and we are his heirs, we ought the^ to love him more then al other
his creatures, we ought to have in him a more lyvely hope and confydence with
greater effycace, then all other creatures, So that by good consequence we
ought more wyllyngly to submyte our selfs unto his good pleasure then all
other his creatures, in saying all ways, Thy will be done. But what suppose we
to be the will and ordynance off God? S. Paul do the notably teach us the same,
where as he says. Romans 8.
Thosse whom God has know en from the begynynge, he has predestined the^,
to the end they should be made co^fyrmable to the image off his Soune. This
breffe sentence off the holy apostell well understood, does plainly exprese
unto us, what the will and ordyna^ce off God is to us ward. The which does
this myche sygnyfye unto us, that God has immutablye ordained that all thosse
whom he has chosen before the co^stytution off the world should be made like
unto Jesus Christ his son. I appese here unto all your co^syences (D ye
christians) and do demand off you, is there any riches, is there any honor,
is there any glory, is there any tryvn^phe like unto this? ^amly to be made
co^fyrmable unto the son off God? No truly, judge ye yourseldes, wherefore
praised be the eternal name off the Lord our God, who trought his infynyte
bounty, with out any off our deserts, Ephesians. 1.
has chossen us, and made us worthy off this incomparable felycyte and
honor. But this avay lethe no thing unto him that vnderstadeth not the same.
Wherefore it behooves us dylygently to way and consider what the scripture mean
the when it affyrmethe unto us, that it is the will of the lord God our
father, that we should be like unto the image off his son, who is the
natural and only son off God, even Jesus Christ in whom we do beleve, and
of who^ we do bear the holy name off christians. And where is he now? he is
lyvynge and raynynge with God his father in immortalyte most happy, Romans 8.
whosse will is that we should be co^fyrmable in glory to the image off his
son, as wytnesethe. S. Paul, in the place before resyted. To the which also
agreethe. S. John, 1 Ioh. 3.
when as he sayethe, when know that when he shall appear, we shalde like unto
him.

Whereby it is manyfese, that we shall us lyve and reign with him, the which
thing most certainly shall come to pas, for he him self does make us there
off a most perfyt promys, Luc. 12.
in thesse words, ffere not lytiell flock, for it has pleased your father to
gyve you a kingdom. Shall not we then have it? Truly, we shall have it. for as
says Mardocheur, Est^r. 13.
The lord is an allmyghty king, and all things are in his power, and there
is no man that can resyst his will, wherefore yff he have purposed to deliver
Israel, who shall let it? shall we not then be all saved? yes, shall we not
all lyve and reign with Christ? who will comunycate unto us his glory and
immortalyte as the first borne a mo^gest many brytherne, and that our God has
wylled it so to be, and has ordained it to be so? There is no doubt theroff.
And truly I suppose, there is none off us all that would not gladly be pertaker
with Jesus Christ in this respect. For we all delyre to be saved, we all
desire to be happy, we all desire to lyve and reign with Jesus Christ: but
how the^? If we do no thing else but reign with hi, we shall not the^ in all
respects be like unto the Son off God.

For the Son off God does not only reign but before he assended into his
glory, he was a servant, he was a subject, he suffered. Math. 10.
he was crucyfyed and all for us. Wherefore yff we desire to be made perfytly
like unto Jesus Christ, then most we bear his cross, ffor yff we should
reign with him, with out being trucyfyed with him, we should be (as it were)
but in one respect like unto him, but God has wylled that we should be
co^fyrmable and like unto him, not in half or in part, but in all things.
Ephesians. 1.
Then is it off necessyte that we suffer with him, and that ons ended, we are
certain that we shall be gloryfyed with him. So that there is non other way to
enter into the glory off God, but only that way whereby Jesus Christ his son
is entered. And this way is the cross. For yff we do dyrectly consider how
Christ entered into the glory off his father, wayinge therein the immutable
ordynance off God and the infallyble veryte off his holy word we may say, and
say truly, that it was off necessyte that Jesus Christ did enter into his
glory by cross, afflyction and death, for other wysse the ordyna^ce of God
had been all to gyther infrynged and broken, and the holy scryptures fo^^^de
falls. For God by his eternal counsayll had before determy: ned that he should
be put to death, Math. 16.20.28.
and the scryptures lykewysse did before testyfye the same, the which thing to
be true, namly that God has before ordained that Jesus his son should suffer
death, he him self does wyines unto us the same, when as in. S. Luc he
sayethe. Truly the son off man does go, according as it is determined off
him, etc. Lykwysse. S. Peter speking unto the Jews o^ him, does manyfestly
declare the same, by thesse words, ye have (says he) killed him, Act. 3.
in affiyetynge him by the hands off vnryghtous men, after he was delivered by
the determyuate counsayll and fore knowledge off God. Also the prymatyve church
in a prayer written in the Acts, wherein they make rehersall off thosse things
that the son off God did suffer, they do euydently declare unto us, that all
that ever happyned unto him, ca^to pas, Act. 4.
by the only will, pleasure and ordynance off: God his father, for they say,
truly Herod and Po^cius Pilate with the gentylles and the people off Israel
have gathered the^ selves to gyther in this cite against thy holy c^ylde Jesus,
who^ thou have anoyncted. But where to came they to gythere? For to do what so
ever thy hand and thy counsyll had before determined to be done. Is it not now
apparent before your eyes, how that the holy ghost who speaking by the holy
scryptures does attrybute all the suffrynge off Jesus Christ unto the
determynate counsayll and immutable ordyna^ce off God his father? Lykwisse
Jesus Christ him self being entered into the deep and perfyte co^syderation
off this immutable determynation, said unto his dyssyples, Luc. 9.
hit be hovethe the son off man to suffer many things and to be reproved off
the elders and off the high prestes, and Scrybes, and be slain, and the
third day to rysse again. But wherefore, (O lord Jesus) behoved it so to be?
It behoved it so to be, for as myche as God had so ordained it, who says by
the mou the off the prophet Esaias, truly it shall be, as I have determined,
Esai. 62.50.
and shall com to pas as I have purposed it in my mind. The lord off hosts
has decreed it, and who is he that can cansell that decre? My cou^sayll shall
take place and a bide, says the lord God, and all my will shall be
accomplyshed. For as myche then as God has wylled that Jesus his son should
be put to death, having so ordained it by his eternal counsayll. Was it not
then off necessyte that it should so come to pas? Hit could be non other wysse.
Wherefore to prowe that the holy scriptures did testifye before that Jesus the
only savyoure of the world, should be put to death, shuche as have but a
little perused the word off God, are not ignorant off the same. Sothe not he
him self say? Math. 26 Marc. 14 Luc. 22. Johan. 5. Esa. 30.52.
The son off man goethe as it is written off him? Yff we would take the pain
(as we ought to do and as we are commanded) to search dyrectly the scryptures,
we should find that not only they have prophesyed his death, but also they
have prophesied (yea and that partycularely) all other things that he has
suffered for us. So that it behoved him off necessyte, to suffer all that he
has suffered. And therefore he said unto his dyssyples, it behooved me to accomply
she all that was written of me in the law off Moses, Luc. 24.
in the prophets, and in the psalms. And again he said unto them, thus it is
it written, and thus it behobed Christ to suffer. And a little before that, he
said unto tow off his dissyples which were going unto Emaus, Luc. 14.
O folles and slow off heart to beleve all that the prophets have spoken, was
it not requysyte that Christ should suffer thesse thynghe, and so enter into
his glory? He sayethe that it is requysyte and necessary, that by the cross
he should enter into his glory. But wherefore was it so requysyte and
necessary? It was necessary, first, for as myche as God had so ordained it,
Secou^dly, by cause it was so written and prophesyed off him. But for all that
it behoved hi necessarily to suffer beathe, yet not with standing he did not
suffer the same by coaction and constraynt or against his will, but he did
wyllyngly obaye the most merciful ordyna^ce off God his father, and with a fre
consent off heart did acco^plyshe the holy scryptures, to the end he might render
unto God his father the glory off all truth. And to prove that Ies^ Christ
has both wyllyngly and obedyently submitted him self unto the will off God
his father, the holy scripture testyfyeth every where, and it is evydently
apparent unto all thosse, to whom God has give^ grace to know parfytly what
is Jesus Christ, for he is properly that true Dauyd, who has fully
accomplyshed the will off his lord God, (that is to say) he has done all
that he would have him do. But no man can accomplysh the will off God, yff he
do it not wyllyngly and with all his heart, ffor the law is spyrytuall as
says. O. Paul, Romans 7.
that is to say it requy rethe the spirete and the fre consent off the heart,
and can none other wysse be acco^plyshed, but by doing wyllynglye the thing
that it commandethe: yea a man must have his wholl delight in the law off God
(as says the prophet) other wysse it is no thing else but mere Ipoerysye and
a plain mocking off God. psalm. 1.
But Jesus Chrisre which is the veryte it self, could bens hypocryte. The^
did he willynglye accomply she the will off God his father in all thing, and
namlye in suffrynge. It is evydent then, that he has willyngly, gladly, and
with all his heart suffered, that he did suffer, yea and yff we will narowly
examyne the matter, we shall find that he never desired any thing so ernestly
as to accomply she the good will and pleasure of his father, or rather to speak
more truly we shall find that he never desired any other thing. The which
thing to be true he him self does evydently witness the same unto us, Ioh. 4.
in thesse words. My me ate is to do the will off him that sent me, and to
fynyshe his work. That is to say. I desire non other thing, but to
accomplish the will off my father, and to bring to effect the work that he
has gyven me in charge. But what work was it that his father had gyven him in
charge? Truly amongst other things he gave him in charge to suffer death for
his elect. Whereby it is apparent that he desired no thing so myche as to dye
ffor the salvation off the chylderen off God, the which thing he him self
declarethe evidently by the pen off. O. Luke, in thesse words. Luc. 12^
I must be baptized with a baptism, and how am I payned till it be ended?
Which signyfyeth as myche as yff he had said, God my father has ordained that
I shall dye, wherefore it be hoveth off necessite that I do dye, the which thyn
ge truly I do must desire with all my heart, seeing it so pleasethe the
benygnite of my father, and I shall never be in quyete and at rest till it be
accomplyshed and ended.

Thesse words well considered, do they signifye, that Jesus our savioure did
dye unwillingly or with repenynge? No teuly. But contrarywyffe they do signifye
that willingly and with a good will, he did obaye the determinate ordinance off
God his father, even unto the death. The which thing he has not expressed
unto us by words only, that he would dye for us in obaynge the will off his
father: but also he has declared the same by other iestures and signs. As when
he comonynge with his apostelles the first time, off the order off his death,
saying, that he must go up to Jerusalem, Math. 16
and there suffer dyvers things of the elders, high preistes and scry bes,
and must be killed, and raised up again the third day. Then Peter took him
aside and begaue to rebuke him, saying, master, favor thy self, this shall
not happen unto the. As who would say, master for gods sake beware off them,
and take heed lest they put the do death. O cursed wisdom off the flesh, and
humayne under standing? But let us hear what the lord did answer him. Did he
say unto him? Peter my frynde, the cou^sayll that thou gyvest me cannot
prosede but from good will and hearty love, yea it prosede the from that great
and persyte amyte and frendshype which thou bear unto me, wherefore I will
beleve the, and follow it, yea I will beware off this generation, and will not
come at Jerusalem. Jesus Christ did not make him this answer. But what then?
Be said unto him, as it were in a great collar. Go after me Satan, thou art
offencyve unto me, for thou saborest not the things that are off God, but
thosse that are off men. Bear we may se how that he callethe his own dissyple.
Satan, and adversarye to God, by cause he went about to dissuade him that he
shoul be not dye, as God his father had ordained it, and the prophets
testified. Is not this then a most certain sign and token that he went
willyngly unto the death for us? The which thing the prophets did prophesye
that had written off him. And a mongest other, yff ye list to hear a certain
and true testimonye, harken what the king off Jerusalem the prophet David
sayethe, Psalm. 40.
speaking in the person off Christ. Sacrifice and oblations thou would not
have (says he) but mine ears have thou opened (that is to say) thou have
made me obedient unto the. Burnt of feinges and sacrifice for sin thou have
not required, then said I, Lo, I come, in the volume off the book (that is to
say in the law off God) it is written off me, that I should fulfill thy
will, O my god, I am content to do it, and thy law is with in my heart. This
is the testimone that David bears off the Messiah. The like thing viterethe
the Prophet Esaie, the true Bomere off the prophets. Esai. 50.
The lord God (says he) has opyned myneare, (that is to say he has given
me the gift off true, perfect and voluntari obedience), and I cannot say
nay, nor with draw my self (that is to say I have not striven against his
will) but I have offered my back unto the smiters, and my chekes unto the
nyppers, I turn not my face from shame and spittynge and from them that would
scratche me by the same, for the lord God is my helper, and therefore shall I not
be confounded, I have hardened my face like a flynt stone, for I am sure, I
shall not come to confusion. Behold my dear brytherin and fayghtfull fre^des,
be hold, in how few words, the perfi te and voluntarye obedience off Jesus
Christ is dyrectly declared as will by David as by Esaias. But it is no thing
to consider and know that Jesus the anointed off the lord has volunfarely
and willingly suffered all things, eya even death it self, yff we do not also
narowly consider, one thing, 1. Pet. 2.
wheroff S. Peter does admonish us. And what ye that? Jesus Christ (says
he) has suffered for us, levinge us an example to follow his fo^steppes. That
is to say, that ye do as he has done. It was requisite and necessary that
Ies Christ should suffer. But wherefore was it requisite? By cause God had so^
ordained it. And the holy scriptures so testified it. Wherefore to obaye the
ordinance of god, and to accomplish the holy scriptures he did suffer, and
that gladly and willingly. But what then? The ordinance off God does it tend
no farther but only over the person off Jesus Chrisit? Ephe. 1. 1. Cor. 11.
Truly the ordinance and providence of God does extend over althynges
universally, but chefly owc us that are the me^bres of Jesus Christ. And as
the scriptures do speak principally off Jesus Christ, Romans 10.
who is the accomplishment and end off the law, even so also do they
consequently speak of us, Collo. 1. Ephe. 2.
who by grace are made one with him. But what is the ordynance off God over ve?
He has ordained that we do first suffer with Christ before we shall be
glorified with him.

For he has predestinate us to be like unto his son, in that by the cross
he is entered into his glory, and not otherwysse.

And therefore. s. Paul having respect unto this immutable ordinance, writtinge
unto the Romans, saiethe. Roma. 8.
The spiret of god rendrethe testimony unto our spiret that we are the
childerin off God, yff we be childerin then are we also heirs, the heirs I
mean of God and coheriters with Christ, yff so be (says. s. Paul) that we do
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified to gyther with him. Consider I
pray you herin the mind off. S. Paul. who plainly affirmethe that we have no
part with Christ in glory, unless we do participate with him in misery. And
again witting to Timothe, 2 Timothy 2.
It is a true sainge (says. S. Paul) yff we dye with him, we shall also lyve
with him, yff we be paciente, we shall also reign with him yff we deny him, he
shall also deny us.

This is the ordinance and determination of God over us. But now let is se what
the scripture speaks off us, that scripture (I say) which in all things is
confirmable to the ordinance of God, the which also (to speak more properly) is
no thing else but an expressive regester off the divine and all mighty
ordinance off the lord. 1. Tim. 2.
But what says this scripture concerning us? It says. Marc. 9.
Every man shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be sesoned with
salt. What is that to say? I take it, as yff the lord had said. God said in
the law off Moises, all thy sacrifices shall be sesoned with salt, Leuiti. ^.
nether shall thou take a way the salt off the covenant off thy God from off
the sacrefice, but thou shall offer salt on all thine oblations.

Whereby it is apparent that it was requisite in the law that every sacrefice
should be sesoned with salt. Even so is it necessary, says our savioure
Jesus Christ. that every man, who is also a sacrefice. be salted with fire,
that is to say, it behovethe every man that does dedicate hi self unto god,
or with out faynynge does truly embrace the christean religion, that he be
sprynkled and salted with tribulation, I mean, that he be persecuted and bear
his cross. This is it truly that Christ teatethe when as he said, Ioh. 16.
ye shall have afflyction in this world. 2. Tim. 2.
This is it, that. S. Paul by express words declare the saying. All thosse
that will lyve godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

This is that purgatory whereof. s. Paul does admonyshe us in his epistell to
the Corynthes, 1. Cor. 3.
in thesse words. Every ma^s work shall appare, for the day off the lord
(that is to say, the time off afflyction) shall declare it. Which shall be
showed in fire, and the fire (that is to say the cross) shall try every man's
work what it is. For this cause also, the Author off the book that we call
Ecclesiasticus, says. Eccle. 2.
My son when thou come into the service off God, keep thy self in
ryghtousnes and fere, and prepare thy soull to suffer temptation. Where unto is
to be refarred the saying off Jesus Christ, If any man will follow me, Luc 9.
let him renounte and forsake him self and take up his cross and follow me.
For as he says in. S. Matthew, Math. 10.
be that does not take up his cross, and follow me, is not worthy off me.
What is that to say? He is not worthy off me? It is to say, as witnesses. S.
Luc, he cannot be my dyssyple, he cannot be a chrystean. For a chrystean beleve
the a christean hopethe, a christean lovethe, a christea^ suffrethe gladly for
the glory off God, and who so ever does not so, he is no thing less than a
christean. Behold here trow, my brytherin and most dear fryndes, behold I say
the ordynance of God, behold also what the most certain and holy scryptures
does teach conseruynge our estate. And truly all vertyous and godly men that
have been syns the begynynge, have perfe^^ly tasted and felt, the effycacie and
power of this divine ordinance, which is all to gyther void off mutacion. And
they have known by experience, the truther off Gods word, which promises
unto us in this world no thing but the cross, Act. 14.
saying that by many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom off heaven.
But how and wherein have they felt the power off this his providence? How have
they experimented the effect off this his holy word? Well I naught. For all
they to gyther with out any exception have been afflycted and ill entreated off
the wordlynges. The which thing to be true, Iudeth. 8.
the holy woman Iudethe does witness the same unto us in her book, where as
she sayethe: All the fayght full that in time past have pleased God, have
passed by many tribulations. And yff ye ly^e to behold the examples off their
lyffe, Ye shall find no thing more certain. Gene. 4. Math. 23.
Tell me I pray you? Abel, whom Jesus Christ calls ryghtous, was he not
persecuted? When as his own brother did most cruelly morther him. Noye, who a
wholl year to gyther was enclosed in the arc upon the waters, Gene. 7.
with all manner off beasres, and a none after was deryded off his own
natural son, Romans 4. Gene. 12.13.14.20.22 23. Gene. 19.
had he no tribulation? Abraham, whom. S. Paul callethe the father (that is to
say the example) off all belevers, tasted he no adversyte? Alas he never had
here any other thing. Loath also his ^^weu, suffered he no iniure 11. Sodom?
Isaac, had he not a great and marvelous temptation when as at the comaundme^t
off God, Gene. 22.
Abraham his father, who lo ^ved him so tenderly, took him and bound him,
Gene. 27
to make him a sacrefice? Jacob, was he not molesied and affacted by his
brother Esau, when as he thrratened to ^yll him? Gene. 37.39.
And Joseph, how was be entreted off his brytherin, what iniure ressayyed he by
a lassyvyous woman, who falsely accused him off adulterye? But this cross was
the means off his exaltation and prefarme^t. And of Moses, what shall we say,
it shall suffice to rehearse, that which is written of him in the epistell to the
(...) breus. To wit, Hebr 11. Exodus 12.
when Moses was great, by fayght he refused to be called the son off Pharaos
daughter, and chosse rather to suffer aduersite with the people off God, then
to enjoy the pleasures off sin for a season, and extemed the rebuke off
Christ greater riches, the^ the treasures of Egypt O Moses, the true servant
off God, thou dydest then consider, that thing, which syns the holy ghost has
vttred by the mouth off Solomon king off Jerusalem, namly, prouer, 16
It is better to be persecuted with the humble, then to part the spoylle with
the proud and arrogant.

O that thou wart then byrectly led with that spiret, who syns thy time has
said unto us. I had rather be a door keeper i^ the howsse of God then to dwell
in the tabernacles off the vnryghtous, that is to say I had rather bear the
cross with the people off God, then to reign and tryumphe with his enymes, O
godly mind, O divine and christean affection. But let us return to our
matter. Joshua the successor off Moses, Joshua. 1.10.
(to whosse voice the lord God obayed when he stayed the course off the Son)
did he enter into the land off promys with out cross and tribulation? Iudh. 4.
The scriptures record the contrary.

And Debora being a most virtuous woman, and most justly governynge the people
off God, had not the aduersite, as well as the other? Yea that she had, and yet
not wit sta^dynge she showed her self more virtuous and worthy, then the me^
off her time. The lord gyve now unto wyme^, the heart of Sebora. Also Ierobaal
other wyffe called Gedeon, Judge. 6.
was he exempted from aduersyte? I report me to the book off the Judges.
Lykwyffe Sampson whom the lord had blyshed, Judge. 16.
was not he afflycted by the philistians, who puttyng out his eyes, they made
their foul off him? Saint Paul in the.13. chapter off the Ac^es bear the
wytnes, that God found David a man after his own heart. And yet not
withstandyng all the lyffe of David well considered, 1. Sam. 19 20 21.22. 2.
Sam. 15
was no thing else but trouble, affliction and aduersite. What suffered he at
the hand off Saul? What suffered he by his son Absolon, whom he loved so
enterely? Yea he suffered so many things and so grevous to be borne, that it
cannot be expressed. And yet in this perpetual cross, in thesse quotidian
afflictions, in these contyneuall torments as well of the soull as of the
body, how did David behave him self? What said he? He said, I am ready, that
the lord do with me, as it semethe unto him best. I am ready to bear patiently
and with a good will all that it shall please him to send me. O saying worthy
off recordation in the heart off a christian. O voice all to gyther heavenly. O
fl^sse perfytly beaten down, or rather all to gyther mortyfyed by the mighty
mallet and power off the sprete, able to overthrow mountains. To the which
saying agreethe the words of Hely the pressed. 1. Sam. 3.
To whom when Samuel had showed the rewyne off his howsse, he answered, He is
the lord, let him do, what it best seems unto him. O that the Souls off
thosse men are most fortunate, whose carnal affections and flesly cogitatio^s,
the fire off Gods spirete has so perfytly consumed, and brought to this pas,
that they can willingly say unto the lord there God, O God thou art master do
with us what so ever is pleases the, thy will be done. But thesse men before
mensioned, did they for all their persecutions, at any time forsake the lord,
or be came slack in well doing? No truly, Tob. 3
whereunto I appele as a wyttnes the good Tobias who diverse ways was afflicted,
and yet not withstanding all his afflictions, did never forsake the way off
verite and truth. I produce also to witness the fayghtfull Job, off whom ye
have hard the affliction and patience. Job. 23.


What say ye also to all the prophets who have borne a bout the word off
verite? We will say off them that which Jesus Christ does teach us, when as
he said unto his dissiples, and in them to us.

Blyssed are ye, when men revyle you, and say all manner off evell saynges
against you for my names sake, Math. 5.
rejoice and beglad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they
the prophets which were before you. But what? did they persecute some of the
prophets, and left other some un afflicted? No. They have universally
persecuted them all, with out any exception. The which thing to be true, is
evydent by the words off. S. Sthephen. Act. 7.
Which off the prophets is there (says he) whom your fathers have not
persecuted, from the first unto the last. And not only the prophets, but John
also, who was more the^ a prophet, even such a one (as witnesses Jesus
Christ) as there was not a greater borne a mongest the childeren off women.
Math. 11
There was no prophet greater then John Baptisie, and yet was he persecuted. But
how was he persecured? They did unto him all to gyther what so ever they would,
and yet was he that Helias as testifies Jesus Christ that was promised to
come. Math. 17
Here we have no small occasion to stay our selves, and diligently to
consider the profounde and admirable Judgment off the lord. For. S. John was a
most holy and virtuous man, he sought in all things the glory off God, he
never did iniure to any man lyvynge, he was a man all to gyther
inreprehensible. And yet all this not withstanding, the lord gave him over
into the hands of his enymes, to erecute their tyranny upon him, Math. 3.
Marc. 1. John. 1.
the which thing also he most patiently suffered. Ought we then to be abashed
and marvayll yff he suffer us wreched sinners to faull into the hands off our
adversaries and capital enymes? Or rather how myche ought we hyghly to thank
him, for his gentle correction, and patiently endure the same. Truly my fryndes
it is our duty so to do. But it is but a small thing that the enymes off the
faygh did unto saint John, all thought they did what so ever they could. For
they did unto Jesus Christ the soune off God, what so ever they would, As he
him self prophesied before in saint Matthew, saying, Math. 17
I say unto you, that Helias is come all ready, and they knew him not, but have
done unto him what so ever they lusted, in lykewysse also shall the son off
man suffer off them. But who is this son off man? The son off man in this
place is to say the son off God, Math. 1
the only and true Messiah, that is to say the only and true savioure off the
world, to be breffe, it is Jesus Christ him self who spoke it, who only a boue
all other is most worthy to be called man, or the son off man, not by cause
off his humylyte and abiection, not by cause he is not borne off man and woman
as other ate, but for by cause that he only (who is both God and man) is the
honor, the glory, and the perfyte savyoure off the humayne nature, for it is
he only that has repaired and restored the same again into his perfection, it
is he that makethe me^, perfyte men, for with out him, man is, no man, that is
to say, the image of god, but a beast and worse then a beast, yea the
perfyte image of the devell. And this man, this son off man, who only is the
perfyte man, Math. 1.
and also (Emmanuel) that is to say God with us, and consequently the glory
of man, was gyven into the hands of sinners, to the^de that they might do with
him what so ever they would, that is to say, what so ever God his father had
before ordained off him to be done: and they did it. Now my brytherin and
fryndes I do demand off you? Yff God the eternal father has not spared his
own proper son, as says Gaynt Paul, but has abandoned him to the will
off sinners. Ought we to think it strange yff he do gyve us into the hands
off sinners, (we wiche are also sinners) to the end we may be made confirmable
and like unto his son, Romans 8.
accordig to his determination before the fondatious off the earth. And tell
me, I beseech you, is a sholler abone his master, or a servant greater then his
lord whom he seruethe? Or rather ought not the skoller to be contented when as
he is entreated as his master, and the servant as his lord. Gyve ear I pray
to a worthy sentence that a certain christean has spoken in our time.

O saruantes, do ye think, that it behoue the you to rest and take your ease,
when as the lord does trauaylle and take pain? Truly all the faughfull
servants and good christeans that were in the time off Jesus christ, and also
syns his death, have had no rest, but have all ways trabyled: they have all
been persecuted, as was their master: wheroff he warned them also beforre hand,
Marh. 10. Mar. 13.
saying, yff they have persecuted me, even so will they persecute you. Wherefore
yff the world did make war against the master, is it reason that we his
servants lyve (...) peace and pleasure? Or rather is it possible that we
should not suffer, seeing the master has suffered? Who ever knew the members
in health, and the hea de sick? who ever hard off any shuche shynge? And
forther more yff the prince him self go unto the wars for the comen wealth
off his contrye: is he not alto gyther a cowarde and a dastard, that sekethe
his ease at home, and will not accompany his prince, who willyngly de the
abandon him self to emyne^t danger for the vtilite off the comen wealth. Bow
myche more, yff the son off God, Ebr. 12.
who is our only prince be in his own person in the battle, armed at all
points, are we fayghfull servants, are we worthy soldiers, are we true
christeans, yff we do not accompany him? And yff all over companyons be about
our prince, berynge the brounte off the battayll with him, and we tarrynge
behind, do we not merit to be erpulsed his ba^de and felowsbyppe, to be rased
ont off the book off lyffe, and to be reprobated and accursed for ever? Truly,
we deserve no thing else, and then so shall it happen unto us. Barken I besyche
you, what the angel off the lord God says in the book off the judges. Curse
ye the Lyte of Meros (says the angel of the lord, curse the inhabiters
thereof, by cause they came not forth to help the lord, neither to help the
mighty. Here may ye se a most certain malediction and curse upon shuche as
are slack and neclegent to assyst the lord in the time off tribulation. In
time past also when Gedeon made war against the Madianites, he left be hynde
him and did not call the men off Ephraim to assyst him, where for they were
grevouslye offended with him, Judge. 7.
and kendlyd in shuche indignation, that it wanted little that they had not
oultraged and dystroyed him. Why have thou served us thus (said they) that
thou calledest us not with the, when thou wentest to fight with the Madianites?
Ye may se that the men of Ephraim, did not desire to tarry at home and seek
their ease, when as their captain Gedion with his army was in perryll and in
danger off the ennymes.

Lykwyse we read in the book off Samuel, 2. Sam. 11
that when David king off Jerusalem, was advertised that Harsabe the wyffe off
Vryas was with child. He sent unto his cheffe captain Ioab, and commanded
him, to send him Vryas, who was as the^ in the camp amongst the other
captains and soldiers off the king. When Vryas was come, and after the king
had inquyred off him the estate off his army, he said to Vryas, go into thy
howsse, and wash thy fette. And Vryas (as says the hystorye) departed out of
the kings howsse, and there followed him a service ffrom the kings table.

But Vryas slepte at the gate off the kings palace with other off his lords
servants, and went not down into his howsse: off the which thing, when king
David was informed, he said to Vryas, are not thou come from the fylde? why
then do not thou go down into thy howsse? But now I besyche you brytheren,
gyve ear and consider dylygently, the worthy answer off Vrias, the which truly
is worthy off perpetual commendation, and never to be forgotten.

But what said he? The arck off God and Israel and Judah dwell in the te^tes
(says he) my lord Ioab, and the servants off my lord, lie upon the face of
the earth, and shall I then go into mine howsse, to eat and drink, and to
lie with my wyffe? for thy health and for the health of thy Soul I will not
do this thing. O most excellent, whorthy, and vertious man. O constant mind
never werye off troble and pain. O saying never to be forgotten. For he would
not take his case, when it was time to travayll: but would go with the rest,
and bear his part off the burden. Is it lawful the^, for us, brytherin, to
seek our ease, and to refuse to suffer, seeing that all our companyons have
suffered, and do suffer, and also our only hedd Jesus Christ with them? There is
no apparent excuse why we should do so. Iphe 2.4 Iom. 12.
Wherefore David in his time speaking in the person off Christ, and off his
mystycall body, that is to say, of us, he said, I am ordained to be wypped
and beaten. And. S. Peter in his first epistell says the like. 1. Pet. 2.
Yff for well doing (says he) ye suffer wrong, and take it pacyently then
is there thank with God, for there unto verily were ye called. Consider
ernestly, derely beloved thesse. 2. sentences. David affirmethe that we are
ordained to be afflicted, and G. Peter sayethe that we are called to suffer.
Namly to suffer patiently, and that for ryghtousnes sake. Math. 5.
Is there any excuse then, why we should refuse patiently to suffer for
ryghtousnes sake, seeing we are there unto ordained and called of god? Ought we
to refuse, wyllyngly to drink off that cupe that God our father has ordained
and gyven unto der that were no perfyte obedience to the divine ordynance.
Math. 2^.
That were no dyrecte followynge off our vocation. That were no true
expression off the example off the son off God our only hope. 1 Timothy 1.
Ti^^. 2
That were no thing confirmable unto this order of prayer, Our father thy
will be done. To conclude, that were no way to declare out selfs to be
christeans, but rather to manifest our selves enymes and aduersa^yes to the
most holy and tyghtons will off God: Yea it were no thing else but dyrectly to
mourmure against God. It is written in the book of Iudgethe, how that thosse
that resayved not the temptatione, Judge. 8.
with the fere off God, but put them self forth with vnpaciencye and
murmorynge against God, peryshed off the dystroyer, and were slain off
serpents. Do we think then to escape the extermination and ponyshment off God
yff we become murmorers and repyners against his determinate ordinance and
pleasure? In seeking means to avoyde the cross, which he does present unto
us, for the glory of his name, and our commodite? Alas O lord, Act. 5. Gal
6. 2. tim. 4.
so miserable is our estate and condyssion, and so greatly does it dyffer from
our Ancesters and fathers. For the Apostels and first christeans, did
rejoice, when God did them this honor, as to suffer iniurye and persecution
ffor the name off Jesus Christ. And they did not rejoice with out a cause,
Math. 5.
for as mythe as the scripture say the. Blyssed are ye, yff ye suffer any
thing for ryghtousnes sake, eya blyssed are ye when me^ revyle you, and
persecute you, and shall falsely say all manner off evell saynges against you
for my sake, rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, that is
to say, the kingdom of heaven is yours, as he said a little before. Blyssed
are thesse that suffer persecution for ryghtousnes sake, for theyrs is the
kingdom off heaven. Thesse confortable words and saynges of our savyoure
Jesus Christ, being fyrinly embraced and credyted off the apostelles and
prymatyve christeans, moved them boldly and stoutly to embrace the cross, in
willyngly submittynge the^ self under the same. For they had a mest^eltayne
assurance founded upon the omnipotent verytable word off the son off God. 1.
Cor. 3.
That in so doing they were happy and blyssed, and that they should have part
in the consolations, and glory off Jesus Christ, as they had participated
with him in his tribulations. But are we christeans of thesse days, come to
this Issew? Have we avansed our selfs so far? or do we as they did? Alas,
no. The lord be merciful unto us. For that cursed love of our selves,
surmou^teth in us the love off God. And the affection that we have unto
fryvolous and transitore things that are permanent and eternal) do cause us
to have in hatred, Math. 10.16.20. Mat. 8. Luc. 9
the persecution and cross, which the son off God him self has with saffed
to bear, before us, and for us. And what may be the cause heroff, I pray you?
But only our incredulyte for that we do not fyrmly beleve the word off God,
which his own son has most fayghtfully testified unto us. This vicious
love, and this damnable affection, which does so draw us, from the things
where unto we are called, ca^ they prosede from any other thing, then from a
diffidence and mystrust that we have in the saynges and promyses of the son
off God? I report me to your consyerces: Truly the apostles and prymatyve
church who were perfyte christeans. And did fayghtfully believe the saynges of
the son of God. They did not govern the^ selfs on this sort, but suffered
gladly for Jesus Christ, and for the testimonye of his gospel, when it pleased
the good will off God, that they should be afflicted. They did never dissuade
one another to suffer, but contrary wysse, they did anymate and bolden one
another even to the very death. Paraduenture ye will answer me, and say, all
this is true, we acknowledge. But the cross off the Apostles and off the first
chrysteans, was not so hard, so cruel, nor so evell to be borne: As is the
cross that God lays upon our shoulders in thesse days. Wherefore they bare
their cross easily, and we with more pain. O vnadvysed saying, O objection
worthy off reproffe. Do we supposse that the cross off the Apostles and
prymatiue christeans, was easy to be borne? I pray you, let us take the pain,
to consider what was their cross, and that done, we shall easily deserne
which is the more grev user. Truly yff we would with a syngle eye consider all
things, we should find that we al together did new suffer the tenthe part of
the pain and trouble that. S. Paul him self only did taste and endure. And
therefore does he boste him self, that he is a better servant off Jesus Christ,
the^ were, a certain kind off falls prophets amongst the Corrinthians, off
when he makes mension. Wherefore yff it please you, let us here him self
speak. 2. Cor. 11.
They are the ministers off Christ (says he) I am more, in labors more
abondant, in strypes above measure, in prison more plentiouse, in peril off
death often, off the Jews fyve times ressayved I forty strypes save one,
thrisse was I beaten with rods, I was ons stoned, I suffered thrysse
shypwrake, night and day have I been in the deep see, in iorneynge often, in
perils off waters, in perils of robbers, in ieoperdes of mine own nation,
in ieoperdes amongst the heathen, in perils in the Cite, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea in perils amongst falls brytherin, in
labor and travayll, in watchynge often, in honger and thyrst, in fasting
often, in cold and nakedness, beside the thiges that out wardly happen unto me.
Here may you se, what saint Paul did suffer ffor the testimony off Jesus
Christ. 2. Cor. 1.
And in an other place he sayethe. Britherin I would not have you ignorant,
off our trouble which happened unto us in Asia, for we were grieved out off
measure passing strength so greatly that we dyspayred even off lyffe. Also we
ressayved an answer off death in our selfs, that we should not put our
trust in our selfs, but in god, which raisethe the dead to lyffe again, and
which delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, on who^ we trust,
that yet here after he will delyver, by the help off your prayers for us, that
by the means off many persons, thanks may begyuen off many on our behalf,
for the gift given unto us. Here may ye se (my fryndes) here may ye se the
cross off Saint Paul, here may ye se what he has suffered, and yet this is not
all. For he has suffered many other things as wytnessethe the book off the
Acts off the Apostles, and finally be suffered death for the witnessynge off
Jesus Christ. For there more. S. Paul has not only made me^ncion, off that
which he did suffer himself, but also he has made rehersall off the estate
off the other apostles off his time. Wherefore, for Gods sake harke^ what he
says off them to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 4.
Truly I believe (says he) that god has set us forth, (we which are the last
apostels) as it were men appointed to death, for we are a gasyng stock unto
the world, and to the angels and to men, we are folles for christ's sake,
but ye are wysse through christ. We are weak, but ye are strong. Ye are
honorable, but we are despised.

Even unto this time we hounger and thirst and are naked and are buffyted with
fystes, and have no certain dwelling place, and labor workynge with our own
hands. We are reuyled, and yet we bliss, we are persecuted, and suffer it, we
are evell spoken off, and we pray, we are made as it were the fylthynes off
the world and the off, scowrynge off all things even unto this day. That is
to say we are no less detestable unto the world, then were thosse that the
ge^tylles did customablye throw into the watter for the preservation off the
commen wealth. And in a another place he says. We are troubled on every side,
yet are we not forsaken, we are in povertye, but yet not utterly with out some
what, We suffer persecution, but are not relynquythed therein. We are cast
down, nevertheless we peryshe not. We all ways bear about in our bodies the
mortification of the lord Jesus, that the lyffe off Jesus might appear in our
bodies, for we which lyde, are all ways delyvered unto death for Jesus sake,
that the lyffe off Jesus might also appear in our mortal flesh. Now have ye
hard what. S. Paul testifyeth off his estate and off the other apostles. Now I
besyche you gyne ear unto that he wrytethe off the estate off all the saints
in general, that is to say off all the elect and true chylderin of God by
Jesus Christ. Throught fayght (says he) they have subdewed kingdoms, Hebr.
11.
wrought ryghtousnes, obtained the promys, stopped the mouths off lions,
quenched the violence off fire, escaped the edge off the sword, out off
weakness they were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the
arms off the aliantes, the wyme^ ressayded their dead to lyffe again: Other
were racked and would not be delyvered, that they might inheryte a better
resurrection: Again other were tried with mockynges and skornynges, more over
with bonds, and prisonment, were stoned, were hewn a sonder, were tempted,
were slain with the sword, walked up and down in shepskyns, and gotskyns,
being destitute, troubled and vexed, they wa^dred in wyldernes, in mountains
and in caves off the earth, off which me^, the world was not worthy off.
Behold the lyffe, behold the estate and intretyng off the childerin off God,
during the time they were in this world, Is there any greater temptations,
then thesse which we have hard rehearsed? And yet never the less Jesus Christ
and his members before us have suffered them. But in all thesse extreme
temptations how did they behave them selves? Were they at any time astoyned or
dyscomforted? No, truly. As witnesses. S. Paul, saying. Blyssed be God the
ffather off our Lord Jesus Christ which is the father off mercy and God off
all consolation, 2. Cor. 1.
which conforteth us in all our tribulations in so myche that we are able to
comfort them that are in any manner of trouble, eve^ with the^ same comfort,
that we our selfs are comforted off God, for as the afflictions off Christ
are plentious in us: even so is our consolation plentious by Christ. Cor. 12.
I^e^ he says in a another place. Therefore will I very gladly reioysse in mine
infirmites that the strenght off Christ may dwell in me, Therefore have I my
delectation, in infirmites and in rebukes, in necessites, in persecutions and
in anguyshes for christ's sake, for when I am weak, then am I strong. Here by
it is apparent that G. Paul was not dyseomforted not dyscorraged in the mids
off his tribulatio^s, but suffered all things very gladly and quyetly, even
very death for the testimony of the truth: he would not also that his frindes
should be moved or troubled for any thing that might happen unto him, but
rather that they should rejoice with him. The which comfortable lesson he truly
learned in the most floryshynge skolle off his master Jesus Christ, who said
unto his dyssiples, Let not your hearts be greved, neither fere, ye have hard
how I said unto you, Ioh. 14.
I go and come again unto you, yff ye loved me ye would verily rejoice, because
I go unto my father. The which thing truly the dissiples did show in the
end, that they did love him unfeignedly: For after that he was visibley
departed from them as towchynge his bodyly presence, and assended up into the
heavens, whereas he remaynethe resedent unto this hour, lyvynge and raignynge
and prayng for us. They returned unto Jerusalem with great joy and gladness as
testyfyeth G. Luc. Act. 1.
But did Paul and the other apostles only reioysse in tribulation? All the other
christeans who have suffered for the veryte sake, did not they also reioysse in
beringe their cross. Yeas, truly, thanks be given unto our god. The which
thing. G. Paul, speki^ge as well of other as of him self does sufficiently
declare, saying. We do not only glory, in the glore off the son of God, but
also we do glory in tribulation. As who would say, we christeans are not off
that opinion, that the worldly men are of, for worldly me^ do hate and deteste
all tribulations, and call the^ evelles, Thynkyng it an evell, odious and
shamfull thing to suffer* persecution. But contrarywysse the true christeans,
do glory and reioysse in all their persecutions. That is to say they are
assured that they re persecutions, make for their glory, honestye, wealth,
vtilite, and synguler profit: For the which cause they do glory in suffrynge,
Iam. 1.
and do reioysse. For. G James in the name off God does coman^de them to do
so, saying. My brytherin extyme it an excedyng joy, when you fall into diverse
temptations. 1. pet. 4.
G. Peter also exhorts them unto the same thing, when he sayethe, dearly
beloved marvel not that ye are provyd by fire (which thing is to try you) as
thought some strange thing happyned unto you: But reioysse, in as myche as ye
are pertakers of christ's passions, that when his glory apperethe, ye may be
merry and glade. For truly all christeans, yff they be in very de de christeans,
do not only reioysse and glory in their tribulations, but also they gyve
hearty thanks unto God, and therein praysse his holy name. In which doing they
follow the example off the.iij. chylderin that being thrown into the furnace,
bound, Dany. 3.
walking in the mids off a great fire, did gyve thanks, praise and glorifye
the lord. They also follow the example off Job, Job. 1.
who said, yff we have ressayued good things at the hands off God, why not
e^ell also? The lord has gyven, and the lord has taken away, even as it
pleasethe the lord, so is it come to pas, blyssed be the name off the lord.
S. Peter also does gyve them in comandment to do the like, saying, 1. Pet. 4.
Yff ye be rayled upon for the name off Christ happy are ye, for the glory
and the spirit off God rests upon you, but se that none off you do suffer as
a mortherer, or as a thief, or an evell doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters, yff any man suffer as a christean, let him not be ashamed, but let him
glorifye God on his behalffe. But wherefore is it, that the christeans, do so
greatly rejoice in their tribulations? And do gyve thanks and praysse the
name off God in the mids off their afflictions? G. Paul in his Epistell to
the Romans does gyve us a plain resolution theroff in thesse words We
know (fayeth he) that tribulation bryngethe pacyence, Roma. ^.
patience bryngethe experience, experience bryngethe hope, and hope makes us
not ashamed, by cause the love off God is shede a broad ^n cure hearts, by the
holy ghost which is gyven unto us. What meanethe this sayn Tribulation
bryngethe pacyence? is) it the nature off tribulation to make all men pacient
indifferently, that are afflicted and troubled? (No truly.) For yff tribulation
naturallye did work patience in all them that are troubled, the^ should be all
men generallye patiently hear their tribulations. But every one does not so.
For we do se at this time the most part off men mourmer and grudge with out a
cause, and folyslye compain in their afflictions and aduersites. What have I
done (say they)? Wherein have I offended? Lan thesse words prosede from a
pacient heart that willyngly does submyte him self under the most just
judgment off God? It is certain that it can not. And therefore it semethe that
the Apostell, here speak the against the experience that we have off things.
But on the othersyde if we do diligently way to who me he here spekethe, namly
unto the christeans, he being also a christean, we shall easily gather, where
unto the tendethe.

For it behooves us to consider and understand that the tribulations whereoff
he now treatethe, are not the tribulations off the worldlynges. But rather they
are the tribulations off the elect and true childerin off God, whosse
properiyes he here declarethe, and says. What tribulation (that is to say)
the tribulation off o christean, bryngethe pacyence. But, which way? A
christean man that seethe him self troubled and afflicted, understands forth
with that his tribulation does not happen to him by fortune or chance, for he
is not off that unhappy and dainnable feet off infideles that bare deny the
divine providence off God, laying as we read in the book of Ieremyes
lame^tacio^s That from the mouth off the lord prose death neither good not
evell. Lament. 3.
The lord seethe us not, Ezech. 9.
he has forsaken the ear the. And as it is written in the book of Job. Tushe,
how should God know? does his dominion reach beyond the clouds? Job. 22.
Tushe, the clouds cover him that he may not se, for he dwell the above the
scyrcie off the heavens. All thesse words or rather blasphemes, signifye no
thing else, nor tend to none other end, but to make us beleve, that God, that
has made heaven and ear the does not entermedel with humayne and earthely
things, And that it is not he that sendethe unto man good and evell,
prosperity and aduersite, which we taste in this lyffe. But a true christ and
does not gyve any credyte unto so pestilent and diabolical a lie. For, to
thynk off God, a thing so myche unworthy his majesty is not the work off a
christean, but off an Epicurian or of an Aristoteler. A christean man gyvethe
reverence unto the word off God, in belevynge and fyrmly dwelling upon the
same, all thought all the universal world would contensiouslye affirm the
contrary. And the word off God sayethe. Tua pater prouidentia ab initio
cuncta gubernat. O father (sayethe the scripture) thy providence gouernethe all
thing from the begyuynge. And again if sayethe. Who is he there that sayethe
that any thing is done, with out the comandment off the lord. Forther more
the lord our God speaking by the mouth of the prophet Esaias say the. Esai.
45.
I am the lord, and there is none other beside me, fformynge the light, and
creatyng the darcknes, making peace, and creatynge evell, yea I am the lord
that does al thesse things says the all mighty God. Deuteronomy. 32.
And in Seutrend he sayethe, behold, I am the God alone, and there is none but
I. I kill and will make alyve again, I wound and I will heal again. And
also Tobias having respect unto this sentence, said unto the lord, Great art
thou (o sorde) for ever more, and thy kingdom world with o^t end, for thou
skourgest, and hea lest thou leadest unto hell, and bryngest out again, and
there is none that may escape thy hand. Where unto agreethe the author off
the Ecclesiasticus saying, Eccle. 11.
prosperity and aduersyte, lyffe and death pouertye and riches, come all off
the lord. And to that end does the prophet Amos inquire saying, Does there
any evel happen in the cite, Amos. 3.8.
that the lord has not wrought? Use thy riches in the days off prosperity
(says Jesus the son off Syrach) and have patience in the time off
aduersite, for even as God has made the one, even so has he made the other.
All thesse textes, and other infinite contained in the holy scriptures declare
sufficiently, that the world is not governed by forture and chance, as the
infideles dare affirm, and that against the evydent testimony and judgment
off their own co^syences, which witnesses unto them that the world is all
to gyther governed by the only providence off God: And that as well riches, as
pouer tie, good and evell, that is to say^, all tribulations, persecutions,
losses, afflictions, turmentes, and miseryes that we suffer, does only prosede
from God, and that by the will, ordinance and comma^dment off God, who does
all in all things, according to the counsayll off his own will. Wherefore when
that a man, that is a christean, does persayve him self in any respect
afflicted, in what sort so ever it be, he does not doubt, but is certainly
persuaded that it is god him self that does afflicte him. In sendyng him that
same tribulation that he has: and that all the wicked men off the world, yea
even the develles and all other creaturee, that seem to afflycte, are no thing
else but the rods and ministers off his divine will and ordinance, as it is
written in the prophet Esaias, Esai. 10.
Assure, is the rod of my furye, and my staff. Also in the* 54. chapter the
lord sayethe, Behold I create the smythe that blows the colles in the fire,
and he makes a weapon after his own handy work, and I mak^ also him that
kylleth to dystroye. A christean man now is sufficiently assured that his
tribulation is all to gyther a work off God, and does not only consider, that
it is God that afflictethe, but also the end where unto he tendythe by
afflic^^^ge him. But which way should he know it? By the scriptures only, for
the scriptures does not only most certainly assure him, that it is God, that
afflictethe, But also when that God afflictethe, he does it not off hatred, nor
for any pleasure that he takethe in our affliction, as testifiethe the book
off wysoome, which sayethe, Sap. 1.
That God hatethe no thing of that he has made, neither takethe he pleasure
in the destruction off the lyvynge. The which thing also Tobias confessethe in
thesse words, Lord, Tob. 3.
thou take no pleasure in our perdiction. The which thing also the lord
him self confirmethe by the mouth off his prophet Ezechiel, I will not the
death off a synnet (saeth he) but rather that he torn and lyve. Ezech. 18.
A christean man then, that belevethe all that the scripture teacethe, does not
think that God does afflicte him for any pleasure that he takes to se him
suffer, (for that were the affection off (...) tyrant) neither yet by cause he
hateth^ him in any respect, but rather he is pe^fytly persuaded that God
afflicts him, by cause he lovethe him. For he says him self. Prouer. 3
Ebr. 12.
Ego quoscunqe amo, arguo et castigo, that is to say, I do reprehende and
chasten, all them that I love. I is necessary then that all thosse that god
lovethe, Apoc. 3.
and chefly thosse that he lovethe in Jesus Christ, be chastyned. But wherefore
does he chastyce the^s Because that he lovethe them. But how myche does god
love them? How myche less does he love them, then he loved his only son
Jesus Christ? He lovethe the^ as his chi^derin for christ's sake, and he that
belevethe not that, does deny the verite spoken by Jesus Christ, who
speaking off thosse that throught the prechynge off the apostles should beleve
in him, said to his father. O father thou have loved them, as thou have loved
me. And Jesus Christian how myche does he love them? Ioh. 17.
Harken what he sayethe in the gospel of. S. John. As my father has loved me,
Ioh. 15.
(says he) even so do I love you. O assured promys, O saying off great
consolation, to all thosse that fayghtfully beleve the same. O comfortable
words which being well understood and surely fyxed in a christean man's heart
by the excellent and supernatural hammer off fayght, is able with one only
blow to subdew our corrupt nature, and natural inclination, in making
the same willyngly obedient, to the good will off God, who has so myche loved
us, and of his mere goodness has done so myche, and has suffered so myche for
us. But now, seeing that love, yea and that an infinite love, is the only
cause, why God our lovynge father does so afflicte us. To what end then
te^dethe he, in this his affliction, and to what purpose does he so often
afflicte us? S. Paul in his first epistell to the Corrinthe ans does express
unto us the cause wherefore, 1. Cor. 1^.
in few words, saying, When we are judged off the lord, we are corrected, to
the end we should not be damned with the world. That is to say, God does
send us affliction and tribulation, but he does not send them to distroye
us, but rather to chastyce us, to the end there by we might amend, and be
provoked to fle unto him for mercy and pardon. By we might not be condemned
with the wicked wordlynges. 4. Esd. 16
Esdras has the like saige in his.iiij. book the. 16. chapter. Behold
(sayethhe) hou^ger and plage, trouble and anguy the, are sent as scourges, for
amendment. Where unto is to be refarred the worthy saying off the holy woman
Iudethe. Judith. 8.
Let us not seek to be avenged (says she) for the thing that is done unto
us: but consider that all the se ponyshentes are far less then our sins and
misdedes, belevinge also that this correction comethe unto us, (as to the
seruates off God) for amendment and not for our dystruction. Now it y^
manifest, that when we suffer any tribulation, hit prosede the from God, an^
that for our salvation. The which thing when a christean man does
fayghtfully co^sidere, he is moved forth with pari^ly and gladly to be are all
his aduersites in rendrynge hearty thanks to God his sat her for the same. And
so come the it to pas, Romans 5.
as says. S. Paul. That tribulation bryngethe patience, not off his own
proper nature, but by a more live^ly knowledge off the good will off God to
wards us. And this patience, bring the experience (says. S. Paul) that us
to say, patience do the try and prove our fayghte, yea patience does
perfytly wytnes, e^ide^tly declare, and surely assure us, that the faught off
that person, that is patience in his aduersite, is no vame, feigned or dead
fayght, but fyrme, true and lyvelye, in that it endure the the fire off
tribulation wiih out either werynes or repynymge. It is a common saying amongst
us, that a man does not certaynlye know his own stomach and boldness,
tylshuche time as he is returned from the battayll. For after a man has felt
him self stout and valiant at the pynche, and wyllinge to do his duty to the
uttermost off his power, and that not for all the iniures, incomodites,
calamites, and miseryes off the wars, he never found him self dyscorraged
from the fayghtful ^erninge of his prince, but has al ways patiently and
valiantly supported all hassardes and troubles, in corragynge contynewallye his
companyons, and all ways showynge a good contynance and lusty corrage. That
men then know the how hardey he is, the^ he knowethe that he is in the number
off them that are meite soldiers to serve the king and the common wealth.
And he is known off all his co^panyons, yea and off the king him self. But
what thing has tried him? what thing has made him known? For so the the
constancye and patience that he had in aduersite. For before this patience,
neither was he known to the king, neither yet to his companyons, what manner
a man he was, no he was not known to him self. Eccle. 34
For as says the Ecclesityke, he that was never tempted, what knowethe he?
And he that was never proved, wheroff has he experience? Be meanethe that
with out erosse and persecution a man shall never know him self certaynlye.
The which thing is most true. For till shuche time as we have been tempted, and
till such time as god has laid upon us his cross that it pleasethe him to
have us bear. We may extyme, Math. 26.
or rather presume off oureselves, then other wysse, as S. Peter, extermed and
presumed off him self, when as he said. Thought all men be offended because
off the, yet will not I be offended, and all thought I should dye with the, yet
will I not deny the, yea I will gyve my lyff^ for the. When Peter vttred thesse
wordis, he knew not very well what he said, neither knew he as yet him self.

And wherefore? By cause he had as then never been tempted nor proved. So lyk
wysse we, yff before we have been tempted or afflicted do utter the like
saynges, truly, we speak off no cersayn^ye for as myche as we never have been
proved, and sherfor are all to gyther ignorant off our selves. But when as God
our father, has sent us tribulations and has gyve^ us grace in the same to
contine we consta^tly, and to behave oursewes valia^tly, that is to say, we
were never dyscomforted nor astoyned nor denied our fayght, but have boldly
confessed the same before the face of our enymes, no thing extemyng our
lyffes with. S. Paul. But have will lyngly dyspyced and abandoued the same for
the verytes sake, according to the doctrine of Jesus Christ our only master,
and most perfyte exampler. Then are we proved, then do we persayve and know by
experience that our fayght is good and lyvely, the^ does oure^ companyons
know us, and then does God him self know us, as he says to Abraham. Gene.
22.
Now I know that thou fear God, So that there is no doubt but that this
probation and experience off our fayght to be good and godly, co^methe off the
pacient constancye, and constant patience that God has gyve^ us, in our
tribulations. For truly the reprobate and vnbelevers, have never patience in
their aduersites. But they mourmer all ways against God and blaspheme his
majesty. Which thing consydere, noved. S. Paul to say, patience bryngethe
eyperience (to wytt) experience off our fayght, that is to say, patience
does gyve us experience that our faight is good, as a good souldioure that
has dilygently done his indevoure in the bataill, consayveth a certain and
sure hope, that his prince for whom he has fought and hasarded his lyffe, will
gyve him thanks, reco^per^se him, and gyve him prefarme^t, charge, and credyte
in his real me. Even so when as by constant patience our fayght has been
proved, and found good, then does our hope incresse more then ever it did,
and do conseve a fyrine assurance, and sure certitude off our salvation. Then
begyne we (as it were) partly to know and lyvely to feile, that we cannot be
damned, but that we shall be most certainly saved, Tob. 3.
as witnesses the good Tobias, Who so ever lovethe God (says he) and serves
him a right, is sure off this, that yff his life be tempted and proved, it
stands in tryynge, and yff he contynewe in patience, he shall have a reward,
and be hyghly crowned. To the which agreethe the holy apostel. S. James,
saying, Iam. 2.
Blyssed is that man that endure the temptation, for affter that he has been
proved, he shall ressayve the crown off lyffe, that God has promised to
thosse that love him.

And this is it, that the apostell teacethe us, when as he sayethe, probation,
Romans ^.
that is to say, the experience that throught patience we have off our
strong and invinsyble fayght, workethe (or rather engendrythe) hope. But upon
what thing is this our hope founded and bylded? Yff it were founded and
stayed upon the force and worthynes off our patience, the^ should it have, but
a slender fondation, myche like unto that edifice that is bylded upon the
sand, But where upon the^, is it situatede? upon the only certayntey off the
verytable promysses off the lord, who says in. S. Matthew. Blyssed are all
thosse that suffer persecution for ryghtousnes sake, Math. 10
for theyrs is the kingdom off heaven, and again he sayethe. He that will go
about to save his sowll, that is to say, his carnal and temporal lyffe, he
shall loss the same, but he that shall loss his fowll, that is to say, he
that shall wyllyngly abandon his lyffe for my sake and for the gosples, he shall
surely save it. Upon thesse promysses and other like, which are infinite in the
scriptures, is our hope all ways founded and bylded, as the only foundation
theroff. And not upon our own works, patience or worthynes. And this hope,
is not confounded says saint Paul, that is to say, that all thosse that do
fyrmely hope after the things that God has promised them, they shall never be
dyssayved not frustrated off their expectation and attente: They shall never
be confounded before the ungodly and unbelievers their enymes: It shall never
repent them, neither shall they be asshamed for that they have beleved in the
promises off God. For assuredly they shall have, that they have hoped for,
namly that which God has promised them. And on the other side, the vnbelevers
and ungodly shall have no ocasion, to laffe the^ to skorne. For out off all
dout they shall be saved, as testifiethe the prophet Esaias. Esai. 28.
Whosoever belevethe in him, shall not be confounded. Also it is written in the
psalms. Blyssed is the man that hopethe in the lord, Psalm. 33.
ffor God savethe thosse that trusiethe in him. But what need I here to allege
the sayings off thesse.ij. prophets, David, and Esaias, seeing that all the
scriptures tendythe to none other end, and al most reacethe noneother
doctrine, but only that all thosse that unfeignedly do reposse their
confidence in God, shall be delyvered from all their tribulations, and shall be
saved trought the grace and mercy off the lord Jesus Christ. And there for
gyve ear unto the lyvely and puysance consolation, that the aposiell does
gyve unto us in his epestell to the Ebrieus, and else where, Hebr. 12.
saying. Wherefore let us also (for as myche as we are compassed about with so
great a multitude of witnesses) that is to say, so great a number off them
that are gone before us. Lay a way all that presses down, and the sin
that hangethe so fast on, let us ro^ne with patience unto the battaylle that is
set before us, lokynge un to Jesus the captain and fynysher off our fayght,
which for the joy that was set before him, a bode the cross, and dysspyced
the shame, and is now set down on the right hand off the throne off God,
Consider therefore and consider again, how he endured such contradiction off
sinners, lest ye should be weryed and faint in your minds, for ye have not
yet resisted unto blood, stryvynge against sin, and have forgotten the
exhortation that speaks unto you as unto childerin. My son dispyse not thou
the chastenynge of the lord, neither faynte when thou art rebuked off him, for
whom the lord lovethe, him he chastynethe, yea, he skorgethe every son that
he resayvethe, yff ye endure chastenynge God offrethe him self unto you, as
unto sons. What son is he whom the father chastynethe not? Yff ye be not
under correction (wheroff all are pertakers) then are ye bastardes and not
sons. Therefore seeing we have had fathers off our own flesh, which
corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not myche rather be in
subjection unto the father off spirits and lyffe? And they verily, for a few
days nortered us after they^e own pleasure, but he norterethe us for our
profit, to the end that he may minister off his holiness unto us. No manner
chastenynge for the present time semethe to be joyous, but grevous, never the
less after ward it bryngethe the quyete fruit off ryghtousnes, unto them that
are excercysed thereby. For thought our outward man peryshe, yet the inward
man is renewed day by day, for our tribulation, 2. Cor. 4
which is momentany and light, preparethe an excedyng and an eternal wayght
off glory unto us, whylles we look not on the things that are seen, but on
the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen are temporal,
but the ^higes which are not seen, are eternal. For we know, that if the
earthly mansio^ of this body were dystroyed, 2. Cor. 5.
we have a byldige of god, an habitatio^ not made with hands but eternal in
heaven. My fryndes and brytherin, thesse worthy saynges are written for our
doctrine, to the^de that we throught patience and consolation off the
scriptures might have hope. Romans 15.
Comfort your selves then, in thesse words, have patience, be thankful all
ways unto our particular and general father.

Yff at any time it pleasethe him to make you pertakers off the healtfull
suffrynges, of Jesus Christ his only son, and off all the fayghtfull
christeans that here to fore have suffered ffor his name sake.

Have a sure hope, that yff you suffer wish the son off God, ye shall also
reign with him. And yff ye do comunicate with him, patiently berynge his
cross in this world, be cause you would be found obedient unto the good will
off God his father, ye shall also be made like unto him, lyvyng and reigning in
heaven, in immortalite most happy. And all ways remember and fayghtfully
consider this one thing, wheroff the holy ghost by the pen off saint Paul does
admonyshe us, saying, The afflictions off this world, are not worthy off the
glory to come, the which shall be reveled on us. In this firm confidence,
co^myte your selves holy, to the more then fatherly providence off our God. And
say unto him with a good will and ernest mind with out all dissimulation. Our
ffather thy will be done. And then say also. With a sure confidence, as
says. Hebr 13. Psalm. 55. Psalm. 117.
S. Paul. The lord is my helper. I will fere no thing that man can do unto
me. Fere not that God will forsake you, in what so ever miserable state it
pleasethe him to bring you. For he has said, Ios. 1.
I will not forsake the, nor abandone the. Ye would not relynquyshe, not
forsake a man that has suffered any thing for you. And do ye think then, that
god who only is good, will forsake us, who only have suffered for his name
sake? O fryndes let it never enter into your hearts, for it is not possible
assure your selves.

And forther more, be ascartayned that no thing shall happen unto you, but
that which God has eternally ordained for you. And all thought all the
tyrants off the world, and the wholl world it self, should conspyre against
you, they are not to be feared. For you can drink no thige else, but that cup
that God has prepared for you, from the beginning. Ye can suffer no more, nor
non other wysse, nor at non other time, then God has ordained. Do not ye
know, that the kind off death off the son off God, was before determined?
It behoved him to be exalted, as he him self tescifie the in S. John, that is
to say, it behoved him to be ceucifyed, Ioh. 3.
he could not dye off any other death. And the time also wherein it be hoved
him to dye, was it not certain lie ordained and apoynied? Yeas truly, as
witness the Daniel in his. 9. chapter.

How often times hane ye read, in the historye of the lyffe off Iesy Christ,
that his ennymes sought diverse means to take him, and yet they could not, by
cause that his hour was not come? that is to say, Ioh. 19.
that the time was not them come, that God his father had determined that he
should be taken. But when his hour was come, they took him at their pleasure,
trought the inevitable ordinance off God, who the^ did deliver him into their
hands, and gave them power over him, as he said to Pilate. Thou should
have no manner off power over me, yff it were not gyven unto the, from a houe.
Lykwysse he said unto the Jews, Ye are come forth as it were against a
theaffe, with swords and staves for to take me. When I was daiely with rou in
the temple, ye sireched forth no hands against me, Luc. 22.
but (says he in. S. Luke) This is eve^ your very hour, and the power off
darcknes. The place lykwysse whereas he should suffer, was it not also
determined? Be him self declares unto us, that yeas. For he says, It is not
possible that the prophet, that is to say, the Alessias, or the anointed of
god, should pery she, but at Jerusalem. And of thosse that should comdemne him,
Math. 20
and put him to death, was there no thing determined in the secret counsayll
off he deite? What should we doubt theroff, for he him self said, Behold, we
go up to Jerusalem, and the son off man shall be delivered into the hands
off the high preistes and scrybes, and they shall comdemue him to death, and
shall deliver him to the gentylles to be mocked, and to be scourged, and to be
crucified, and the third day he shalrysse again. And off him that did
betraye him, what? was there no thing determined before? Math. 26
Barke^ what he him self sayethe, Verily, I say unto you, that one off you
shall betraye me etc. The son off man goethe as it is written off him, but woe
unto that man by who^ the son of man is betrayed, It had hyn good for that
man, yff he had not hyn borne. Then Judas, which betrayed him, said master, is
it I? Jesus said unto him, thou have said, that is to say, thou have said
the truth, it is even thou, that was ordained for thit purpose from the
beginning. This may ye se, how all things consernyng Jesus Christ was gyded
by the providence and determination of god his father. Truly there happyned no
thing unto him, that was not certainlye ordained and appointed before. Whereby
we may easily gather, that no thing shall happen unto us his members, that God
has not ordained for us, thought all the men off the world would conspyre to
gyther, and with them all the develes in hell, or in the eayre, with all their
iniquite crastes, treasons, wyckednes, thretenynges, strenght and
condemnations, yet ca^ they not abrydge our course, not prolo^ge our lyffe,
one moment. How great then is our pusillanimite and weakness? When as al
things dependynge enterely upon the only providence of god, in whosse sure
safgard and protection. we are and have our being, and yet for all that we
fere a mortal man, and that more is, a weak woman, that to day is grieve as
the gresse, and to morrow shall be cast into the furnace. Continewally (as says
the prophet Esaias) we stand in fere, off the furye off them that trouble us,
and in the mean time do forget the lord that has created us, that has
siretched ont the heavens, and has laid the fondations of the earth. O that
we are people off little fayght. But some man paraduenture will replye and say
unto me. We are not Jesus Christ, therefore it is not certain whether god has
ordained the thing that happyneth unto us, as he did unto Jesus Christ, and
whether he has charge and care over us, as he had over Jesus Christ? wherefore
not with out a cause we do fere the imaginations and entrepryses off our
enymes, against us. O saying all to gyther myred with infidelite, this is that
I spacke off before, alas, we have no fayght, for wherein can we more show our
incredulite, then so to restrain the eternal providence of god, as to tend no
forther then over the only person off Jesus Christ? So should god be the God
off Jesus Christ only, and not our God also? Wherefore then do we believe in
him? Wherefore then do we reposse our wholl trust and confidence only in him?
Wherefore then do we call him, our God, our father, and our savioure? yff the
providence off God do not tend over us also, and yff he have no solicitude and
care over us, then has the spiret off god abused us with a notable lie, when
as by the penn off. 1. pet. 5.
S. Peter he said, Last all your care upon God, for he carethe for you. But
truly the lord might justly say off us now, that which some time he spoke off
Ephraim in the. 11. chapter off the prophet Oreas, Oze. 11.
I bare Ephraim in mine arms as he that noryshe the them, and yet they would
not know that I had care off them. O to myche ingratitude? O infidelite
incomparable? Tell me I pray you, are not tow sparrowes off les walewe with
God, then we are? Truly God has not so myche extemed them, Math. 10.
for he dyed not for the^, as he has done for us, and yet Jesus Christ
testifies unto us, that a sparowe shall not fall upon the ground, without the
will off our heavenly father. Luc. 12.
And what then? Shall we fall without his providence and determinate decre? No
truly. Do we not know that even the hears off our head are all nombred? Do we
not know that god has disposed all things by number, wayght, and measure?
Are we ignorant off this, that all things have their appointed time? and that
all thing that is under the heavens passethe by his course? as says the
Lcelesiastike. Do we not know that God has gyven to man, time, and number off
days? Have we not seen written that there is a time off byrte. Eccle. 3^
and a time off deathe^ Have we forgotten, or rather do we not understand,
that which is written in the book off Job, and that we hear so often song in
the church. Job. 14.
The days off man surely are deter mined, the number off his months are only
known unto the, thou have appoited him his bounds, which he cannot go
beyounde. What is that to say, God has appo^ynted bounds and limytes unto
the lyffe off man? It is to say, that God has ordained every man a certain
time to lyve, the which time we cannot over pas nor go beyond. But this is not
all. For it behovethe us also to tarry the appointed time and as it were to
touch the limited bounds. Wherefore yff we will directly understand this place
off Job, we must dyligently consider what is to say a bound or a lymite.
Truly when a piece off ground is lymited and bounded, it does not only
signifye that it goethe no farther, but also that it tendethe and sire chethe
to the bound. Wherefore it is not inought to consider that we shall not pas the
time that God has lymited, and determined us to lyve, but also we must
assuredli persuade oureselves that we shall lyve as long as he has ordained us
to lyve. And truly so shall we do in the dispite off all our enymes, all
thought they would swelt their hearts. And tell me forther more, have men
given us our lyffe? No forsothe. No more can they take it away from us. God,
with out any other has gyven it us, and God only does take it away. For he
is the lord off death, as well as off lyffe, wherefore when the appointed time
off our death is come, let us assure oureselfes that it is god only, and none
other that does kill us. For he says. It is I that kill, and make a lyve
again. And therefore when it shall please him to kill us, that is to say, to
take away this miserable lyffe off the flesse: let us say with Job.

The lord has gyven, and the lord has taken it away, blyssed be the name
off the lord. Let us consider, and follow the example off Isaac, who so
patiently permytted him self to be bond off his father, being redye to put
him to death. Oesyrynge the infinite bounte off our God, so to bind our
members and affections, that there appear in us no manner of thing, that may
resist, gainsaye or replye in any respect against his good will and pleasure.
But before all thing let us follow the example of Jesus Christ our only
savioure and master, who seyinge his death approchynge said to god his
father, My father, not as I will, but as thou wyllt, thy will be done and not
mine. Let us then offer unto God the father, oureselfes for a sacrefyce, whose
savoure all thought it be evell and stynkyng in the nose off the world, yet it
is good and agreeable unto God by Jesus Christ his son, upon whom, that is to
say, in the fayght and confidence off whom, we do dedycat. and offer our
selves, when we persayve our hour to approach. And in the mean time let us
not tempt God, let us not search out, and provoke our enymes, that is to say,
thosse that with out a cause would us evell, but rather in following the
example off Christ and his apostles, let us with draw our selfs thither,
whereas it shall please the prouydence off our God and father to address us.
And what so ever betyde, let us not fere me^, no, let us not fere them, for God
does inhibite and for bid us the same, saying by his prophet, Esai. 41.
, Fere the^ not, for I am with you. And seeing that god does forbynd us to
fere men, can we fere them with out sin? No truly. But to what purpose do we
fere them? Men off them selves are no thing: Men off them selves can do no
thing: and yff at onye time they have any power, the same power come the only
unto them from God, and is gyve^ unto them only to accomplish and execute the
will off God. Wherefore they can not at any time, do any thing but that, that
God will have done, by their ministration. Wherefore then do we fere them?
Geying we are only under the protection and safgard off God, who is all
mighty. Tell me I pray you, yff we had an enyme in Ingland, and the Quiene, who
is but a woman had promised us to protect and defend us against our enyme,
would we then fere him? I suppose, no. And yet we are not ashamed to fere our
enymes, Gene. 15.
after that God who only is all mighty, and off power to preserve, has said
unto every one off us, Fere not, for I am thy protector, thy defense, and thy
reward shall be exceeding great. Yff after this certain promys and diverse other
like, we do yet fere men, our enymes, It must off necessite follow that we do
doubt off the power, goodness, and allmyghty help off God. Is this the honor
that we bear unto his divine majesty? Can we do him a grea^er iuiure, then
not to credyte and obaye his word? Why rather do we not say with he prophet
David, and that with unfeigned lyppes void off all Ipocrysie. My hope and
confidence is only in the lord God, I fere not what man can do unto me? Why
the^ should we fere the death, which thesse wordly wysse men (and yet in very
deed folles) do make appear unto us so horrible and expouentable. For truly
that man that now fere the death, does great iniure unto Jesus Christ which
has over come the same. And semethe, that he does dyspayre off eternal lyffe,
that Jesus Christ, by his death has purchased for us. But peradventure ye
will say unto me, that Jesus Christ him self in the time off his cross, did
fere death, and therefore it is no marvayl, thought we do fere it, in whom there
is no shuche perfection and constancye? Truly the flesh does always abuse
her self with the example off Jesus Christ, she does abuse it, for she
cannot rightfully use it, in as myche as the flesh is all ways repongnant
unto the spiret and the good will off god. And for as miche as you will heri
follow the example off Jesus Christ, well I am contented, fere death: But
fere it, as Jesus Christ did fere it. Yff you will say, that Jesus Christ had
fere off death, consider the same also to be on shuche sort, as the fere
theroff did not keep him back from the voluntarye obedience off God his
father, and from saying with unfeigned lyppes, My father thy will be done: nor
(his hour being come) from the offrynge of him self wyllyngly into the
hands off his enymes, to be crucified and put to death. So thou so (o thou
flesh) for yff thou do otherwysse, then do thou not follow the example off
Jesus Christ in ferynge death, but thou would cover thy pusyllanimyte and
imperfections with the example off the son off God, in whosse lyffe was never
found any imperfection. Ye will answer me, and say, we fere not death, for
any fere we have to be damned, neither for any diffidence that we have off
eternal lyffe: But do beleve and are certaynlye assured, that our God, in
who^ only we have our confidence, will not damn us, but off his mercy, will
give unto us eternal lyffe for the ryghtousnes and merytes sake off his son
our savioure Jesus Christ: But we fere the death for the humayne
understanding that we have, of the great pain that some do suffer in deyinge,
and especially, in deying by fire, for we suppose that pain to surmount all
patience. O fond flesh, thy voice is all ways full off the love off thy
self, and off a secret diffidence and mistrust off the all mighty power,
wisdom and goodness off the lydynge God. I am sure, thou do not comprehend
it, nor understand it, neither thou will not, nor cannest not. And therefore I
will no more indevoure my self to speak unto the, for it were but lost
labor. But I will derecte my words, unto all the childerin of God, who (as.
S. Paul says) are led with the spiret off God, Romans 8.
and them will I now arm against all the difficultes, that this cursed flesh
had wont to obiecte, when as it behooved us to bear the cross off Christ for
the glory off God. Te great number off martera that latly have been borne in
Ingland do testifye the co^^rarye.
And namly against that, which she latly objected saying, that the pain that a
01 christean does suffer by deyeyng in the fire, does surmou^t all patience.
O seyinge saying, O shamfull blasphemye, that aparently denyethe the infinite
power, and the incomparable bountye of god, O ye christeans? Will ye gyve
credence unto this abominable and wicked flesh, which sekethe no thing else
but to pull us from the cross off Christ: and so consequently from our
salvation, unto the which it pleases our father so benyngly to call us? O how
ca^ you abide to hear this with patience? For yff it be not possible for a
christean man patiently and constantly to suffer the torment off fire, as this
wicked flesh (all wayed rebellynge against god) woloe persuade ver I pray you
tell me then. What meanethe Jesus Christ by this saying which he teaceth his
dissiples, Mar. 9.
That there is no thing impossible to him that beleuethe? Wherefore yff all
things are possible to the belever, (as says the veryte) then is it possible
for a man that beleveth patiently to suffer death, and that by fire. Whereby it
is apparent that the torment off fire does not surmounte all patience. And
forther more, what meanethe. S. Paul, 1. Cor. 10.
when he affirmethe that god is fayghtful, and will not suffer us to be tempted
a bove our powers, but shall in the mids of the temptation make a way, that
we shall be able to bear it? Does this text offer unto us, that the torment of
fire does surmou^t the patience off a christean? No truly, but rather the
contrary. Forther more the scriptures do witness, Esai. 53. He^br. 4.
that the son of God is shuche a man as was full of sorrows, and as has
good experience off infirmites. For in that he suffered and was tempted, he is
off power to help thosse that are tempted. For we have not an high priest,
which cannot have compassion off our infirmites. Wherefore then, if the son
off God, in whom we do beleve, and for who^ we do suffer afflictions, have
experime^ted in him self, our sorrows, and not only is able to help us, but
also suffers with us, as the head with the members* Is there any pain now that
we are not able to bear with all pacient constancye, and constant patience? For
yff we should fere that God would forsake us, when as for his holy name, me^ do
throw us into the fire, what assurance then can we have that God will gyve us
eternal lyffe? How dare we then bost our selves, that we are certain, and
void off all doubt, off our salvation? Can we offer agreater iniure to God,
then to fere that he will forsake us when as we suffer for the testimonye off
his truth? No truly. For a man, that is evell off nature, will not abandon a
another man that suffers any thing for his sake, (as I have said before) how
ca^ it then enter into the thought off a christean, that God (who only is
good), will forsake him, when he is tormented for his word? Sapi. 1.
Were this a good opinion off the lord as the holy scripture commandethe us to
have? No truly. Even so never entered it into the heart off a fayghtfull man.
But what (a mo^gest other things) ought a christean man to think, when he
comethe to the fire to be borned? He ought truly to remember that which is
written in the.xvi. chapter off the book off wisdom, where as we read this
saying, The fire forgate his own strenght by cause the ryghtous might be
noryshed, for thy creature that seruethe the (which art the maker) is feirse in
ponyshynge the vnryghtous, but does assuage it self, and is easy and gentyl
to do good unto shuche as put their trust in the. Thesse words do not
declare that the torment of fire is an intolerable pain unto a christean, but
contrary wysse, that the pain is light and easy to bear for as myche as by
the power off the confydence that we have in God the lord creator off all
things, the vyolence off the fire is so tempered and assuaged unto us, that
whereas the unbelievers do burst out by impacience, and mourmer against God, we
do suffer patiently and wyllynglye in gyvynge praises unto the lord in the
mids off all our extremites.

In following therein the example off the three young me^, who beyn bound in
the mids off a flambynge fornes, did sanctify and prayffe the forde God, who
performed and accomplyshed then unto them, that which he before promised by the
mouth of his holy prophet, saying, yff thou walkesie through the fire, Esai.
43.
it shall not borne the, and the flambe shall not kendyll upon the, for I am
the lord thy God, the holy one off Israel, thy Savioure. Is there now any
apparent reason or cause, why a christean, who only has his confidence in God
by Jesus Christ, should fere the fyrye fla^be, wherewith men do threaten them?

The fire is not noyful. unto a christean man, but very profitable, for as
witnessethe the scripture, Sapi. 3. Pro. 11.17 Psalm. 65. 1. per. 1.
It workethe the like effect in a christean, that it does in gold or silver,
that is to say, It does prove him, it does purify and pourge him, with ont
consumynge. And truly is way the thing dyrectlye, a christea^ man thrown
into the fire, may worthily he compared unto the fyrye bushe that Aloyses saw
in the mount Dreb, Exodus 3.
which bushe for all that it was on a flambye fire yet did it not consume. Be
may also be compared unto the chinyng worm, that being in the fire, does not
peryshe, nor consume, but contrarywysse is thereby purged from fylth, and made
more bewtyfull then yff it were washed with all the watter off the world.
Wherefore let us then assure our selves, and from hens forth let us never fere
the fire that so sone vany^het away, for I am sure that when we have passed
through the fire, we shall say with Jesus the soune off Syrache, I was not
bornte, no, not in the mids off the fire. Let us not fere men, that work no
thing else universally, but vanite. Let us not also fere death, for to fere
death (as says a certain wysse man) is no thing else, but to seem to be
wysse, and yet in very deed to be no thing less. Finally let us not stand in
fere off any manner off crcatures. Let us fere God only, let us gyve over our
selves unto him, and abide under his protection, and that done, let us not care
for, nor pass off any thing, for so the spirit off goo admoni heth us by. S.
Paul saying, 1. Cor. 7.
I will that you be with ont all solicitude. And again, care not for any
thing. And by the mouth off S. Peter, 1. pet. 5.
he says, Last your care upon God, for he carethe for you. But peradventure
you will obiecie against me. How dare you now go a bout to persuade us, that we
should not care? Was there ever in all our lyffes a greater occasion off care
ministered the^ there is at this present. Who does not se how some are exiled
out off their natyve coutrye, compassed a bout with miserye, pouertye and
sondrye afflictions, void off all conforte and consolation: on the other side
some impresoned, shut up from all fryndes, acquayntance, and kyndred, abydyng
every moment the sentence off comdemnation, to be gyven over into the hands
off the ha^g men to be executed. Some other have lost all their goods and
lands their howses sealed up, their wyffes and children lyinge upon their
hands void off all releffe and forsaken off the world, beyinge be come an
obloque and a laffyngstocke unto al people, and as it were poynted at with the
finger. And yet you say unto us, that we should not care for any thing. Is it
now time to say, care not at all? Truly my fryndes I have in very deed so
said unto you, and do so say again, for as myche as God, who is your God,
and will show him self to be your God, has commanded you to do so, for he
says plainly, Lare not for any thing. Lan ye now then take care for any off
your affairs, be they never so great with ont offendynge and dysspleasynge off
your God and father? It is not possible. Wherefore I would consayll you to
depend wholly upon him. Who has said, Cast your care upon the lord, and he
will help in the time off need. And on the other side all thought you might
justly be careful for your affairs with out offense, tell me yff it please
you, whereto seruethe all your care? What comodyte does hit bring Truly none at
al. Know ye not that of many cares and great thought taking, there comethe no
thing but dremes? Galomo^ speki^ge in the sprirete in the v. chapter of the
Ecclesiastic. does plainly testify the same unto us, Lykwysse yff we had
dylygently engraven that divine and frutfull lessou that the soune of God does
leave unto us in the end off the.vi. chapter off. S. Matthew, ye should well
persayue that all our care and thought taking cannot in any respect further
the lest bysoues that we have. Will you the for no thing dysquyete your selfs
and break your head, and in so doyinge offend your father, in que^shynge
thereby his fatherly providence and great care that he has over you? Ye allege
that ye are out off your natyve contrye, who sees not how vain this your
allegation ye. Yff ye thought your selfs rahter the childrin off God, then the
sons off mortal men after the fresh, ye would consider that where so ever
you become upon the face off the earth that you are in the contrye and kingdom
off your father, for does not the scripture plainly teach us, that the
earth is the lords etc. Which thing, yff it be true, as there is no thing
more certain, then are we not out off our own contrye where so ever we
become, for that land or contrye wherein we dwell, is our fathers, by creation,
pocession and gift, and it is ours by promys gyven unto us his childerin. Are
not thesse sayings then the blossoms off incredulite? Yes truly, for yff we
did not more savor of the flesh, the^ of the spiret, if we were not more
worldly the^ heave^ly they should new proced out of our mouth. Forther more
if our love were but as perfitly fixed upon our spouse Iescon, as the love of
a faightful wyffe is upon her husband, we would be co^te^ted for his sake to
abandon all, and go where as he is. For what fayghtfull honest woman is there,
that havynge her husband in a strange contrye, and sendynge for her, does not
forth with forsake father-and mother, frynde and acquayntance, goods and
lands, no thing regardyng neither peril, nor pouertye that may happen unto
hy^ so that she may be in the folowshype and company off her husband. And
wherefore?

By cause she louethe him, and has her confidence and trust in him, and is
sure that she shall participate with him, what so ever he has. And ought not
we christeans, (unless we would be reputed unnatural branches, unkind lovers,
and insolent persons) to abando^ and forsake for the love off our heavenly
spouse Jesus Christ, (who has married us unto him self with the ring off
fayght) all wordly and fleshlye pleasure, what, and how many so over they be,
yea and our lyves to. As dyvers vertious wymen have done in time paste as the
histories testifye, for the love off their husbands.

Wherefore now yff your celestial husbond Jesus Thriste for your salvation and
co^modite, and be cause he would make, you like unto him self, does now call
you out off your own contrye, do ye refusse to follow him, which is the author
of lyffe, the preserver from perils, the gyver off all good gyfftes, and the
most fayghtfull lover off our souls, whereas a weak woman would not refusse to
follow her vukynde husband who is no thing else but earth ashes, flesh,
blond and corruption, having no certayntie off his lyffe, nor no full
assurance of his person nor presence. O to mychs ingratitude, O love imperfete,
or rather utterly quenched, or else bestowed upon strange lovers, the very
enymes off thy lovynge spowse. Can there be a greater iniure then this. No
truly. But ye will an swer me and say, It were but a small matter to be out
off our contrye, yff we had any certain dwelling place whereunto we might
repair, but we know not where to be come, nor whyther to go. We never
traueled so far, and the contrye and people is utterly unknown unto us? My
fryndes let it suffice that god of his goodness has hitherto gyven you howsses
to dwell in, for in that respect truly he has done more for you then he did
for his own natural son, who never had any. The foxes (says he) has
holes, Math. 8. Luc 9.
and the birds off the eayre have nestes, but the son aff man has not
whereon to rest his hedd. Do you not se how that the son off God him self had
no earthly ma^sion nor dwelling place off his own, and yet not with standing
he did not complain off any thing, he did not dyscomfort him self. Neither
yet was he at any time destitute off lodging, for his father in whom he only
trusted did provide for him, wherefore, yff that you now beyinge in strange
contryes are with out habitatio^ off your own, reioysse therein, for in that
respect you are confyrmable and like unto the son off God. Behave your self
in this estate, as you know he did govern him self, and it shall happen unto
you, as it did unto him, that is to say, Content your selves with things
present, trust in God, and he will never leve you, nor forsake you. Jesus
Christ also your celestial husband will never forsake you, did ye ever kno^we
any good husband, that in lyme off need did abandon his espowsed wyffe. in
suffeinge her to range at ryote with out having any respect unto her. Jesus
Christ is that only good husband, for he has gyden his lyffe for his wyffe.
Were it possible, now, that he would forsake her in levynge her destitute off
healpe? In mine opinion, it were not possible, his infinite gooddes could not
suffer it. Wherefore no doubt he will provide lodging for you, assure your
selves off that: and truly it is an easy thing, for him to do it, for all
the howses and dwellynges off the world are his, as wytnesset he the prophet
David, who sayethe, The earth and all the plenytude theroff is the lords. For
it is with God, as with a husband that has diverse mansion places, the which
also by the common right off marriage belong unto his wyffe, who causethe his
wyffe to dwell in which house it pleases him, and when he list he causethe her
to remove and to change habitation as he thinks best, and al ways the wyffe
us contented, beying an honest woman and belytynge in the company of her
husband. Then so, Jesus Christ, who is the lord off the v^^uersall world,
who also by fayght has espoused you, Ole. 2.
will have this prerogaty^fe also, na^ly to place you in which of his howses it
pleasethe him best: your part is to obaye, and wyllyngly to dwell in that
place where he will have you. And there to remain, in lea dynge a christean
lyffe, till shuche time as he call you thens unto some other place. The which
thing yff ye are contented to do, the^ do ye pacie^tly follow your vocation,
in gyvynge him thanks for all things, havynge all ways a sure confidence that
he will never leave you vnprovyded, and that ye shall new want a howffe to
lodge in, seeing that for his sake, you have left that which was your own.
For he has so promised us in his gospel, saying, I say unto you off a
truth, the re is no man that does forsake his howsse, pare^tes, brytherin,
Math. 19. Mar 10. Luc. 18.
wyffe or childrin for the kingdom off God, that shall no. ressayve myche more
in this world, and in the world to com, everlastyng lyffe. Are ye in doubt,
that Jesus Christ will not perform unto you this his promys? Doubt it not, for
whereas you, do forgo but one howsse for his sake, ye shall find a great many
off howsses off your fayghtfull brytherin open ready to ressayve you. The lord
will provide for you as he did for his prophet Elias fleyng from the face off
Achab, 9. Reg. 17
out off his contrye, a wydowe off Gerepta, a frynde in a strange land that
shall minister unto your necess^^^s: yea he will provide for you, as he did for
his servant Paul, a true Aquila and a very Pryscills, who will not only be ready
to ressayve you Ito their houses, but also instruct you in a more a^ple
knowledge off the truth as they did Apollo. Wherefore my dear brytherin and
faight full fryndes I most heartily exhort you, that during the time off your
exile, and whylle it pleasethe the lord ye dwell in strange contryes, as it
were in places off progress, that you do lyve ryghtouslye, holely, and as it
be comethe the chyldrin off God: to wit, in all honestye, in true humilite, in
perfyte veryte, in an unfeigned peace, in prompte obedience, incharite not
feigned, in laboring with your habes and in serving one a another, according to
the habylyte that the lord has given you, and in so doing take no thought
how you shall lyve in time to come, or where with you shall be feed and clothed,
leve this damnable and unprofitable care and thought taking unto the infydeles
and idolaters. God your father knows far better then you, wheroff you have
need, and he will gyve it you, in time and place, doubt you not: for he does
noryshe and preserve the yerbes off the earth, the birds off the eayre, and
the beasts off the field, which all are no thing in comparyson off you: Yea
he does also norythe his adversaries ffor whom the world was not made.
Wherefore let it new enter into your thoughts that he will forfake you, but be
off this most certainly assured, that he will all ways provide for you, all
though you are not able to forese and consider the time, when, nor the means,
how. For yff it please him he will assiste yonre necessite by the ministration
off some off his creatures. Yff it please him, he will help you, with out
using any off his creatures, as an instrument there unto: for his almighty
power is not anexed nor bound unto his cre, atures. And therefore my dear
fryndes, the scriptures often times recordethe un to us, that the help off man
is all to gyther vain as says the prophet Sauid, psalm. 59.
that is to say it is all to gyther unprofitable and serves to no use of it
self, with out the lord with saffe to bliss the same. And therefore the
scriptures does often times forbid us, not to put our confidence in men, and
namly in princes, who truly are but men. psalm. 117.
That is to say, they are no thing. For the holy ghost says plainly, that
every one that trustethe in man, Iere. 17.
is accursed. Wherefore we may not seek for help at men, for there is none. We
may not have our confidence in me^, al thought they be kings and princes, and
the governors of kyngdoms and contryes: for yff we trust in men, then do we
no thing else but lean upon a broken reed, Eze. 29.
which will make us fall, and in brekynge, wound our hand and mayme us: that
is to say, it cannot be chossen, but that some myschyffe shall there by happen
unto us. for it lyethe not in men, no not in pryntes, any thing to succore
your calamite, and all though they can, yet will they not. And al though they
could, and would: yet may they not, for as myche as they have vowed the
contrary na^ly, neuerto help you, as long as you seek the glory off God in
his gospel: that is to say, tylshuche time, as before them you deny your
God, your profession and fayght, to save thereby your carnal lyffe. The which
thing in very deed, is no help. but a rewyne: is no commodyte, but a
hyndrance: is no pleasure, but a pain. for what should it profit us, my dear
fryndes, to win all the world, Math. 16.
and then to lose our own soulles? Last a side, cast aside then all
confidence in man, never desire their help, seying that we can not use the
same with out the prejudice of the glory off our lord and God. That is to
say, with out eternal damnation. With draw your cogitatio^s from al
creatures, come a way, and depart with a sure and perfyte fayght. Enter into
the protection off the eternal God your father. Behold him only, as it were,
a part and separated from all creatures. Let it never enter into your
thoughts, that ye should anexe and bind, the infinite bou^tye, wysdom and
power of your eternal God and creator, unto things created. Cousyder that he
was God with out begynynge, before he created and made the word, being only
all mighty, all wysse, and all goodness. And that by making off the world, he
is not become more myghtyer, wyser, or better then he was before. Consider
then, that all though all the creatures off the world did faylle you, at your
need, yet god remains yours, who will all ways help you, and that as well
without the help off any creature, as with the aid off all his creatures to
gyther. Be assured off that. And let our trust be no less in God alone, then
yff he were accompanied with all thosse things that he has created. This is
the true Arche and pyller of a christean fayght, and the-same taken a way,
fayght must needs quayll. Wherefore my dear fryndes put in practysse this
fayghtfull consyderation and I ensure you that you shall find therein shuche a
consolation as hither to ye never tasted, and your affairs shall prosper
better, then yff ye heaped all the carres off the world to gyther for the
same. The lord God, by Jesus Christ his son, comonicate unto you all, his
holy spirete, that in thesse abysmes off wyckednes, and palpable darcknes,
which now is happyned amongst you, he may so co^ducte you, that by a strong
fayght, and sure hope ye may abide in God, and in the profession of his holy
word unto the end. Wyshyng no thing so myche as the acco^ply shyng off the will
off god, al thought it be with the prejudice of the wholl world. Amen.

FINIS.
1 Timoth. 2. It is a true saying: if we be dead with Christ, we shall also
lyde with him. Yff we be paciente, we shall also reign with him. If we deny
him, he also shall deny us. If we beleee not, yet abydethe he fayghtful. For
he cannot deuye him self

Hebr. 12. Stretche forth therefore again the hands that were let down, and
the weak knees and se that ye have straight steps unto your fete, lest any
halting turn ye one of the way.

Hebr. 13. Remember the^ that are in bonds, the^ as though ye were hou^de
with the^. Be myndful of them that are in adversitye. As ye which are yet in
your bodies. Be not carried a bout with diverse and strange le^nynge. Anno. 1556.


