The Civility of Childehode, with the discipline and institucion of Children,
distributed in small and compe^dious Chapiters, and translated out of French
into Englysh, by Thomas Paynell.

Anno. Do. 1560.

To Master Antonie Brown the Son and Heir of the right Honorable Lord,
Antonie Vicount Mountegue, Thomas Paynel sends greeting.
AFter that I had Englyshed this French book incretyng very eligantly and
compendiously of the Civility and good manners of chyldehod and how children
should behave them selves in the Church, at the Table, in the Scole, in the
Chamber, after Dinner and Supper, in commen and pryuate Assembles, to honorable
and private persons, to their Parents and Scolemaysters, what Authors they
should read, and how to repete the^, what raime^t they should were, and how
to use it, what dyligence they should use in their study and when they should
study, what semelye and manerly contenaunce of face gesture of hand and of the
hole body should become them, what recreation and pastyme and what plays they
should use and refuse, and with whom they should play, what they ought to
do, or ever they prepare them selves to go to their rest, and what they
should afterward record and imagine with manyfold other things very mete and
necessary for the educacion and erudition of children. I with my self
reuoluynge and remembrynge how rusticallye and rudely the children of this
noble realm of England in most places be brought up, being ignorant of all
good manners, thought it no lost time nor labor to translate this little book in
to English for the crudicion of children, and to dedicate the same to you a
child, and yet a spectacle to all children of all good civility and pure
manners where with ye do manifestlye show where and under whose wynge ye have
been nourished and brought up, that under the ferula and wynge of your
father, a learned and a noble man, adurned with all humanite and virtue, with
all civility and godly behavior, with wisdom and counsel, with affability
and comely gesture, wherefore it shall be your part from henceforth to ensue and
follow the prudencie and wisdom, the nobilyte and erudicion, the pure and
exquisyte manners and the liberalite of your most noble father: for unseemly it
is the father to be served, and the child vnterned, the father to be lyberal,
and the child prodigal the father to be mylde and meke, and the child ungentle
and churlyshe, Therefore I would exhort you in this your tender age, to apply
and to give your self to honor and to fear god, to erudicion and virtue, to
honor and to obey your parents and elders, and continually to serve God the
geuer of al grace and goodness, fo; so shall ye prosper both spiritually, and
temporally, and obtain the favor both of in nine, and of the immortal God
for ever. Thus our Lord increase you and keep you.

The Ciuilyte of Chyldhod four principal points required to order and to
instruct youth.
THe office to order and to instruct youth, has diverse points, of the which
as this is the first. So it is the principal that the tender sprite and mind
may be seasoned with virtue. The second that he love and learn lyberal arts.
The third, that he be instructed in the manners of doing and actions the which
this life requires. The fourth is, that at the beginning of his age and
years, he accustom him self, unto the Ciuilite of manners, the which thing I
at this present have pryncipally enterprised. For many other and we our selves
also have written many things of the three other poynetes. And although that
the exterior and vtwarde gesture of the body does proceed of the well learned
spyrite and mind, yet we do see that often times it chaunsyth through
uncertain of the precepts yt some times we desire this good grace and gift in
virtuous and well learned men. Nor I will not deny that this is not the worst
part of philosophy, but as men's iugements be now a days, it profyteth and
serves very much to get and to obtain benevolence and amytie, and to cause
the noble virtues of ye soul, to be commendable before the eyes of men.

Modestye and simplicite is required to be in young children.
IT is necessary that in all thing man be both of mind, of body, of gesture
and of raymente and upright, but specialy handsome, modest and simplicite
becomes young children, and among them and above, all other noble infants and
children. But they must be esteemed more noble ye adurne their spirits with
liberal studies, then they which paynte in their scutshons Lions, Egles,
Bulls and Liberds, they have more true nobility in that place of so great
blasynge and arms may take so much of the arms of nobility, as they have
received and learned of liberal arts.

The orberynge of the eyes.
TO the intent than that the sprite and mind of the child well learned may
shine on every side (it thyneth and is seen principally in the face and visage)
his eyes must needs be sweet and peasable, shamefast and restfull, and not
lifted up or ouertwhart, the which is a sign of cruelnes, nor vage, nor
fearful, the which is a sign of folly, and a fault of the brain, nor
squinrynge, nor blinekynge, the which appertain to them which are suspected
and fraudulently go about some treson, nor to much open and enlarged, the
which appertainch to dullardes and fools, nor oftentimes twynkling, which
pertayneth to those yt be inconstant, not wandering hither and thither, the
which pertain to the astonished, for this was noted and blamed in Socrates, nor
to sharp, the which is a sign of anger, nor assygninge, and as it were
apointynge and spekinge, the which is a sign of unchastity, but declaring a
certain quiet, temperat and amiable sprit with all reverence: and truly yt was
not ill said of the aunciente philosephers, that the eyes be the lease of the
soul. The ancient painters do declare unto us, that in times past it was a
singular modesty to behold the eyes half closed, as among certain
Spanyardes, it is reputed gracious and an amiable thing to look the eyes being
abased and inclined. Like wise we learn by the forsaid paynters, that it was
long sense a sign of a wise man to draw in and to close the lips, but that
that is cumly of nature, shall be esteemed goodly and honest before al people, not
with standinge that in these things we must sumtimes be like unto fyshes, the
which do change their color after the thing they recounter and meet with
all, so must we apply our self after the custom of the country. There are
beside these other country. There are beside these other cou^tenaunces of the
eyes that nature has given to some after one sort, and to other after another
sort, the which fall not under our precepts, but that the evil gestures
ofentimes do mar, not only the countenance and order of the eyes, but also of
the hole body.

Contrary wise the gestures which are right and convenient causes that
thing that is semely by nature to be more comely and decent, and that which is
vicious, if they take them not away, will cover and diminishe them. It is
nothing beautiful to behold any man with one eye, for what other thing is
that, but to make him self one eyed. Let us leave this gesture to the hu^nes a
people so called, and to shoters, in crosse-bowes, and to many other artificers.

Straight brows.
THe Brows ought to be straight and not drawn bakwards, the which is a sign
of pride, nor exalted, the which is a sign of arrogance: no hanginge upon his
eyes, the which pertains to dreamers and to those that think evil.

A joyful and merry forehed.
FOrther more let the forehed be joyful and full, shewinge a good and merry
chere, not wrincled and reuen, the which pertains to age, not cumminge and
goinge, for that pertains to hedge hogs, not ouerthwarte and rughe, which
thing pertains to bulls.

A clean nose.
THat there be no sneuill in the Nose, the which is a sign of a foul filthy
people, and Socrates the Philosopher was blamid for this vice, to wipe his nose
with his bonet if he have one, or upon his gown is a rustical and a rude
thing: to wipe his nose with his arm or elbowe, pertains to fyshmongers, nor
it is not more manierly to do the same with his hand, if by and by thou make
clean thy fingers upon thy gown. To receive ye filthiness of ye nostrilles with
an handkercher, is honest, and likewise to turn the body a little if there be
any honest men there, if there be any thing upon the ground after he has wiped
his nose with two fingers, he must trede upon it.

To blow with the nose and to snorce.
TO blow loud with the nostrelles is a filthy thing, and a sign of color, and
yet more filthy to snorte, the which pertains to those that be furious and
without understanding, if they do it customably, for they must be pardoned
that have a high brethe, and do brethe with great difficulty. To speak in the
nose is a thing that men mock at, and it pertains to Storkes and
Elephantes. To shrink up the nose pertains to mockers, and to those that
play the storke backwardes.

To Nese.
IF it chaunse that thou must nese in the presence of sum man, it is a point of
ciuilite to turn thy self a little, and incontinente after that the violence
shall be appeased, to make the sign of the cross upon thy mouth, and
afterward puttinge of thy bonet to salute the^ yt saluted thee, or the^ yt
said, Christ help. For why to nese as to yawne, does wholly take away ye
hearing of ye ears. And afterward to desire and pray them not to be
displeased, or else to give them great thanks.

To say God save you when men neese.
IT is a devout thing to say god save the man when he neseth. If men do it in
the presence of diverse aged men the which say unto some honorable man or
woman, God save you the child ought to put of his cappe.

Forther more to enforce him self to nese more louder or to duble it to show
his force and strength, pertains to those that be glorious: and to retain
the sown yt nature gives, partaineth to folishe and unapt people, the which
praise civility more than health.

Shamefast Chekes.
THat the chekes be died with a certain natural shamefastnes and with such as
is meet and convenient for a noble infant without paintinge or false coleringe,
but yet he must so temper it that it turn not in to great assuance or
boldenes, nor that it bring not a certain astonishemente and dulnes, and as
the common proverb does say. The fourth degree of folly. For some have this
nature so strongly emprented that it makes them like to a parson or man that
rules. This vice is or may be moderate if the child do accustom him self to
live with men yt be elder the^ him self, and if he exercise him self to play
enterludes and comedies. To cause the chekes to swell, is a sign of arrogance,
and to cause them to faul and swage, does pertain to him that disconfort him
self, or is disconfort, the one does declare that the man is glorious and
proud, yt other yt he is a traiter.

The mouth close.
LEt not the mouth be to much shut as his is that fereth to receive the breath
of another, nor yt it be open and gaping as foles have, but that it be close,
the lips kissing each other swetlye. It is also a filthy and a vile thing
oftentimes to put forth the lips and to do as if thou should cherish a
horse with the tongue, although that this thing is to be suffered in great
estates, that go through the midste of a certain company of people, for nothing
misbecummeth them, but we do order and teach an infant.

To Yawne.
IF by chance thou be enforsed to pawn, nor can not turn the, nor go thy
ways, thou must put before thy mouth, either thy napkin, or thy hand, and
make the sign of ye cross.

How one should laugh, and how he should not.
TO laugh at all purposes, and at all things that we see done, does pertain
to fools. Contrariwise, to laugh, at nothing that men do, does pertain to
sad men and to shepish persons. It is an ewil, thing to laughe at vile and
dishonest things. Morcouer one manner of laughinge, and to make a great
laughter that moves all the body, whereof the Greeks call it al moving and
travailing is not decent nor mete for no age, so than it cannot become youth.

It to also a filthy thing when a man laugheth to neye like a horse, nor that
laughter is not very goodly that eular geth ye mouth, and causes the cheeks
as it were to retere, and discovers the teeth, the which laughter is called
the girning of a dog. No man shall express his joy in such manner, to the
end that he show not a dissolute sprit, and that he deforme not his mouth.

These be the words of fools, I piss through laughter, I burst through
laughter, I thought I should have dyed through laughter: or, I sound through
laughter. If any thing chance, where at a man does so laugh, yt it causes
hun to eat again yt he has received, he must cover his face either with his
napkin, or with his hand. To laugh all alone, or without any evident cause, is
attributed to foolishnes. But yet if it so chance, it shall be ciuilly and
well done, to declare the cause wherefore he laughed: or if it be not to be
reveled, he must find some thing, to ye end that no man think yt they mock
hint.

To byte the lyppe.
TO bite the nether lip is vile and dishonest, for it is the gesture of a man
that threatens, and likewise to bite the upper lip. And also to lick the
borders of his lyppes is an uncomely thing. To have the lyppes extended, and as
pressed and ready to kiss one, has been of long time a gracious and a comelye
thing among the Almanes, as their paintinges and pictures declare.

Of drawing and putting ouce the toungue.
HE mocketh some manne that draws out his tongue at him, these snatchers and
gapers should use and do that.

To spitte.
When thou spittest turn thy face aside, to the intent thou spit upon no man. If
thou have cast any ordure or filthiness upon the ground, thou must trede it
out with thy foot as I have said already, to the end that it trouble no man's
heart nor stomach. If it be not lawful for to turn thee, receive and gather
thy spittle into thy handkercher. It is a vile thing to swalow down thy
spittle, as we do see some that spit at every word, not of necessity, but
by custom. Furthermore there be some that do coughe, and that by a usual
custom, such manner of doing does smell and declare a liar, or one yt speaking,
does forge what he should say.

To belche.
OTher at every word do belche with less honesty, the which thing if it
come and draw to a custom in youth, it will continue in age. The selfsame
must be judged of coughing, whereof Clitipho in Tere^ce was reprehended of a
servant. If thou be constrained to coughe, be ware thou do it not before the
mouth or face of a another, and that there be not a fond manner to coughe hier
than nature requires.

To vomit.
IF ye wilt vomit, turn thy self to so other place, for why to vomit is not
ill of it self, but it is a vile thing, if gluttony be the cause thereof.

Clean teeth.
Youth must take heed that their teeth be clean, but to make the^ white with
powder, belongs to maidens, to rub them with salt or alem, is evil for the
gummes, to do this with his urine, belongs to Spanyardes, if any thing
remain between thy teethe, thou must not take it out wc thy knife, nor with
thy nails, as dogs and cattes do, nor with thy napkin, but with a tooth piker
made of a spindle, or with a quill, or with the little bones taken out of ye
spurs of cocks or capons.

To wash the mouth.
IT is an honest thing and a wholesome to wash the mouth in the morninge,
with clean and pure water, but to return often times unto it is foolishnes,
and vncomelynesse. Of the use of the tongue we shall speak in his place.

Of a clean head.
IT is a rustical and a rude thing not to be comb: and that there be a
clenlynes, but not a tyremente of maidens. There must be neither lice nor
nittes. Often times to scratche the head in the presence of other is a thing
not very dece^t nor honest: as to scratch the body with the nails, is a foul
and a filthy thing, and specially if it be done by a custom and not of
necessity.

That the here fall nor hang not upon his eyes, nor upon his shoulders.
Oftentimes to cover his bushe by shaking and casting up of the head, does
pertain to horses that be pompeous and proud. With the hand to turn up yt
here from the forehead an high, is a thing not very fair nor comely: but to
shede them with the hand is more modest.

An upright body.
TO hold down the head and to lift up the shoulders, is a sign of
slouthfulnes. To bow back the body, is a token of arreganey: but to keep it
upright without enforceme^t is comely. That the head neither hang to the one
side nor to the other, for that smells of an hipocrite: except there be a
cause that a man may hold it so, or that some like thing require it. Ye must
govern and rule your shoulders with a just counterpese, and not after the
manner of the Atheniens, to hold up the one, and to let faule the other. For
such manner of countenaunces are dispraised in little children tournynge
themself into nature, difformynge and defilynge all the body contrary to his
nature. And therefore they that of sluggishnesse have taken a custom to crook
the body, shall get a crooked back and a vice that nature has not given
them: and they that have a customed to hang the head on the one side, shall
so harden and give them to that use and manner, that when they be great, they
cannot change it. The tender bodies be like young plants, tho which grow
and ware hard in such sort as thou have bowed and drawn them with stake,
cord, and band. To cast the arms behind the back, betokens an idle
person and a these: nor it is not much better sittinge or standinge to hold
or to set one hand upon his side, the which thing nevertheless to some
men seems fair and goodlye, and to smell of a man of war. All that that
pleases fools, is not yet honest, but that thing that is after reasone and
nature. The rest shall be spoken when we shall come to speak of devices and
purposes, and also of the Table.

Dishonest members to be covered.
DO discover wout necesitie, ye members, unto the which nature has given
shame, ought to be evil to an honest child. And when necessitye
constrains him, he ought to do it with a certain decent shamefastness:
ye and that he have no witness to see them. For the Angels are always
present unto whom shamefast company and keeping of chastity is very greable for
young children. And therefore we must so much the less suffer other to touch
our members, from yt which to turn our eyes, is chastity and honesty.

To retain urine or ventositye.
TO retain urine is hurtful to health, but to make it secretly, is a thing
that keeps him from shame. There be that command that a child should retain
the ventositye of the belly, beholding of his buttocks together, but ceries
this is not a point of Civility to show himself gracious and of good manners,
and to engender a certain sickness, if it be lawful to turn away, and being
al alone to let it go, and avoid it: otherwise after the ancient and old
proverb, he must disguise the so unde by coughyng, they should have
forbidden all this at once not to discharge the belly, considering that it is
more dangerous to keep and hold his wind, than to retain his urine.

How one should sit and stand vpryghte.
TO sit with the knees open, and cast abroad or hold his legs wide or
crooked, does pertayne to those that be brave, and do counterfaite
gentlemen. When thou shall be set, see that thy knees and thy feet be close
together, also when thou do stand, that at the least they be meanly open.
Some do sit after this sort, that they cause the one leg to hang above the
knee. Some other stand upright, having their arms a cross, and their legs
together, the one manner pertains to men that be pensyfe: the other to people
that be foolyshe, and to sit casting one foot upon the left thighe, is the
mood and manner of au^ciente kings, but it is reproved.

In Italy certain men for honor sake do lay one foot upon another, nor
they sustain not themselves but as it were upon one leg, after the manner of
storkes, if this gesture be convenient for little children, I know not.

To incline to do reverence and make courtesye.
LIkewise to incline and bow thy knees after one manner is well lyked, in some
country, it is mislyked, and another in another. Some do bow the knees
together, and some hold them right up: and other somewhat crooked. There be
that esteem yt that manner pertayneth to women: and therefore keeping their bodies
upright, they first bow the right knee, and incontinent after the left, the
which manner is praised in the children of England The French men do bow only
the right knee with a certain sweet turning and moving of the body. In like
things diversity has no repugnance against honesty. It shall be in the will
of each one, either to use the manners of the country, or to cleue to the
manners of strangers, forasmuch as there be men, unto whom the things and
manners of strangers are most pleasant.

Of going.
THat our going be not as it were broken and feigned, nor to hastye: the one
pertains to soft and effemenate persons, the other to those that be furious
and mad. Likewise that it be not wavering from one side to the other, and
therefore let us leave it to the men of war of Swicherlande, and to those
yt esteem it a great ornament to wear feathers in their bonets. There are some
yt have a foolish manner of haltyng when they gooe. Notwithstanding that we
have seen Bushoppes that glorified in such manner of going.

To shake the legs when men do sit pertayneth to fools, as to fyddle and to
make a thousand toys with the hands, is a sign of an unsound and entire
understanding.

Of raiment and of the honest form and facion of the same.
WE have spoken compendiouslye and briefly of the body. Now we shall speak of
the raymente in few words: because that the raime^t in a manner is the body
of the body, and because that thereby a man may conjecture, and give judgment
of the nature and quality of the spirit and mind of men. Notwithstanding
that we can not prescribe nor limit a certain manner and fashion, because the
fortune, riches, or great dignity of every man is not like: and that in all
nations like things are not semely or unseemly. Furthermore because the self
same things please not at all times, or displease: therefore as in other
things, like wise in this we must give somewhat as the proverb says, to the
law, and to the place. And furthermore wise me^ command to serve the time,
yet nevertheless in these varieties me^ find a thing that is of it self
honest or not honest, as things that serve to no use for the which garments
are made.

Long tails or traynes in women's garments.
MEn do deride and mock to see women draw their long tails after them, and
men also be blamed, whether they be conueniente and meet for Cardinals and
Bushops, let other men judge.

Short gowns.
VEry short gowns have been evermore vituperated and blamed, as well in men
as in women: for why the second use of garments is to cover such parts as
can not honestly be showed to the eyes of men. It is said already not to
pertain to man, and also to sauer the feminine sepe to be vngyrded: but now a
days it is no rebuke nor vice to no man, because the shameful parts are
covered with the sherte and hosen, although yt gown does open it self, and
flies abroad with the wind. For this cause the garment is dishonest among al
people, the which is so short, that when thou stoupeste down, it covers
not those parts, the which men do cover for honor sake.

To Iagge and to cut garments.
TO cut and iagge his raiment, they do it yt are out of their wit and mad.

Painted and guarded raiment.
TO use painted and guarded raime^t pertains to fools and apes.

Clenlines in raiment.
IT must be then, that there be cle^lines in raiment after the riches and
dignity of man, and after the country and custom: and that the garment be
not vituperable to the craftesman, nor setting forth a molestiousnes and
arrogancy.

Modesty in garments.
TO young children belongs a garment that is not curious, so it be without
foulnes and filthiness

Clenlinesse and honesty in the use and part of them.
THere be certain that make read the borders of their shertes and of their
coats with a certain perfume of urine, or else they plaster their breasts, and
their sleues with a certain vile covering, and not with plaster, but with the
sneuil and filthiness of their noses, and with ye ordure and spittle of their
mouth. So^e there be whose gown does ha^ge all on one side, unto other it does
fall backwards unto ye reins of ye back and there be unto whom that seems
very fair and goodlye. So that all the garments of the body must be clean,
proper, and well fashioned, likewise they must be after the proporcion of the
body. If thy parents have given thee any ioly and semely apparel, behold it
not tourningre thy eyes unto it, nor make not as though thou were merye and
well content, showing it unto other, for one of these manners pertain to apes,
and the other to pecockes. Let other men look upon thee, and be thou
ignorant that thou art in good order. The more that a great man's riches is,
the more is his modesty and humility agreeable. It is for the poor whom we
must suffer moderatelye to glorify themselves, to the comfort of their
poverty. But the rich man showing forth the sumptuousnes of his raiment,
does reproach other of their misery, and purchases to himself envy.

How he ought to behave himself in the Church.
AT all times and as often as thou do come into the church, discover thy
head, and swetely bowyng thy knees, salute Jesus Christ. Look that thou come
into no church, but with like devotion, thy head being bare, and both thy
knees upon the earth, make thy prayer to almightye god disposing al thy body to
devotion, and thinking ye god is present with innumerable milions of Angels.
And if he that does come to speak to a king being in the company of his
nobility not discovering his head, is of all men esteemed not only rude, but
out of his wit: what is he that has his head uncovered, and his knees up right
there, where the immortal king of kings, and the geuer of immortality is
present with all his celestial spirits, most reverently about him: nor thou
nedest not to care if thou se him not, for other eyes see him, and as certain
it is yt they be present, as if thou saw them with thy corporal eyes, for
the eyes of faith see more certainly, then the eyes of the flesh.

Not to walk in the Church.
ALso it is an indecent thing and an unhonest to walk in the church, and to
counterfeit the Peripatiques, that is to say, Aristotle's scholars, the which
were wont to walk when they disputed. Certes yt pallas, town house, porches,
haules, and market places are conueniente for a man to walk in, and not the
churches, the which are dedicated for divine sermons, for the sacraments, and
for prayers and oracions.

Behold and hear the preacher diligently.
THat the eyes behold the Preacher, and that the ears be atte^tiue, that the
mind and ye heart take heed with great desire and affeccion, and with
reverence not although thou did hear a man, but god speking unto thee by
the mouth of a man.

When one should stand upright or knele in the communion time.
When any man does read or singe the gospel, stand up, and if thou may,
hearken unto it devoutly. When they singe the Simbole, that is to say, Credo
in vnum deum. etc. the Creed, and at these words, et homo factus est, he was
made man, kneel down, humbling thy self at the least in this point, for the
honor of him that being above all the heavens, has abased himself unto ye
earth for thy salvation. When all thy body is disposed to devotion, turn thy
face, and thy heart to god.

An indecent manner of knelyng.
TO touch, the ground with one knee and to hold the other upright, upon the
which the left arm does rest, is the gesture and countenance of an evil
man of war, the which mocking our Lord, said: I salute thee king of the
Jews.

Therefore set down both thy knees, and somewhat abase all the rest of thy
body with a certain veneracion and fashion of honor.

What he should do in the church when there is no communion.
ALL the residue of time, either read somewhat out of some book of prayers, or
else of holy Scripture, or else that thy spirit be thinking or contemplating
upon some celestial thing, or upon god.

Neither to babble nor to turn thine eyes hither and thither in the church.
TO babble or then to devise with him that sits by thee, does pertain to
those that believe not that god is present. To cast and to turn the eyes hither
and thither, does pertayne to those that be out of their wit. Esteem that thou
art gone to ye church in vain, if thou return not from thence better, more
pure and clean.

Of the Table and how a child ought to use and behave himself.
FIrst or ever thou sit down at the Table wash thy hands, and pare thy nails.
At the Table thou must show a certain cherefulnes, to avoid dissolute
babbling. Sit not down until thou have washte, and that thy nails be first
pared, lest there remayn any filthiness, and less thou be called extreme
filthy and proud.

To make water or ever he sytte down.
HE must before he sit down make water, or discharge his belly if ye thing
require it. And if peradventure it chance that thou be to much pressed it
shall be well done first to unloose thy points, because yt thou should do it
with less honestye at the Table.

To be joyful and merry at the table.
AND wiping thy hands, cast by and by awan all molestiousnes and heaviness
that thou have in thy heart, for thou must not be heavy at the Table, nor
make none other man sad nor heavy.

To bless and say grace and how.
IF any manne command thee to say grace, prepare thy face and thy hands to
devotion, lokynge upon the most honest man of ye assiste^ce, and naming Jesus
bow thy knee, if this be given and appointed to another, hearken and answer
with like devotion.

Humility at the Table.
GEne quietly the highest rowme to another, and being invited to ascend more
higher, humbly excuse thy self: but if any man of authority do diverse times
and in good earneste co^mande thee, obey him with shamefastness, to the end
that thou seem not to be opinatiue in place to be eiuill and well manerd.

The countenance of arms and hands.
Being set hold both thy hands upon the Table, not joined together, nor
upon thy trencher: for there are some that foolish lie do hold the one or
both in their bosom. To lean with one elbow or with both upon the Table, is
granted to those that through age and sickness are feeble: and thou must
dissemble the like, but not follow in this certain delicate courchers, the
which do think, that all that they do becomes them. In the mean while
thou must take heed that thou hurt no man with thy elbowe, nor that thou
pushe nor thrust him that is next thee, and that with thy feet thou smite them
not, that are on the other side of the table.

The countenance beying set in chair, or in any other place.
TO move himself in his chair, and to sit now upon the one thigh, and
now upon the other, is like unto a man that stroke for stroke does lose his
belly, or that laboreth to lose it. And therefore the body must be kept upright
with a just measure.

Upon which arm we ought to hold and bear the napkyn, and when it is
convenient and mete to eat bare headed or covered.
IF they give thee a napkine, lay it upon thy left arm. If thou take thy
repast with great and noble men, look that thy head be well comb, put of thy
bonet, except the custom of the country be otherwise, or that the authority
of some does command thee the contrary, unto whom it were no honesty to
disobey.

When a child should sit at the table, and when he should not.
They have in some place even of custom that the children shall eat at the
end of the table bare headed, he must not set himself, but when he is
commanded, nor he shall not tarry there to the latter end of the repast: but
when he has eaten sufficiently, taking away his trenchour, and bowinge his
knee, he must do reverence principatly unto him ye is most honorable among
the assistence.

Glass and knyfe.
THe glass and the knife being clean must be laid upon the right side, and
the bread on the left. Cut bread with a knife, and eat it with reverence.
Leave of for the delicatenes of certain courchers the manner and use to break
the bread with ye ends of thy singers, laying thy hand upon it. As concerning
thy self, cut it gentlemanly with thy knife, not cutting of the cruste round
about above and beneath, for that does sauer a delicate person. Our elders in all repastes did eat bread with great reverence as a holy thing: and of that
comes the custom of this time, to kiss the bred, if perchance it be
fallen upon the ground.

When, how, what, and how much a child ought to drink at his repaste.
BY and by to begin ye repaste with drink is for drunkardes, ye drink not for
any thirste, but by a custom: nor it is not only a dishonestie, but also a
great noiaunce of the health of the body. He must not drink incontinent after
he has supt up and eaten his porage, and yet less, when he has eaten milk.
It is neither helthsom nor honest for a child to drink above twyse at one
repast, or at ye most thryse. That he drink once when he has eaten a while
of the second mess, and specially when he is dry, furthermore about the end
of ye repast, he drinking must drink genely and swetely, not gluttingly nor
blowyng as horses do. The wine and beer that makes one dronken as much as
wine, as they do hurt the health of children, so they do defame and dishonor
them. Water is convenient for the age that is hot: but if the nature of the
country, or some other reason does not suffer him to drink it, let him use
small bear, or some wine yt is not burning, and that it be well tempered with
water. Or else here are the retribucion and rewards yt follow those yt love
wine. Yelow teeth, and as it were rusly, hanging cheeks, blered eyes, a dulnes
of understanding, and to be short, age before age, and before his time. Swalow
down thy morsels or ever you drink nor com not nie ye glass with thy mouth,
before thou have wiped it with thy napkin specially if any man offer thee his
glass or if men drink in a common cup. It is a filthy thing to look aside
wha^ thou art drinking, so it is a dishoneste thing to turn thy head upon thy
back, after the manner of storkes, for fear yt there should remain any thing
in the goblet. Thank him swetely that shall pray thee to drink, and in taking
yt glass, and in tasting it a little, fain thy self to drink wisely, as
though thou were not a thirst, and this shall be enough for him that
dissembleth and can play the courcher, and he shall promise to make an end,
wha^ he waxes greater, if he that did drink unto him be so rude, that he
constrainde him thereto.

Modesty at the coming to the table.
THere be that scantly can tarry till they be well set to eat their meat, and
this pertains to wolves, and to them yt can scacely tarry till the meat be
taken out of the pot. By the means whereof thou shall never put thy hand first
into the dishe, nor that only for this cause that it declares thee to be a
glutto^ and famished, but also because there is oftentimes danger therein: for
he that has put whote meat in his mouth, is constrained to cast it out
again, or to burn his tongue if he swalowe it down, so it follows that one
or other does mock him, with the evil that he has suffered.

To moderate his appetite, and to avoid lykeryshnes.
MEn must tarry a certain time, to the intent that the child learn to moderate
his appetite. To yt which intencion Socrates being now very old, would never
drink of the first cup. If the child be set with his supertours, that he put
his hand last into the dish, nor that he do it not, ercept he be first
commanded. To temper and to put his fingers in sawees, caudelles, or brotthes,
pertayneth to rude and those that be brought up in villages: and therefore
they must take the thing that they will have with a knife, without chosyng it
in the dyshe, as they do that are likerythe, but he must take that, that by
chance is before him. The which fashion: nay be learned of Homere, the which
does often times speak thus. They boldly put to their hands unto the meat
yt is set before them. Likewise if that, that is before the child be an
exquisite morsel, he must leave it for another, and take the next. So than as
this is the deed of a likerish person, to train his hand on every side of
the dishe, so in like manner it is scacely honest to turn the dithe that the
best morselles may come toward thee.

To receive the thing that is presented with ciuilitye.
IF any man give thee a good morsel, after that thou haste excused thee,
receive it, but when thou have cut a certain portion for thy self, restore the
rest to him that gave it thee or give part to him that is next unto thee. That
thing that cannot be received with the fingers, must be received with the
trencher. If any man give thee of a tarte, or of a pasty, receive it with thy
trencher. If the thing that is given thee be liquide and fleting take it, and
after that the sawcer be wiped and made clean with a napkin restore it.

To lick his fingers, or to wype them upon his gown.
ALso it is an uncivil thing to lick his fingers, or to wipe them upon his
gown: and suddenly to swalowe down hole morselles does pertayne to storkes
or to gapers. If there be any that does cut or carue, it is an unmannerly
thing to offer or to put forth thy hand or thy trencher before he proffer
thee any thing: for it seems that thou wouldeste take that away, that is
prepared for another. Thou must receive that is presented and given

To cast honestly away that a man will not swalow.
IF perchance thou have taken any thing that is not good to swalow, turning
thy face to some other part, eiect it. To take again the meat that is half
eaten, or the bones that are laid apart upon the trencher, is blamed. Beware
thou cast not the refuse of thy trencher under the table, lest thou defile the
place or to lay them upon the table clothe, nor within the platter, but to
separate and lay them on one of the corners of thy trencher, or put them into
the sawcer, yt which in some places they do give expressly to put in the
refuse.

To make clean the shell of an egg.
TO make clean yt shell of an egg with thy fingers is a rediculous and a thing
that men laughe at: and to do it putting thy tongue into it, is yet more
rediculous. It is done more properly with thy knife.

To gnawe bones.
TO gnawe bones does pertain to dogs, to make them clean with a knife is a
civil thing.

To take salt with a knife.
MEn do count by a common proverb, three fingers put wtin yt salt celler, to be
yt arms of villains. Ye must take with a knife as much salt as ye have need of.
If the salt seller be to far of, thou putting forth thy tre^cher must ask
it.

To lick the dishe.
TO lick the dishe with thy tongue, or thy trencher where sugar was or some other
likerishe thing, does pertain to cattes, and not to me^.

To cut meat in small morselles, and to chamme it well, or ever thou swalowe
it.
THat the child do cut his meat in small morsels upon his trencher, and that
incontimently he do put bread unto it, well chammed before he send it to the
stomach: for this thing does not only profit unto honesty, but also to the
health of the body. There be that for a truth do rather devour, and as
gluttons do swalow than eat, and even so as though a man should carry them
and bring the^ to prison. Such gredines is like unto them that stele and rob
the thing that they do eat. There be that at once do put so much in their
mouths yt their chekes be blown up and swell on every side like beasts:
other do open their jaws so wide when they eat, yt they make a noise as it
were hogs. Other through a feruente heat to eat, do blow with their
nostrelles as though they should be strangled.

Another to drink nor to speak having thy mouth full.
TO drink or to speak wha^ ones mouth is full, is neither honest nor yet
without danger. It must needs be that the good purposes spoken one after the
other must in the mean space break the continual eating.

To maintain honest gesture in eating.
THere be that continually do drink and eat, nor yt because they could not
otherwise maintain their gestures, if they scratched not their beds, if they
piked not their teeth, if they made not some toys with their hands, if they
plaide not with their knives, if they cought not, if they spitted not. Such
manner of doings proceed of a rustical shame and behavior like unto folly. We
must pass over this molestiousnes and give head and harken to other men's
devices, if opportunity do not suffer us to speak.

Not to be pensifull and heavy at the Table.
IT is unseemly and an unmannerly thing to sit at the table as pe^sife and
heavy. Ye shall see some so foolish and so dreaming yt they hear not what
other men say, nor feel not yt they eat, and if ye call them by their name,
they seem to be awaked from some great sleep, their hearts are so much set
upon eating.

Not to behold what another man does eat.
IT is a dishonestie to turn yt eyes about the table, to see what every manne
eats: nor he must not hold nor look long upon any of the assistence. And
it is furthermore more dishonest to behold with the corner of the eye those
that be on every side of thee. It is a very honest thing turning of the neck
to behold the thing that men do at another table.

Not to report the thing that has been freely spoken at the Table.
IT is not fair nor honest, not only for a child, but also for no other to
report any thing yt has been freely spoken or done at the table.

Modesty in speaking and laughyng.
When the child shall drink or eat with his superiors, he shall never speak,
if necessity constrain him not, or if he be not invited of some manne to
speak. That he smile most swetely at those things that shall be spoken
merely. That he never laughe at filthy and vile words, but frown, if he that
spoke those words by a man of dignity, and make as though he hard them not,
nor understood them. Silence does bring honor to women, but more to little
children. Some do answer, before that he which speaks to them has made an
end of his purpose: and therefore it bappeneth often times that he which does
answer is scorned, and yt he gives place to the aunciente proverb. Thou
reenters the pykes, that is: you answers nothing to yt matter. The great and
very wise king does teach us this, and does attribute to folly to answer
before thou have heard and certes he hears not at all, ye does not
understand him that speaks unto him: therefore let him hold his peace for a
while, until he repete of himself the thing that he has spoken, But if he will
not, but does press him to answer, ye child shall pray him most humbly to
pardon him, and that it would please him to repete again yt he has spoken.
When he has understood the demand and question, he must a little bethink
himself, and than answer him briefly and joyfully.

Not to trouble the good chere with molestious words.
WE must speak nothing at the Table, that shall trouble yt good chere. To
touch the good name of any manne is a very evil deed. Nor he must not renew
his heaviness to no man.

Blame not the meats that be present, nor praise them not to much that be
presented.
TO blame the meats that be set upon the table, is esteemed an uncivil and an
unmannerly thing, nor it pleseth not him that receued you to his diner. If the
things be thine yt the banquet is made of, as it is a civil thing to excuse
the small preparacion and entreating, so is it an unsavory sauce for the
assistence, to praise the meats, or to declare what they did cost thee.

Manerly to dissemble the folly of other men.
IF there be any at the table, that through foolishenes does any thing
rudely, we must rather inwardly dissemble ye thing, the^ to mock thereat.

Liberty at the table.
Liberty must be had at the table. It is a vile thing and vituperable as
Horace does say, if a man has unwisely or unawares spoken any thing at the
table to discover and open it. All that is done or said, must be imputed to
the wine, to the intent thou hear not the greeks law. I hate the geste that
is memoratiue and myndefull.

To rise from the Table when nature is satisfied.
IF the repast or diner be longer than the age of a child requires, and
seems to draw to superfluity, by and by if thou have satisfied and contented
nature, withdraw thy self either secretly, or demanding and asking leave.

Wise moderacion at the beginning of the nourishment of the child.
THey that constrayne the child to endure and suffer hunger, truly after my
opinion and mind they are foolish, nor they are not much less foolish that
burste nie unto the maunger. For as one of these manners does weaken the force
of the little child likewise the other does obfuscate ye spirit. Ye must learn
a certain moderacion eue^ from the beginning. Ye must feed the body of the
infant or child with out filling of him entierly: and this must be done more
oftener than largely.

There be that cannot tell when they be full but when their bellies do swel,
so that they be in danger to burste, or to vomit. They also do hate their
children the which notwithstanding they be young and tender, do let them sit
in a manner all night at the table.

To take away his trencher and refuse, and when he rises from the table to
salute the company.
IF than thou must rise from a repast or diner yt shall be to long, take away thy
tre^cher with the refuse thereof, and when thou have saluted him yt seems the
most honorable of ye company and afterward all the other together, go thy
ways: but return shortelye again, to the end it shall not seem that thou
did rise to play, or for some other thing not so honest. When thou art
returned again, if need be sit down or stand vprighte before the table
reverently, as one that attends if there shall be any man that will command
thee.

Wisdom in serving.
IF thou serve, or do take away beware yt thou defile no man's gown with
any thing either with brother, or with a caudel, or with any other thing.

To snuff the candle.
BEing willing to snuff the candle, arise first from the table, and with thy
foot tread upon that, that thou haste snuffed, that no evil sauer offend the
nose. If thou give or turn any thing, take heed thou do it not with the left
hand.

To say grace.
When thou art commanded to say grace, dispose thy self as ready when time
shall be to say it, and that every manne hold his peace. Then thy face must
be reuere^tly and constantly turned toward him that sits vppermoste at the
table.

Of Metinges and intertayninge.
To turn from the way, and to give place and reverence to persons worthy of
honor: and not to disprayse the unknowen.
IF thou meet with any man in thy way the which for his age is venerable,
or reverend for his holiness or grave for his dignitye, or otherwise worthy of
honor, look thou remember to give him place, to turn thee and to make him
way, putting of thy bonet reverently, and somewhat bowing thy knee. That the
child never say thus: what have I to do with one that I know not? what have
I to do with one that never did me good? This honor is not done to man, for
his merits and good deeds, but unto god. God by Solomon has so commanded,
the which has commanded to do honor, and to stand up before an aged
person. He has also commanded it by Saint Paul, to give double honor to
priests: and in brief, to do honor to all those to whom honor is due,
comprehending also the eathnike and painims magistrates and governors. And if
the Turk had dominion over us (that god forbid) we should syn if we should
refuse the honor that is due to such dignity. I hold my peace at this time
of fathers and mothers, unto whom after and next unto god, ye first honor is
due. And no less is due unto preceptors and scholemasters, yt which as it were
do engender the spirits of men and instruct them.

Reverence unto our egalles.
FUrthermore this word of Saint Paul ought to take place among our egalles,
and such as bet like unto us, preventing (says he) one another in doing of
honor. He that does prevent to do honor to him that is like unto us, or to
our inferior is made never the less, but more civil, and therefore more
honorable. He must speak reverently, and in few words with his superious,
with his egalles amiablye and gently.

To hold the bonet with the left haude.
SPeakinge or when thou dooest speak, the left hand must hold the bonet, the
right hand being or swetely lying upon his nauil, or else the which is esteemed
more honest, the bonet hanging upon both his hands joined together, and the
two thu^mes apearing, shall cover the upper part of ye girdel. To hold his book
or his bonet under his arm holes, is a rude thing. The child must have a
certain shamefastnes that must give him a grace and become him, and not to
astonysh him.

To behold him peasably and simplye unto who^ we speak.
THe eyes ought to behold him unto whom thou speak, but peasably and
simply, showing no manner of lasciuiousnes, or of euylnes. To hold down the
sight, or to look a tosyde, brings suspicion of an evil conscience. To
look a tone side, is like one that wills and means evil. To turn the
face hither and thither, is a sign of lightness. It is a foul thing to
change the face into diverse sorts, so that thou wrincle now thy nose, now
with thy foreheade, or now to lift up thy brows, now to move thy lips,
and that thy mouth be now open, and afterward shut. Such fashions do
show a likelihode of a spirit like unto Protheus, yt which was wont to
change him self into diverse forms. It is also a foul thing to cast the
here by moving and shaking the head, to cough without necessitye, to spit, or
to scratche his head, to dig in his ears to wipe his nose, to scratch his
face with his hand, for that does resemble him that wipeth away his
shamefastnes, to rub the nape of the neck, and to draw in the shoulders, yt
which thing we see in some Italiens.

To speak by signs is unseemly for a child.
TO deny in turning the head, or shaking it to call another, and to the intent
I speak not of all, to speak by signs although at somtinie it become a man,
yet it becomes not a child. It is a foul thing to play we the arms, to
fiddle with the fingers, to stand a tipto, and to be short, not to speak with
the tongue, but with all the body, is the property of turtle doves, or of fair
tails, and well aprochynge unto pies.

A sweet voice, a peasable, an vndersta^dful, and not to speak to hastelye.
THe voice must be sweet and peasible, not high, the which thing pertains to
paisans nor so low nor so soft, that it cannot come to the ears of him that
thou do speak unto. That the speech and words going before the thought be
not to hasty, but al at leisure, and so that it may be understood. For if
that take not wholly away the natural brutishnes, and a certain impediment of
speakinge, yet at the least it does mitigate and moderate it for the most part,
considering that ye brutish and to hasty speech has engendered in many men the
vice of the tongue, the which nature had not given them.

Often times to repete the honorable title of him to who^ we speak.
SPeaking to a man it is a civility oftentimes to repete his honorable title.
There is nothing more honorable nor more sweet than the name of the father and
the mother. There is nothing more amiable than the name of a brother and a
sister. If thou know not the particular titles of every man, all learned men
ought to be honorable masters. All priests reverend fathers, all that are
like unto thy self brothers and friends, to be short, all men unknown
seignours, all women unknown, danies.

Not to swear at all, and not to speak fylthelye.
IT is a vile thing and an unhonest to hear an oath out of the mouth of a
child, whether it be in sport or in good earnest. What is more vile than the
custom, whereby in some countries at every word, and likewise the maidens do
swear by the bread, by the wine, and by the candle, and to be short, what is it
yt they swear not by? That the child mingle not his tongue among, and with
vile words, and that he hearken not unto them, finally nor to all that, that
does discover and open it self unhonestly to the eyes of man, and does present
it self indecently to his ears.

If ye case require that thou must name some shameful member, thou must
signifye it by some modestius disguysing. Furthermore if any thing chance that
may trouble the heart, as if any men do speak of vomiting, of a iakes, or of
a turde, he must pray him that it displease not his ears.

To gaynsaye with modesty, and without quarellyng.
IF he will gaynsay against any thing, yt he take heed he say not, ye say
not truly, specially if he speak to an aged person, but first to pray him
that he will not be displeased, and say: I understood it otherwise of such a
man. A well manered child will never quarrel with any man, and namely with his
equalles, but rather if the thing com to debate shall give it over as won, or
else report him to some arbiter or vnpere.

Not to prefer himself above any person, nor to boast himself of any thing
nor blame no other, nor to break no man's purpose nor co^municacion nor to
quarrel.

THat he prefer not himself, nor auaunce himself of the things that he has,
that he reprehende not the dooinges of other, yt he blame not the spirit or
manners of other nations, that he reuele not the secrets ye men has told him,
that he set not forwards nor sow no new rumors, yt he bespot no man's
renoume and name, yt he blame not the vice which is given by nature: for that
is not only iniuryous and inhumaine, but also foolysh, as if a would call him
that is blind, blind: or a crepil, a crepel: a blincard, a blincarde: a
bastard, a bastard: by these means it shall be and happen, that he shall
find love without envy, and friends like unto himself. To break the
communicacion of one that speaks, or ever he has made an end, is an uncivil
and an unmannerly thing That the child take no rancoure or question with any
man, that he show a certain swetenes to every man, not withstandinge that he
receive few to his enterior and secret familiarity, and that with great
choice and eieccion.

Not to reuele and open his secrets to any man.
NOtwithstanding this, that he never tell to any person yt thing that he would
should be kept close and hidden, for this is but mockety to look for faith and
trust of silence in another, the which thou canste not keep to thy self,
Certes no man has the tongue so continent, but that he has some man unto whom
he shows his secrets. This is a thing most sure, to do nothing whereof thou
may have shame if it be disclosed.

Not to be curious of other men's doings.
BE not very curious of other men's doings, and if thou have seen or perceived
any thing, make as though you do not know yt thou know. To look upon,
and with the corners of thy eyes to behold the letters, the which be not
offered thee, is an uncivil and an unmannerly thing. If any manne open his
coffer and the chests of his Iewelles in thy presence, stand back, for it is
an vnmanerlye thing to look into it, and yet it is more to withdraw or take any
thing away. If thou perceive that there shall chance any secret purpose or
matter among certain men, draw back with out making of any semblaunce, nor
meddle not with no such purpose, without thou be called.

Of play. Myrthe in play without being to much opinatiue, and lying.
IN honest plays there must be a certain lustines and mirthe, so there be no
sticking in opinions the which is the mother of debates: and that there be no
disceit nor lying: for of these small beginninges, come greater injuries and
malice. He gayneth more honestly from debate, than he that obtayneth or wins
the thing troubling himself by debate.

Go not at al against the arbiters, nor against them that have judged ye game
If thou play with those that know not the play, so that thou may win
continually, suffer thy self to win sometimes, so that the play may be more
pleasant, and more cherefull. If thou play with thy inferiors and of less
degree than thou thy self, be ignorant and forgette that thou art of a hyer
degree than they are. Men must play to refresh their spirits, and not for
gain.

The nature of the child is known in play.
MEn say that the nature of children does never more appear than in play. If
the spirit and mind of any man be inclined to lie, to noise, to anger, to
violence, to arroga^cie, the vice of nature does show it self in play. And
therefore that the child of good nature be no less like himself at play, than
at the table.

Of the chaumber, and of those things yt me^ ought to do there.
To avoid chatteryng and noise in the chamber and bed.
Silence, shamefastnes, and also simplicity, are praised in the chamber: but
crying out, evil noyses, and prattling, are not honest, and much less in bed.
Whether it be wha^ thou dooest vnraye thee, or when thou do rise, remembering
shamefastnes, beware thou discover nothing to the eyes of other, that both
custom and nature would it should be covert. If thou have a common bed with thy
companion, be, still when thou art laid, and in removing thy self, uncover him
not nor be not grievous unto him plucking his couerlet from him.

Pray first or ever thou sleep, and when thou rysest.
Or ever thou lay down thy head upon the pillowe, make the sign of the
cross upon thy forehead and breast, commending thy self to Jesus Christ, with
a little prayer. Do the self same in the morning when thou do rise, bep
inning the day with prayer, for you canste not begin with a better presage or
sign.

To wash his face, his hands, and his mouth.
As Soon as thou have been at ye privy, do nothing until thou have washed
thy face, thy hands, and thy mouth.

To be like thy parences in good manners and honestye.
IT is a filthy thing to those that God has given the grace to be well borne,
not to answer and be like their parents in manners and honesty. They who^
fortune has willed to be of the common forte of people and low borne, and in
the countreye, they must the more enforce themselves to recompense that with
elegantnesse, clenlines, and properties wherewyth fortune has envied them. No
man ca^ choose himself a father, mother, or country: but yet every man may
forge him self a good mind and good manners. I will now instead of a
conclusion (...) a certain small rule, the which as me thinks is in a manner
worthy of the first place.

Easilye to pardon and amiably to reprehend the faulted of other men.
THe greatest part of civility is (so thou fail not therein) casily to
pardone other men's faults: nor thou must love thy friend nevertheless, although
he have certain rude manners and evil favored conditions: for there are yt in
other perfeccions do recompense the rudenes of their manners Furthermore we
give not these rules as though me^ could not be good wtoute the^. If thy fre^d
do fail through ignorance in any thing that seems to be of importance, it is
ciuily done, swetelye and secretly to monish him. I would that this gift
such as it is, may be given by thee my dear son to all other children, to
this end that by this present thou may obtain and get thee the love of
thy companions, and that thou cause them to have in recommendacio^ the study of
liberal arts and good manners. The benignity of Jesus Christ, keep and
increase continuallye from better to better the noble and good lykelyhoode of
virtue that thou representeste.

The end of the civility of childhoode.
The disciplyne and institucion of children.
How he must rise in the Morning.
Ovid does say, that to watch in the night makes the body, if it be moist.
subtle.
Therefore above al things we must have a respecie to steep, for fear that it
be not less than reason requires, or longer than pertains unto it. It
suffiseth the^ for a child to have slept seven hours. Then first of al rising
from thy bed, thou shall begin the day in a good hour, in ye name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, commending thy self to Jesus
Christ with the Lords prayer. Thou shall give him thanks that it has
pleased him to give the this good night. Furthermore thou shalt pray him to
give thee likewise all the day in good prosperity: less thou fall into sin.
Incontinent after yt thou be come into the presence of thy parents, bid good
moro we. Afterward comb thy head and wash thy hands and thy face, to
the^tent thou may go to schole. Before you enter in you must pray Jesus Christ
to give thee his holy spirit, considryng ye whatsoever is enterprised without
his aid and help, is wholly unprofitable. Yet that notwithstanding leave not of
to study in the mean while as though he ought not to help thee at all wtoute
great labor. Piety ought to be the principal point of the child, the which
is no other thing but the true service of god, which does lie in faith, love
and in the assured hope of god.

Of the diligence that should be kept in the schole.
HEre with a good mind, and that thou do, let it be done withal thy heart.
Answer wc shamefastnes. Reprehe^d not evil things bitingly but rather modestly.
Beware above al things to be corrected and beaten merytoriously. Offend not
thy master neither in word nor deed, nor thy companions. Be more ready to
teach, than to overcome him that disputes against thee: make thy heart a
Library of Jesus Christ readyng continuallye. Learn from thy childchode holy
Scripture. Take also a task appointed to be red ordynarily. Nor go not to thy
bed, until thou have first replenished thy spirit with some fair sentences.
If at any time thou haste left out any thing of thy task, conbe^ne thy
self in some ame^des. Learn you by certain arts to accustom and to give thy
self to those things that thou must express. In ye mean while you must read
ye most approved authors. That there pass no day that thou get not some thing
to ware better, for it is a deuilishe thing only to study eloquence to ware
better learned in science, and not to be better. Truth it is, that eloquence is
profitable if virtue govern it, so that the manners of the orator be such ye
persuade, and not yt oracio^. These be ye authors of yt which me^ learn
eloquence. Cicero, Terence, Gellius, Quintilian, and Saluste. Turn those yt
principally we must follow in eloquence, as the first to speak well.
Nevertheless, I have perceived yt certain do disprayse Terence, and forbid
that he should not be red to children, but they be such that never understood
Terence well. Nor I also did never approve commonly to read all Poets, and
without chose of them. It is also expedient from youth to learn at least way
the first foundacions of liberal sciences, and likewise ye geographie of
stories, and to join the^ to tongues.

Of the return and coming from the school
BEing come from the schole, go hastily home without any tarying by the way.
And if there be any service to do unto thy parents, do it diligently. But
if thou have leisure to repete particularly the thing that was red thee in the
schole, do it, for there is nothing more precious during this life, than time.
Think also with thy self, that it cannot be recovered again, and that it is
lost and passes away sodainlye. When the hour of dinner aprocheth, lay the
table.

To prepare to lay the table.
MAke ready the table at ye time accustomed: but before thou do dress it,
wash diligently the glasses. First thou must lay the table does upon the
table, than the Latin circle, and consequently the salt celler, and finally the
bread. As touching ye glasses, do after the custom of the country, for in
that thing al countries are variable.

The consecracion of the table by Saint Chrysostom
BLessed be thou O lord god, that do feed me from my youth, and that do
nourish all creatures, fulfill our hearts with joy and gladness, that we
having sufficientely enough may abound in all good works through our savior
Jesus Christ with whom thou reignest in glory, honor, and kingdom with the
holy ghost through out all worlds. So be it. Afterward you shall say. Our
father which art in heaven. etc.

Another consecracion.
HE that through his goodness nourishes all things, bless and sanctify all
his that is set upon the table, and that that shall be set.

To take up the table.
YE must take up the table eue^ as ye prepared and laid it. First ye must take
away the trenchers, and afterward the salt seller with ye salt, and than the
chese must be taken away before al other things ye serve to make an end of
the feast and diner, and finally with bread thou must take away the table
clothe.

Grace after the repaste.
GLory be given to the Lord, glory to the holy one, glory to thee, O king, for
that thou have given us this refeccion, fill us with joy and gladness in thy
holy spirit: yt we may be found worthy to be received into thy presence, and
that we be not ashamed and confused, when thou shalt render to every one of
us after his works, so be it. Our father which art. etc.

Another grace.
O Heavenly father we give thee thanks that by thy unspeakable power and
might, have created all things, and do govern the universal world by thy
wonderful wysdom, nourishyng and genynge vigure and strength to all creatures
through thy infinite goodness, grant if it be thy pleasure to thy infants to
drink with thee above in thy kingdom the drink of immortality, the which
thou have promised and prepared for those yt with true heart do love the through
thy son Jesus Christ, so be it. Our father. etc.

Countenance in serving at the table.
Keep thy self upright with thy fete and holdyng them well together, take
dilygent head yt there lack nothing. And when thou must fill, give, or set upon
the table, or take away any thing, do it honestly. Wha^ you must do a message in
any place, come shortly and incontine^tly again. Bless god, and say ye
co^secracion and grace before and after thy repast. And being in company never
trouble ye purpose or co^municacio^ of any other man, but if thou be questioned
wat answer in few words. Take heed yt through obliuiousnes thou mingle not ye
pots or cups filling one for another, if there be diversity of wines. Forget
not the salt, never set upon the table the thing that is cut or broken, when
ye shall chance to suppe by night, be diligent to snuff the candles, that there
enter not into their noses yt sit at ye table any evil sauer. Take heed thou
put not out ye candle wha^ thou do snuff it. Accustom not thy self to
eat yt is taken from the table, or yt they set up in ye house. After that
grace is said, and that all things be taken away, if thou have leisure pass
thy time at some honest play with thy companions, until that the hour to go to
schole, do quite thee of ye plate.

Of the countenaunces and good manners that must be kept at the table.
IF it chance also yt thou art set at the table, have this in recordacio^
and remembrance: first yt thy nails be well parde. Wash thy hands, keep thy
self upright. Approve and consent to yt that thy host does say that speaks,
Fly al dronkennes. Be sober: show thy self so joyful and merry, yt thou
remember what is conueniente for thy age, be evermore the last of all other to
put thy hand in the dish. If a man give thee a good morsel, refuse it modestly,
if thou be enforced take it with giving of thanks. And when thou have taken
alitle piece or portion thereof, give him the rest, or to some other yt sits
next unto thee, but yet never give any thing to another man's wife yt is
present. Nor like wise thou shall give nothing to any prince or great Lord. It
shall be well suffered to cut and distribute ye best morsels to thy parents and
friends. If any man do serve thee with any delicate thing, as with the liver of
fyshe, or with any other thing, thou shalt taste part thereof, and distribute
the rest. If any man drink unto the, thank him ioifully, and drink a little. If
thou be not a thirst, yet at leastwaye put the glass to thy mouth. Smile upon
them that speak, and as for thy self speak not a word, if no man ask thee
any thing, if men speak of dishonest purposes and things, smyle not, but
turn thy face to some other place, asthough you hardest nothing. Strive with
no man at the table. Put thy self before no man. Boast not thy self of that yt
is in thee. Dyspraise not other men's things. Be gracious and amiable to thy
co^panio^s which are of low birth. Accuse no man. Be you no babbler. And so
doing you shalt find laud and praise without envy with thy egall friends. If
thou see yt thy repaste continue to long, take thy leave, and after yt thou
have saluted the assistence go from the table. Never cut bread against thy
breast. And cutting it with a knyfe, put not thy little fyngers unto it. Gate
that, yt is set before, or nigh unto thee. And being wyllyng to take somewhat
that is within the platter, and with ye point of thy knife, beware thou spyll
not ye meat like a hog upon thy self. Nor meddle not to turn up yt
princypally yt is within the platter, eating of soft or poched eggs, first cut
thy bread in small pieces, but beware that there fall nothing upon it. Eat thy
egg hastily, and afterward lay ye shells which are not broke into ye
platter. Drink not wha^ thou do eat thine egg, and in eating thereof, look
well upon ye for most part of thy clothyng, lest you bespot the^. If thou eat
any sauce, never lick thy fingers. Nor as long as the repaste, dureth wipe
not thy lips nor thy nose with thy sleue. Nor wype not thy nose but with an
handkercher manerlye and modestly. Nor spit not rubbing thy spittle with thy
fingers. Be well ware that thou put not thy fingers wtin ye salt seller, nor
te^per the^ not within ye sauce. Take not to thick, nor to great morsels, but
cut the^ one after another. Never take any thing out of thy mouth, to lay it
again upon thy trencher. Clawe not thy head at the Table. Likewise al excess
laughyng and bourdyng at ye table is filthy. Or ever thou drink wipe the
borders of thy lips with thy two little fingers, lest any man see ye grease
swim within the glasses Drink not al so having yet the morsel in ye mouth and
before it be swalowed down. It is a rude and a filthy thing to eat and speak
together.

To spit and yawne often, is likewise unmannerly. It is a foolyshe thing and a
barbarous to lean at the table upon thy elbowes. Also it is a thing worthy to
be mocked at, when one eats bred to dippe it within the glass in the
presence of people: Lie not upon thy back. Sup as much as a dishe can hold. And
when thou do sup, take good head yt nothing do fall, and sup not twice at
once. Nor sup not again until thou have eaten it, and swalowed it. It is for
dogs to swalowe great morsels, and to gnawe the bones. Behold not what the
assistence have before them, nor what they take and eat. Put not that again
into the platter or dish, that already has been gnawen and bytten. This is a
ciuility among Italiens and French men, to cast there bones and ye refuse
under ye table, but yt is a filthy thing in Germany and among ye Almanes Also
it is an unseemly thing to purge and cleanse ye teeth with ye nails, or with
the tongue, or with a knife, for ye should be done after the repast and diner.

Of the thing that ought to be after the repast.
AFter that al be taken away and set by, and grace said: he must pass the
time, if ye time suffer him, wc some honest play, until yt hour and time be
com yt thou must go to schole. In the mean while find a time to go to thy
lesson, doing yt with all thy might and power that the place requires.

Of a perciculer repast.
THy refeccion must be te^perate and done in time and season. Dyne largely,
and sup more soberlye.

Take as much meat as shall suffice nature, not for pleasure, and ye
contentacion of the body. After yt thou haste dynde, do something joyfully.
Walk a little before supper, and as much after. Study and write fasting.

To choose a scholemayster and to obey him.
TAke the best learned for a scolemaster, for it is impossible yt he which ca^
nothing may instruct another. When thou have met with such a one, by all
means cause him to bear thee fatherly affecio, and that thou bear unto him
the affeccion of a son. For we owe as much honor unto those that has taught
us the manner of well living, as to those that have given us the beginning of
life. Other ways be thou assured thou shall have a scolemaister in vain, if
likewise thou have him not a true friend. Forthermore be thou continually
attentife unto him. Learn the best things even from the beginning and
foundation. It is an extreme folly to learn those things, yt willingly we will
forget. Hearken not only dilygently unto the master when he does interpret,
but also very ferue^tly. And be not content only to ensue and follow him that
disputes, but labor if thou may to pass him. And to retain the better his
good trases, and means of speaking, put them in writing as a treasure of thy
memory. If thou be ignorant, trust not to thy learned books. Forget not the
things that thou have heard as well alone and perticularly, as in compani.
Divide the day in hours, by the which thou shall stay the thing, that thou
should read. Being not content with this, thou shalt remember to give part
of the time, to thy secret thoughts and contemplacion. The exercise, which
is as a certain strife and battle of the spirits, does principal, show the
force of the mind, and does amake it and augment it. Be not given to the
study of the night, and out of time and season, for they suppe up and consume
the spirit, and are greatly hurtefull to bodily health. But the beginning of
the day is friendly to muses, and proper and meet to study.

The manner of studying by ^odolphe. Agricola.
TO order his study, he must principally take heed to two things. The first is,
to consider to what study thou wylt go. The second is by what means thou
may greatly profytte in that, that thou have chosen. As touching the first
point, if thou have suffyciente goods, and a competente spirit and wit, I
counsel thee to give thy self wtall thy force and might, to the best
sciences. In the rest, you shall learn the arts of thy childehoode. If you have
red any thing in good authors labor to translate them into thy mother to^gs
by proper words, and having the self same significacion, to the end yt when
thou would say or write any thing, conferryng by long usage thy vulgar
tongue with ye Latin, thou may pro^ptly and commodiously express the conceit
of thy mind by that which is unto thee natural, for to speak Latin
afterward more easilye. Furthermore if thou entende to make any thing, it
shall be good and mete to form in thy spirit and mind the self same matter
in thy mother tongue as largely, and as elegantly as thou may: and afterward
to pronounce it in Latin purely and with proper significacion, to the intent
that all may be spoken clearly and largely.

The signs of a good nature.
TO be not only continually about and with the masters, but also to study
bisely and diligently. To hafite his companions being best learned. Also wholly
to abstain from the company of those, that men esteem to be hurtful, as
well for their manners, as for their renown. To have no manner of debate nor
strife, but only of letters. To comprehend lightly and to take yt thing that
is showed and taught, and to keep it faithfully to follow fortunately, and to
pronounce elega^tly. To take heed yt in speaking he do not precipitate his
purpose, to break it in his tongue, to murmr between his teeth, but to
accustom himself to pronounce every word distinctly, clerelye, and from
point to point. To be ashamed yt other should pass him, but rather labor to
pass and excede other. Not to be angrye when he is corrected, and to rejoice
when he is praised. To study yt there appear no foolishenes, no disorder, no
vile, nor no sharp thing in him. Not to have an unshamefast forehead, the
brows lift up, ye eyes bold and hardy, ye tongue affectate, and the visage
iuco^stant. Finally yt there be not found in his face, in his countenance, nor
in his goinge, nor standing upright, any molestious or odious thing.

The manner of repeting the lesson.
THere be some that labor principally to learn, their lesson word by word:
but that I like not, for it is a laborious thing, and in a manner without any
fruit or profyt. To what purpose is it nedeful to say that word by word,
that he understands not, as the Popiniay do the. Thou must incontinently
read over again the lesson that thou have heard, and so, that thou deprly
do plant the whole sentence in thy mind. Furthermore thou shall return
again to the beginning and begin to search out every word, and only the
things that pertayn to grammar, yt is to wit and know whether there be any
verb of obscure deriuacion, or doubtful, whether there be any coniugacion he
throgleth, how that it makes in the preterpersitence, what supine it has,
what they be of whom it is derived. What he has ye descend of him, and what
construccion he may have, what it signifies, and other like things. This
done, thou shall run over it again, searchyng principally the things that
does pertayne to the craft of Rhethorike. If there be any good thing, or
elegant, and well spoken, note it with a mark, or with a little star. Take
good head to ye co^posicio^ of verbes, and search the beautifulness of the
oracion, find the intent of the author, and by what reason he has spoken
every thing. When thou fyndest any thing that does please thee beware as men
say, that thou pass not beyond the loge. Stay thy self, and consider the
reason why thou do take so great pleasure in such oracion, and what it
should mean yt thou have not done so much in other. Thou shall find ye thou
wast moved to do it, for some subtilite or orname^t of ye oracio^, or by some
harmony of ye co^posicio^: and to be short, for some other reason. If you find
any adage, se^te^ce, or soin old proverb, or fable, history or some pleasant
similitude; or as you shall think to be spoken shortly, subtily or wittily keep
it in thy mind, as a tresure for use and imitacio^. After yt let it not loath
thee at all, to repete it over.iiii. times, for the writings of learned me^
made with a good spirit, and with great watch have this in them, yt being
read, and read again a thousand times, they do please more and more,
showing dailye new miracles to those that dailye do meruall at them. Praise
not the thing without a cause ye comes customablye into thy tables, because
yt at other times thou have not taken head unto it, the like shall chance
much more by readyng of good authors. Thou shalt read it therefore four
times, and take good head to that, that may be commodious for Philosophy, and
likewise to Moral Philosophye, and whether there be any ensaumple yt
pertayneth to good manners. But is there any thing in this world, whereout a
man may not draw some ensample or some figure or occasion of learning. For we
shall sooner see the thing that we ought to do, than that we should fly and
avoid, by the goodlye and vile deeds of other. In doing of this thou shall
learn notwithstanding thou have done other things. The^ if it seem good unto
the, take pain to learn, for at that presete thou shall be nothing, or at
least way thou shall be of little estimacion. There rests no more but to haunt
the studius, and to set forth thy annotacions, and likewise to understand other
men's, praising the one, and reprehendynge the other, partly defending thy
own, and partlye susseryng them to be corrected. Finallye enforce thy self
to follow in thy writings the thing that thou haste praised to other. Likewise
rise thou up after thy lesson, and walk alone, repeatinge the thing that thou
haft red.

The countenaunces of play and other pastymes.
Sometime we must recreate our spirits after our study. Me^ do that by plays
and other honest pastimes. The honest pastymes yt pertain to children be ye top
and scourge, ye bowls, the exercises of the body, and again te^nis, and
leapinges. The spices and kinds of leapinge are ye leap of grassehoppers with
both ye legs, the fete joined together and with one leg only. Men do
exercise the^self with wrestling, and with ye sword, if it be done in the
presence of ye master and without envy. As concerning swimming, better it
were to be a loker on than a doer. But it is much more honest to exercise his
spirits with instruments of music, ye which is ye most honest pleasure, and
the most co^ueniences to muses yt a man can find. Plays forbidden are these,
dise, cards, and other plays of hazard, to swymme in ye water with other
exercises of russions. These be the things yt enryche the play, gravity,
honest mirth, vinacitie, vigure of the spirit, mutual amity, to play
franklye, to win by truth, and not by disceit. Also to great insolence does
dishonor the play, mad cries, foolyshe countenaunces, to great trouble, and
evil disceite. It is a goodly thing to win by craft in honest plays, and
if every man valeantlye defend his place, in the mean while ye hope of a
certain joyful gain, is cause to provoke sorn other. For the rest here are the
laws of plays: that no man speak in his natural or mothers tongue, or in
that that is less familier, for in so doing they shall learn by playing. This
shall be a thing most profitable to recite certain things of the authors
setting and appoyntyng a certain price or gain to the envy of one and
another, so that the school master give diligente order that they do it.

Iduertisemence for common assemblies and metynges.
AS often as any man unto whom you do owe honor shall speak unto thee, stand
up right, be uncovered, let not thy face be heavy, nor of one side, nor
shameless, nor inco^stant, but temperate with a joyful modesty, the eyes
shameful, and turnynge toward him unto whom thou speak thy fete joined,
and thy hands together. Waver not with thy legs, and fyddle not with thy
hands. Bite not thy lips, scratch not thy head, nor dig not win thy ears,
and yt thy raime^t be honestly ordered Cause al thy garment, thy vysage, thy
countenance, and thy body to show and present a simple modestye, and a
natural shamefastnes. Be not a folysh and a hasty babbler. That thy spirit be
not to seek, when he speaks unto thee, but be thou attentive unto taht he
speaks, if thou must answer him do it in few words and wisely. Furthermore
doing him honor, name him now and than by his surname, bowing a little thy
knee, likewise when thou have ended and finished thy answer.

To fly the company of the evil.
THis is a thing that does aid and profit very much good nouryshyng and
bryngyng up, to avoid the company of ye evil Upon this point Salomo^ does
admonish us saying: my son if the sinful entice thee, consent not unto
them. Take no pleasure in the way of the evil. Also. S. Paul said, that evil
communicacion destroieth good manners, a little leven destroys the hole paste.

How to search the company of honest men.
HAunt not willingly other company than the company of thy masters. Win
through thy obedience and humanity the best learned and modest companions. For
it is a thing that does profit above all other if a man can have the
domestycall and familier company of studious and learned men.

Of the modesty that one ought to have and to hold in walking.
THere be that walk fair and softly ensuing the pases and steps of those
that go to battle, and going, they seem to hold and keep certain measures.
Fly as thou would fly the pestilence, such men's steps and paces. Walk
not also very hastily, if no danger nor no necessity require it, nor you must
not go nor walk to softly. There is one kind or manner of walkyng laudable,
wherein appears gravity, a wait of authority, and a trace of tranquillity.
This is it therefore that thou must follow. So much there is that thy moving
must be pure and simple. A thing colored, does not please me. For nature
must form and fashion our mocion and going. But if there be any vice in
nature, diligence must correct it. If art do fail, correccio^ must satisfye
it.

Of chastity.
Chastity is next unto shamefastnes, nor it cannot be kept more surely than
by shamefastnes, and ye industrious diligence of the eyes: so yt thou shall not
need to care to behold women unchastly and wantonly, not because you should
abhor their sex, but to fly and avoid yt evil yt ensues thereof.

Of garments.
Ameane and comelines is greatly praised in garments. Thy apparel then ought
not to be to sumptuous, nor to simple and poor, but pertainyng and convenient
to public honestye, keep this sentence of Ovid, in the which is said: Let
young minions as comid maidens be far from thee for ever.

Of the entertaynment of the here.
AS touching this point, hearken what S. Paul the Apostle says if a man
entertain his here, it is a dishonor unto him, and an honor to the woman,
because that the here was given the woman for a veil. But a man should not
cover his head, because he is the image and glory of god.

An advertisement for ciuility and humain conversation.
FIrst have thou an heart yt does not find that thing sharp and molestious
that is honest, and that does his duty without astonishment of any fear, or
sodeinly taken by some esperance and hope, acquaint thy self with the most
honest, trouble not the evil, praise not thy own things, reprehe^d nor
dispraise not other men's things, prefer not thy self above other, although
al other should prefere the, with good men do pleasure to the envious, accuse
no man, be gracious and gentle to thy companions which are of low birth, be
affable to all men, be merye within the house, and well manered without.
Declare thy secrets to no man, reme^bryng that the amity of diverse is
deceitful. Do pleasure willinglye, and receive them by constrainte. If thou
dispraise glory, it will follow thee whether thou will or no, if thou seek for
it, it will fly from thee. Desire not to be praised, but do the things
worthy of praise. Be not acquainted with great lords except they be gracious.
Esteem not to have any expense more precious than time.

Of the discrecion of studies.
THe spirits of Students are confounded by excessive alteracion but the
countinaunce does dure through mesurable and ordinary exercises, and does
gather together a greater heap than men do think. There is nothing more
hurtful in all things than the fulsomenes and molestiousnes that men take,
and specially after study.

When thou art returned home after diner.
Being returned home, do even so as thou dydest before dynner Of the thing
that ought to be done after supper.

AFter supper pass thy time with certain pleasant fables, that done, and
after thou have bidden thy parents good night, and all the company, go at a
good hour to thy nest, and there-kneling upon thy knees remember with thy
self in what studies thou have consumed the day. If thou have done any
offense, call for ye grace of Jesus Christ to pardon thee, promysyng to bring
forth better fruit in time to come. If there be none, thank him of his
goodness, that has kepie thee yt day from all vice and sin. Furthermore thou
shall commend thy self unto him with all thy heart, that it will please him to
keep thee from all embushementes of evil spirits, and from dishonest dreams.
That done, enter and go to thy bed, rest thy self modestly in thy sleep,
lie not upon thy belly, nor upon thy back, but first thou shall lie and rest
upon the right side, laying thy arms a cross, laying thy right hand upon the
left shoulder, and thy left hand upon thy right shoulder.

Of the thought that one should have in bed or ever he sleep.
BEfore thou sleep thou should read some exquisite thing and worthy of
memory, and if thereupon sleep do take thee, when thou awakest, search what
that was. Thus much there is, that thou oughtes to have this sentence of
Pliny in thy mind, where it is said, that all the time which is not
employde and spente in study, is lost.

The end of the discipline and institucion of children.
An Admonicion to youth to keep Gods commandments.
Solomon.
MI son forget not my law, and fasten in thy heart my commandments, for
they shall prolong thy life, and they shall gyde the to peace and felicity.
Hang mercy and truth about thy neck, and thou shall write them in the tables
of thy heart, and thou shall find grace toward god, and before men with a
fortunate prudencye and wisdom.

An exhortacion to virtue.
A Wise sone reioiseth his father, and a fool is a heuines and a torment to his
mother. The treasures of the evil shall profit nothing, but Justice delivers
from death. The Lord shall not lose the soul of the just through famyne, but
he shall overthrow the embushmentes of the evil. The idle and slouthful hand
brings poverty and the diligent hand enricheth.

He that sustayneth himself upon lesynges, does nourish the wyndes, and the
self does follow the flying birds. He that gathers in summer is wise, and he
that slepeth in the time of harvest is a child of confusion. The blessyng of
god is upon the head of ye just but iniquity does cover the mouth of the
evil. The remembrance of ye just, is blessed and praised, and the name of the
evil shall rot and perish. The wise manne shall receive into his heart the
commandments, but the fool shall be punished by his lips. He yt walks
simplye, walks surely. The mouth of the just is a vain of life, but the
mouth of the evil and infidel, shall stomble through iniquity, envy moves
strife, and charity covers sin. Wisdom abounds in the lips of the
wise, and a rod upon a fools back. Wise men do hide knowledge, and the mouth
of a fool draws death unto himself. The work of the just does conduit to
life, and the fruit of the evil is their sin.

To suffer correccion leads to life, and he that mysprayseth it leads
himself out of yt way. He that is full of words is not without sin, and he
that refrayneth his tongue, is very prudente and wise. The tongue of the just is
as it were exquisite silver, and the heart of the evil is unprofitable. The
blessing of god makes men rich. The just are contynually in joy, and the
hope of the unfaithful shall peryshe. The mouth of the just shall speak
wisdom, and the evil tongue shall perysh.

An exhortacion of the wise.
CHildren hearken and understand the discipline of the father, to the intent
thou may know wisdom leave not my law, and I will give thee a good gift,
for I also have been the son of my father, and the most tenderest of my
mothers children, the which teaching me said.

Convert not at all to the consent of sinners, nor walk not in the way of the
evil, but turn away, nor go not by it. Trust thou with all thy heart in
God, and lean not to thy wisdom.

Know the Lord whether so ever thou go, for so it shall be, that he will
govern thy steps. Trust not at all to thy wisdom, fear God, and turn
thee from the evil, and from ill. If thou embrace my doctrine, and keep my
commaundemenie, thou shall live.

Finis.
Imprinted at London by John Cisdale, dwelling in knight Kyders street, nigh
unto the Queen's Waredrop.


