CERTAIN Godly and learned Expositions upon diverse parts of Scripture.

AS THEY WERE PREAched, and afterward more briefly penned by that worthy man
of GOD, Master George Estey, sometimes fellow of Goneuill and Caius College
in Cambridge.

Late Preacher of the word of God in Saint Edmunds Bury.

AT LONDON, Printed by I.R. for Richard Banckworth, and are to be sold in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Sun. 1603.

The particular expositions are, of
1 The 51 Psalm. 2 The 10 Commaundenients. 3 The Lords Suppers. 4 The Creed.
5 The first part of the 119 Psalm. 6 Some part of the History of the Gospel.
7 A text in Peter.
To the right virtuous Lady Anne Drurie, all things for life and godliness.
MAdame, this Psalm was preached not long since at Bury. Afterward some
desired the notes, short, ragged, broken, unfit to profit any Reader, witness
(at the first blush of them) your Ladyship: to whom though, for that you are
wont to think somewhat of my nothing, I presume to send them, only in desire
someway to witness my thanks, to GOD, for his grace bestowed on you in the
mystery of Christ, and for your L. kindness to me in that behalf. I think
of Sinaetas the Persian, who having nothing according to the fashion of his
country to present Artaxerxes with, ran to the River Cyrus, and took both
his hands full of water, and offered that. He was not much misliked, as for the
necessity of water, so for the name of Cyrus which it bare. Forthwith was it
put to be kept in a golden flagon. The Scriptures are above allwater, and David
beyond any Cyrus, only my unmannerly hands may tincture, and lessen account.
The Psalm is the same that ever it was, which if I have any way opened, I
thank God. Howsoever, I wish the sweet fruit of it in your Ladyships heart, as
I know God has, and will more still there treasure it up. Often pray this
Psalm to God, and keep these blotted leaves unto your self. Serve them as
they deserve. I were loath that every body should know my rawnesse. Thus craving
humbly your pardon, I take my leave. Bury.

Your Ladyships in all Christian duty, George Estey.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, you have here before your eyes, some labors of that
faithful servant of Christ, Ma. George Estey. Such as have known him (if the
fear of God be within their breasts) will both bewail his immature death, and
also take in good worth, even these fruits of his happy life. We may grant
with grief, that if the Author had longer lived, these works might deserve to
have been the better loved, and if he had published, they must needs have
been thoroughly polished: Nevertheless, let us rather thankfully make use of
what Gods mercy has left, then discontentedly remember what Gods anger has
denied. There is no cause why thou should blame my poor endeavor, seeing
there has not been wanting on my part, either the judgment of grave men to
counsel me, or the importunity of friends to call upon me, or mine own
fidelity to discharge me, for and in the imparting of these things unto thee.
Neither will there be cause (I trust) to blame the works, so be it there be
not wanting on thy part judgment, wisdom, and patience, soundly to weigh all
things, wisely to interpret some things, slightly, or with little meditation to
read nothing. And so I am sure, we may find in these pithy and concise
writings, plentiful matter of singular instruction. Somewhat has been
heretofore published by others, but with much deprauation in diverse places,
and sore against my will to whom the original copies were committed: also in
this impression, something is kept back by authority, as namely the proof of
the Authors judgment, touching Christ's discention into hell. Let me give
further notice, that the beginning of the history of the Gospel unto the 6
verse of the 1 of John, I was feign to supply out of the Authors notes in
Latin, which he penned first, being wanting in the English copy of his
second penning. I thought this course very necessary, that seeing so good a
work wanting an end, by reason of the too too soon end of the Author (if it
had pleased God) yet it might have some beginning, as also that the method and
order of that which follows might be perceived. The order which the beginning
of the Creed mentions, is not to be understood of that which is set before
it, but of the course in preaching. Finally, the Epistle dedicatorie of the
Authors own making, though privately sent in his life time with a written
copy, yet because I found them together among his own original writings, and
having permission by will to publish these his works, I thought it meet not to
suppress so thankful, so deserved, and so elegant a dedication. And thus
(Christian Reader) I commend thee and thy labor in these works, unto the
blessing of the Almighty.

Christian Reader, some faults are escaped in the printing of these works* I
have set down the chiefest, and the most of them so near as I could gather
them upon the sudden; leaving the rest (if there be any) unto thy favorable
amending of them.
FOR and, read not, fol, 2, b line 5. Between the 34 and 35 lines, put in this,
6 To make them use well the things they get with such great suit. fol. 10, a.
For I take it to be, read I take it be. fol, 31 a line 4. For straightly, read
scarcely has leisure. fol, 35 a line 12. For saction, read sanction, fol. 42 a
line 13. For no outward, read an outward, fol. 43 a line 4. For he resiteth,
read he visits, fol, 45 a line 1. For occasion. The bridegroom, read
occasion, the bridegroom, 68 a line 10.

Errata in the second part.
For vagam, read vagum, fol, 4 line 19. After baked a full point, ibid. line
26. read danger, fol, 4 b line 11. Read not meant of quantity, ibid. line 23.
Read Krima eayto, fol, 7 a line 15. For quod audistis, read quae audistu, fol,
9 b line 26. Read Idiopoioumenoi, fol, 13, line 8. For expedition, read
expetition, ibid. line 22. Read in respect of his Mother, fol, 23 b line 23.
For parties, read pa^ts, fol, 26 a line 25. For Andred, read Andreas, fol, 39 b
line 5. Read in which respect it is called, fol, 41 a line 13. For small, read
final fol, 42, a line 16. For of the will, GOD read of the will of God) fol, 54
b line 20. For may be in some, read may be judged in some, ibid, line 24. For
perceived, read perceive, fol 56, a line 16. For may counted, read may be
counted, fol, 57 b line 19, 20. For mutable, read imitable, fol, 61 a line 32.
For exorcised, read exercised, fol. 62 b line 16. For or, read namely, fol, 66,
a line 7. After same things: take out: ibid. b line 13. For private, read
privative, fol, 95 b line 31. Read in the same sense is it said, fol, 101 b
line 7. For confimed, read confirmed, fol, 103 line 9. For no, read not, fol,
105 a line 3. For conuesion, read conversion, fol, 110 b line 1. For before.
God, read before God, fol, 112 b line 2. For secure, read snare, 117 b line 4.
For parenty, read parents. fol, 126, b line 8. For brought into, read brought
in to, ibid. line 18. For apposed, read opposed, fol, 132 b line 2. For
thought, read though, 140 a line 22. For salvation, read salutation, fol, 144 b
line 14. For displease not God, read displease God, fol, 149 a line 18. For
vncombering read uncovering, fol. 150 a line 8. For have him self, read gave
himself. fol, 152. b line 2. For imped with faith, read mixed with faith,
ibid. line 13.

AN EXPOSITION upon the 51. Psalm.
THE book of Psalms is most excellent above the weight in gold, worthy of all
to be known and learned by heart. Wherein are written of Christ (in whom are
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.2.) Luke. 24.44. as Peter to
that end quoteth it. Acts. 1, 20, and also Paul, Act, 13, 33. The authority
whereof even Christ himself uses. Luke, 20, 42.

Whereof what the godly learned of former times have thought, it were too long
to write, and may be offensive in regard of the excessive commendations above
the rest. And even of late, (that noble men may find some worth herein) the
right illustrious and godly Father of John Casimere, County Palatine of Rhene,
thought good to have it translated alone into the Dutch tongue, to carry with
him in his bosom, as a sit companion, and to give it to every of his
servant to read, and learn therein.

Not only so, but before him, Cosmas the religious Bishop of Constantinople,
seeing many things to displease him, and that without hope of redress, giving
over his rochet of his own accord, departed the City, and bad his servant,
to carry away nothing of all the great goods gotten in his sea, save the
Psalter of David. He judged no vianes for a Christian pilgrim so sufficient as
this one book, Basil.
being, as indeed a wise and learned Father calls it, the common
treasure-house of all good instructions.

So as whosoever shall not highly make account hereof, displeases God, and
hurts himself.

Now though this book be like a box of Pearls, wherein none can displease:
yet for some purposes, one may be fitter then other: exercises of conscience in
the case of turning first unto God, or quickening and increasing that, are
specially to be followed. Such is this Psalm, having more variety of
necessary matter then any so small Scripture that I know, being as a man may
term it, a conscience or practical Catechism, so suting these times, and
especially Gods children in them, as that I would wish them when they mean to
stir the wheels of all good graces in them, to use this Psalm, as Gregory
Nazianzen did the Lamentations, to make him mourn.

But it is best to hear the Psalm speak for it self, both in the
inscription and Treatise.

The inscription is, for or to the Master of the Music, a Psalm of David,
when the Prophet Nathan came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.

And contains in it five especial things; The party to whom it was
committed; The kind of Treatise; The Author; The time; The occasion.

The party to whom it was committed, is in the Hebrew, Lamnatseah, for the
meaning whereof the learned do not accord. Some expound it, him that excels
or overcomes, to wit, in singing. Others, the Master of the consort quire or
Music, in such a kind and course. What it is we may better understand by the
1, Chron, 15, 21. Matthithia, Eliphelet, and others, were set over the basse,
and tenor, for that is the Shemimth, that is the eights or diapason, as the
Musicians call it. Where by the way we may perceive, that the godly learned
Interpreters at Geneua, mistook that Lamnatseah, as it is in the Hebrew, and
have in their translation made it a proper name.

Thus it was. The Musicians by David and Solomon afterward, were divided, into
companies and courses, as may appear, 1, Chron, 25, the chief of which
company was called as here, he that excels, that is, in that company
and kind of Music, somewhat like the Chauntor or Master of the children in
Cathedral Churches. Hence it comes, that some psalms are to Ieduthim, to
Corah, that is, committed to them.

Now they were committed to the^, to appoint the music for the singing of
them, a shadow whereof is in the appointing of services in Cathedral
Churches. Look 1, Chron, 16, 7. So as that they were committed to them for
others, even as Christ sends to the Angels, Apocal, 2, 3, that is, the
Pastors, for the whole people and Church.

So do the Prophets prophecy against some Kings, and yet for the people to.

All this was done as a part of the solemn worship of God, to continue.

Whereupon we may learn, that the book of psalms is scripture inspired by
God, containing instruction for the people of God. This may further appear, by
the psalm for the Sabbath, which is 92, by the 113, 114, 115, 116, 117,
psalms, which the Jews call their Haleluiah, and were sung at the Passover,
and are that hymn or song which is mentioned in the Gospel, and also by other
more. Insomuch, that sometime in the person of David, Christ and the Church are
to be considered of us.

Further, such psalms were committed to these Masters of the Music, to
require other to sing them, and the Apostle, Col, 3, 16, requires that we
should speak unto our selves, that is, amongst our selves, one to another, in
psalms and hymns, so as that it may be a great shame to us, if not staying all
ribaldrie songs and vain sonets, we procure not the psalms even of others to
be sung. David would not else so often have made it his exercise, and provoked
other thereto. And for the better directing our singing, we must do it with
understanding, Psalm 47, 8, that is, first, that our selves may understand,
otherwise, we were as good to ^ol fa^ or sound as instruments do.

Secondly, if we be with company, others must understand us, 1, Cor, 14, 15:
And so must they understand us, as that our singing may be with grace, as Col,
3, 16, ministering occasion of profitable matter and instruction in grace.

Thirdly, it must be done with the heart. Col, 3, 16, with feeling affections
and cheerfulness.

Fourthly, it must be to the Lord, that is, the heart lifted up unto God, and
resting in the sound of Music, but having the mind set upon the matter.

Hence follows, that even in singing, it being to be performed to God, it
should be with great reverence.

But here one may marvel, that David, such a great man as he was, whose
credit ought to be preserved to him self, and his people, should commit a
psalm to others to be sung, wherein his own faults should be to all
posterity proclaimed and blazoned. No doubt it is, first to teach us, that
even the particular examples of the Saints of GOD, have use for common
instruction, and now in this kind of David's fact, to learn ones own
infirmity, how diligent in searching ones own self, how severe against
himself for faults, how desirous to rise after falls, every one should be.

Secondly, that in some cases a man may be acknown of his personal faults to
others, and openly.

1 According as he has offended publicly, as David did, or privately.

2 When we be acknowne of our own sins and Gods mercies, to comfort others,
as Paul does of his persecuting.

3 To witness our sound and thorough turning to God, while we are not loath to
be acknowne of our faults, in the face of the world.

Thus much of the party to whom this treasure was committed of trust, now
follows the kind of the enditing, it is said to be a Psalm.

A Psalm is, when there is Music set to a dittie: a song is (many times)
music or notes without dittie.

David was wont and others, to sing to their Harpes or Lyraes, as we are wont
to play two or three or four parts, and sing the sift, thus did the Lyricke
Poets, Pyndarus, Horatius, make ditties for such music.

But this is the difference, David's Musicians had the gift of prophesying, as
1, Chro: 25, 1, 2, 3, that is, to open the Scriptures, and make godly ditties,
for the use of the service of God, and did not only make noyses in the Temple
or Tabernacle. 1, Chron, 25, 5.

The instruments and voice were, when there had been before some sermon of the
praising of God, to stir up the people thereunto. Look psalm 57, 8, 9.

Why then should not we by all the means that God affoordeth, stir up our
dull hearts to praise him?

Or shall David have such private exercises of religion, as that he can pen
mournful ditties or Elegies, and shall not we likewise exercise our selves unto
godliness? sometimes searching out our sins and bewayling them, gathering
together the promises of God in Christ to believe in them, laboring to get
particular directions for every of our practices, enrolling Gods favors to us,
and returning praises for them.

The Author or scribe was David, a King and Prophet, bewayling his own sins,
showing us: 1, That kings should confess their sins, and set themselves a
part to take knowledge of them, and mourning over them.

2 That the breach of the word of God, is a sin in kings, as well as any
other, so that murder, adultery, though never so close, swearing breaking the
Sabbath, pride, idleness, etc, are sins in them. What King either of Spain
or France, would have done as David did? but yet so ought he.

3 And that if David, who loved music so well, did use it in such an holy and
profitable sort, ought not we to follow such delights, as we may be the better
for?

The time was, when the Prophet Nathan had comne unto him, and not before. That
is, that then he penned this Psalm, not that he did not before acknowledge
and bewail his sin. For it is not likely, that a man as David was, according
to Gods own heart, could continue so long (as some think David did) in his
sins, without touch of heart. Look 2, Sam: 11, 27.

Besides; David's heart smit him presently, in smaller matters, as for numbering
of the people; wishing for water at the well of Bethlehem; cutting off the lap
of Saules garment; and therefore it is most probable it did so in this thing.

Lastly, unless David's heart had had some exercise before, it would hardly have
yielded so presently to Nathans reprehension: it was otherwise with Saul toward
Samuel, with Adam and Eve to God.

Well then may some body say; if David was touched in heart before, was it not
sufficient?

Aunsw: No. God would have the occasion of blasphemy given to the enemies by
the death of Vriah, and the scandal to the people by the adultery of
Bathsheba, taken away; and that David should be a pattern of effectual
conversion to all posterities.

Where mark, that when men openly and notoriously sin, God will have it as
openly acknowledged. Was not it thus in Manasses, Peter, Paul, and diverse
others?

This time is set out by circumlocution, to wit, that it was after that, Nathan
came unto him, that is, some months after his fault with Bathsheba, and upon
Vriah. According as likewise it falls out with the children of God, sundry
times when they have sinned. Many years there were before Manasses was
touched, and some months before Paul was converted after his persecuting; the
brethren of Joseph long after their unkindness to their brother, were grieved
with themselves. So that a man may be some while before he repent, and lie in
some sin before he sufficiently turn unto God, and be in some way of
turning, and yet not fully please God. Iehu did many good things, likewise the
men that spied out the Land, save Caleb and Joshua, (...) neither did all as
they ought. Then has a man true and full sorrow for his sin, when it is to
conversion, and increasing change. 2, Cor, 7, 9, 11.
This the Apostle calls godly, (other is worldly) sorrow, and always has
with it great care, great Apology, indignation, fear, desire, zeal,
punishment, whereof we may speak more particularly afterward.

Now Nathan went to David, as sent of God, 2, Sam, 12, 1, not of himself, nor
sent for by David, or set on by any Courtiers or adversaries. 1, Reg 22, 8. 2.
Reg. 19.2 2, Sam, 7, 2,
Sometimes Kings could send for Prophets, Ichoshaphat for Michaiah, Ezechiah to
Esaiah, and this our King and Prophet to Nathan: now Nathan is feign to come
without sending for, and go by Gods commandment only, so are all men's
minds readier to find favors and comforts, then be acknown and confess
their sins, not indifferently liking of the company and ministry of
Prophets, but for their own turns and pleasings.

Here may we well think, how Nathan might be discouraged, going to such a
personage, in such a time, on such an arrand, as by and by we shall hear of:
yet is he not, but goes about Gods business, even to the displeasing, as he
might fear, of Kings and Princes. Why then should any be so nice, to fear
rebukes and taunts of meaner men, which draw no blood?

And seeing that David had need to be put in mind, who can judge any admonition
sufficient for himself?

This coming of Nathan to David, is to be considered of, by the intent and end
to rebuke and convince David, as may appear by Nathans whole course, and the
success thereof.

But mark, I beseech you, Nathans judgment and behavior, 2, Sam, 12, 2,
darkly he goes about the bush, intending to make David confess first in the
general, then to convince him in the particular, fearing that if he had gone
plainly to work, the King would not have heard all, but cut him off in the
midst; or if he first had opened the fault, and not convinced the judgment,
it might have cost him the setting on.

Can we but learn from hence, that indeed dangerous it is for outward estate,
to advertise Princes of their faults? and for all that, yet when God
commands, it must be done. Now God commands all duties of ones place.
Thus did John Baptist, Elias, and others.

Neither this only, but very hard will it be, to bring great ones to see their
faults, Saul may teach us this. These think not of sins, they think their
places excuse them, and many such fig-leaues have they.

Yet for all this, men must endeavor that such may know and amend their faults,
who sin not alone, but by example infect others.

But some may say, Why was Nathan sent, rather then some other?

For his ministry and place, for gifts, and sidelitie, as a known man meet
to convince the King.

Where then are these Eliasses, John's, Latimers, and such like?

Now mark the fruit, David is rebuked and amendeth. So does God bless his
own ordinances, as to Saul, and Ahab, who somewhat yet by rebukes were
restrained. Let none therefore make doubts in Gods businesses, but go about
them, and leave the success to him who gives it.

1 David is rebuked and amendeth at a word. Here is a difference between the
rebukings to the children of God, and men vneffectually called. Gods children
are corrected and rebuked at and by the word: Gods works are wont to work
more with worldlings.

2 But put case they hearing the word do sear, as Herod and Faelix, etc,
after they forget: Gods children do hide it up, and make it of use and to
rebuke, long after that they once have heard it.

3 Or grant the worldlings do think upon it, they are not reformed: the
godly are.

The occasion remains, which is both of Nathans message, and David's enduring
this Psalm, to wit, his going in to Bathshela. Where first mark the words,
after the matter. The words are very grave, honest, and seemly, giving us to
take knowledge of that which is not so comely to be spoken of. This phrase is
usual in the Scriptures, as Knowing.

It is a grace of speech in seemly terms, Eyphemismos.
to deliver unseemly things: so Job, 1, 5, blessing is put for the contrary,
as 1, Kings, 21, 10. This is usual in the Scriptures, as likewise in other
tongues, Eyonyma in Greek, a good name for a thing of worse worth: Eymenides
for the Furies: the old Latins, for nothing, would say well; for no body,
good success, and so other Nations: the Tuscan Italians, call diseases which
they most loath, with more favorable names, as the Falling sickness, Gods
disease, and such like.

1 How ought men therefore abstain from evil deeds, when the Spirit of GOD
forbeareth even the ordinary names of common sins?

2 Nay a shame shall it be for us, not to leave of all filthy speech, and not
so much as to name with liking any sin. Look Exodus: 23, 13, Hosea, 2, 17,
Psalm, 16, 4.

3 So that if even for terms a man should look to him self, the like care is
to be had of company, recreations, attire, diet, and such things, wherein we
may very soon offend.

The matter and meaning of the phrase is, that David sinned in Bathsheba, and
by occasion thereof upon Vriah, giving likewise cause to the enemies to
blaspheme. 2. Sam, 12.

1 O then, into what fearful sins may the children of GOD fall? To any save
that which is against the holy Ghost; so that all the care in the world is too
little, to watch over our selves with.

2 Again see, how one sin tolleth on another, David little thought of
murder at the first; but now to seek a cloak for adultery, he will commit
that, yea not care for the glory of God in respect of his own credit. Doubting
in Eve bred disobedience, and the misery of all mankind. Wherefore resist
sin in the beginning, it will too soon grow too strong, and draw a long
tail after it.

3 Besides consider that David had (no doubt) of his privy Chamber, whom he
used very secretly for Bathsheba, as he dealt with Ioab for Vriah by private
Letters, neither durst those parties be acknowne. Court sins are many times
covert and cunning, and yet for all this, we see they come and break out. It
is therefore folly, sinning to think to lie hid. Thou did it secretly
(says Nathan to David, from the Lord) but I will do this (that is, 2. Sam.
12.12.
punish thee) before all Israel, and this sun.

Nay Kings themselves cannot sin without marking by God, and in his time
revealing.

Now the party with whom this sin was committed, is not to be neglected.
Bathsheba, a woman not only of good house and place, whom David the King
after married, but a devout woman, observing the religious services of God in
her purification, 2. Sam. 11.2.4.
very wise and accomplished, as may appear by the 31 of the Proverbs, which
seems to have been of her making, and yet she is ouer-taken to folly.

1 Let good Ladies then take heed of daliance and courting. Sooner may they be
overcome then they think for: such is the poison of evil company and speech,
able to infect the chastest in the world.

2 And if David and Bathsheba commit folly, may we doubt but that there was a
great deal more filthiness then, in the Court? So it is, some one sin
appearing, may make us judge of many close. Read over the whole eight chapter
of the prophecy of Ezechiell. Where then many sins break out, know that
many more are committed, which should make us mourn at the filthiness of
such times.

Object. But one may say, I never committed adultery; I never kept whore. etc.

Aun. There is no David for all that, that has not his Bathsheba, no Bathsheba
that has not her David; that is, none is there, but takes delight in some sin
or other. Idolatry is whoredom, so is covetousness. Iam, 4.4.

Wherefore, let every one seek to find out the strange flesh his soul
runs after as his Bathsheba, which one may do by applying the whole word of
God to his whole self, constantly studying and meditating thereupon, making
more account of the witness of our consciences, then the judgments of any
other.

That shall we find to be our Bathsheba or sweet sin,

1 Which we will least be acknown of, as in Saul for the Amalekites, Herod for
Herodias, and such like. So do proud, covetous, and riotous persons, excuse,
extenuate, or cloak their sins.

2 Which though we take great heed, we shall easily offend in, as that of the
tongue, Psalm, 39, 23, Iam: 3, 8, So is it for anger in parties subject thereto.

3 Which enemies wait to trap us most in, and can vpbraide us most with. They
can sooner see it, then we our selves. Nature in every body sootheth it self,
and none but thinks himself fair, and his own breath sweet. But especially
if those whom we judge adversaries are godly and wise, as Elias to Ahab, and
Michaiah, John to Herod, there will be no error.

4 Besides, in griefs of conscience, that wounds soarest, which is from the
sweetest and most usual sin.

And after this once found out, let him be humbled to conversion for it. Which
never will be till acknowledging all sin in general, and misliking our own
known sins in special, we forsake them all. Neither let us think that any
sin is small, and may be made light of.

1 What can be little that offends the infinite God?

2 That deserves everlasting death?

3 And if one sin of Adams, poisoned (as I may say) the whole world, shall we
nourish any?

4 Indeed, if but all the world could discharge a man but from one sin, it
were somewhat.

5 Or that but one sin not remitted, did not damn: but it is quite otherwise.

Wherefore be persuaded your sins are great, else will you never sorrow for
them, or seek to be eased of them, and God then will not forgive them.



Whereof there are two parts. The first the general proposition braideth his
people with the want thereof. Ezech: 16, 4, 9, and Jeremy requires it, Iere:
4, 14 to be had. The speech likewise is borrowed from things soiled, which
being washed recover their beauty: so the conscience of man having pardon of
sins, has again his former hue. Here is mercy on Gods part, washing
fault, on our part, iniquities.

Washing, to omit all bodily clensing, may for this place be understood, either
of the washing of sanctification, as is Esaias, 1, 16, Prou, 30, 12, or of the
washing of justification and forgiveness of sins, as Christ speaks, John
13, 8, 10, which I take indeed to be the Prophets meaning, because that it is
the first washing necessary: and that the other is mentioned afterward. And
here by the way it will not be amiss to open Christ's meaning in that place.

First therefore he shows, that this washing is meerelie necessary to
salvation; when as the blood of Christ counted by God, and applied by the hand
of faith, cleanses the conscience.

Secondly, Christ would have Peter thus to be washed all over, head, hands and
feet: and not only him, but as him, so all and every other.

Thirdly, that as in the bathes they scoured down the filth from their bodies
to the feet, and then washed also and cleansed them, so we had need, that not
only gross sins, but remnants thereof, should more and more be purged away.

So as that we may learn from hence: 1 Not to think of our sins as small
things, which the longer they cleave unto us, we having means against them and
yet do not leave them, will cost us more ado ere we can fully shake them
off. Which as all the people of this our Land, so we of these places hereabouts
had need think of.

2 That as in washing, much rubbing and wringing is requisite, so we must know,
that before we can shake off the filth of sin, many rubbings and wringings by
afflictions must pass over our heads, and that we should use our afflictions
as soap and lie, to scour out the stains of sin thoroughly.

Besides, in that the Prophet thus wishes to be washed ^ 1 He shows that we
are not slightly blemished with sin, but that we are quite stained, and as it
were branded therewith. Look Esaias 1, 18. Iere: 13, 2, 3.

2 And not only so, but if he might be thoroughly cleansed from sin, he
cares not what befell him, let him be rubbed, wringed, beaten, so sin may be
driven out, it is his desire.

3 Withal he shows, that he desires not only to have sin (as it were)
shaven, but plucked up by the roots, and the spots taken away.

4 He fears least somewhat remain vnforgiuen, and filth unwashed out: here
is fear commendable. Philip: 2, 12.

5 And being once washed, will never foul himself.

From my sins. Sins, that is, iniquity, any thing swaruing from the rule
of the word of God.

So as that the godly: 1 Always examine themselves, and endeavor to fit
themselves to the word of God.

2 Find many kind of faults to accuse themselves of, as may here appear by
the sundry names of sins, as also Psalm 32, 1, 2, and the number used.

The fourth speech follows, Cleanse me from my sin: in matter and meaning all
one with the former. Wherein is likewise set down the acknowledging of fault,
and craving of pardon.

Acknowledging of fault, as in the words my sin. The word in Hebrewe, is
(Kata) which signifies a missing of a mark one should aim at. It is so
properly used, Judges the 20, 16. This mark is the word of God, Psalm 119.15.
They that put it in meeter thought of this. Now as he that hitteth not the
mark, though he come never so near, fails of his aim: so booteth it not to
come near, if we touch not the word of God.

Learn then: 1 That the word of God, must always be in our eye, well known
and understood.

2 That all our devises, delights, speeches, and practices, must be directed
heereto.

3 And that the least swaruing from thence, much more wandering, rouing, is a
sin. So as that none can be too precise.

Craving pardon follows, which has in it, first a close confession of a more
particular fault, namely, uncleanness: for in that the Prophet desires to be
cleansed, he acknowledges specially that he is unclean: then a craving of
cleanenesse.

He seems in this manner of speech to have respect to the ceremonies of the
Law, where sundry creatures living and without life, were counted unclean,
not so much in themselves, as in regard of use to others.

A sinner then is unclean, that is, such as cannot well be used to any good
service, while he continues so.

First in regard that he displeases God, whose commandment he has broken.

Secondly, even by the witness of his own conscience, as the Lepers, Leuit:
13, 45, so as that himself can do nothing with quiet conscience. For as the
Lepers, and other unclean persons, were not to meddle with any thing, except
they would pollute and defile it: so is it with sinners.

Thirdly, by occasion of scandal given, and so likewise making of others
unclean.

As likewise fourthly all the godly, and some wicked can judge.

Note then that every sinner, that is, whosoever willingly rests in sin, is
unclean, even his very conscience, as Tit: 1, 15, so as that likewise all
things to them become unclean: neither can they go about any thing with good
conscience, while they abide in their sins.

1 Shall not we then contemn vile persons, Psalm, 15, 4, fearing to be sowred
by their leaven? or shall we have fellowship with the unfruitful workers of
darkness?

2 Or not our selves forbear all sin? Seeing every one does make unclean,
and anger defiles our service to God. Math. 5, 24.

3 Let not any sinner look to the show he has in the world, but to his
cleanenesse before God, even for his scandals toward men.

Thus much of the confession of uncleanness, now follows the desire to be
cleansed, which God commands as necessary. Esaias, 52, 11, and Iere: 13, 27,
is likewise promised in Ezechiel, 36, 21, hoped for by the Prophet. Psalm 19,
13. So as that we should not bear even the least spotte, no not in others,
Jude 23, much more not in our selves, being all to be presented without spot,
and in the white shining robes of Christ.

Now then, who sees not himself, to have as much need as David, or any? We
every of us drinking in sin, etc. wherefore we ought as earnestly to desire
it, as ever he did. But first we must know what it is, namely, the purging of
ones conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. Hebr. 9, 14.

In which purging of conscience, is witness of the pardon of fault and
counting righteous, with ability and cheerfulness in all things to serve GOD:
without both which the conscience is unclean.

Secondly, the sprinkling of Christ's blood, Hebr, 9, 14, that is, the
imputations on Gods part of Christ's sufferings, and on our parts, the applying
of them specially unto us, as Ephe: 5, 25, 26. works this.

Thirdly, one is said to be clean: 1 For the word, John 15, 3. 2 By faith.
Acts 15, 9. 3 By the Spirit renewing. 1, Cor: 6, 11. So as that if we want
any, we want our cleanenesse.

Thus much of the thing generally prayed for, now follows the party to be
considered, who is prayed unto, and that is, GOD.

O God, that is, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Father, from whom; Son, for
whom; holy Ghost, by whom all good things do come. Who only can and will show
favor, and forgive sins; otherwise then the Papists teach that and yet
notwithstanding for the present, God every time grants it not. They must
taste of gall and wormwood.

This is hard, but necessary and profitable.

3 They feeling the sweetness of favor, desire it may be (as it is indeed)
certain. Fearing least again they should leese it, which in no case they
shall, 1 If they cleave to God, as he requires in his word: 2 If ever they
had favor: 3 And desire continually to keep it.

Thus much of the second, the third is, According to the multitude of thy
compassions.

Wherein is the Thing. Quantity.


The thing is compassions, motherly pittifulnesses, for the word is taken from
Mothers or dams toward their young ones, which can hardly be told, but by
mothers themselves.

Now these are sundry and very sweet.

It is very hard to reckon up the diverse kindnesses of mothers to wayward
children, but much more of GOD toward sinners.

1 One is that some time or other, he will make them see and feel their sin
and misery.

2 When they be thoroughly humbled, he will not fully nor finally forsake them.

3 He will watch over the^ so, as then, ere ever they think of it, he will draw
them to conversion: as in Paul, Agustine, Luther. So as that even their sins
shall turn to their good.

4 He never casts them away for their sundry slips, and receives them
whenever they return.

Now these are very, 1 Tender, even as of a mother.

2 They are seasonable.

3 Not always to the will, but to the profit and good of the party.

The quantity follows, the word used is Rab, and signifies Great. Much.


These mercies are great. 1 Because they are from a great God, to such as we
are, deserving the contrary.

2 They last for ever. 3 They are in matters of very great worth: to wit,
salvation, as knowledge, faith, justification, peace, joy, patience, worth all
the world. 4 They are to take away sin, which is great.

Besides, they are many: first for number as before. Secondly, For that they
are renewed.

1 See then, how heinous some one sin or other is, that to the pardon thereof,
we have need of great and much mercy.

2 That having tasted the mercies of GOD, they who feel them, are never
satisfied with them.

3 And that whosoever once craves mercy, must always seek to have it renewed
as his sins renew, or else it is not sufficient.

The fourth and last is much. Wash me much. So as that a man of himself,
though he take Snow-water, and much Nitre, shall not of himself be clean.
Christ therefore is like a purging fire, and like Fullers soap, Mala. 3, 2. and
Peter would have his head and hands, beside his feet, washed. Ioh. 13, 9.
Whereof before, in the word wash.

Hitherto has been the chief sum of the whole Psalm.

Now follows the more special setting down of things necessary, either for
the Prophet himself, and those from the beginning of the 3. verse, to the end
of the 19, or for the Church in general, in the two last.

For the Prophet himself in particular, and those three. 1 Confession of sins.
2 Desires or requests. 3 Thanksgiving.

Confession of sins, from the beginning of the 3 verse to the end of the 6.

This confession of sin is of Actual, in the part of the 3 and 4 verses.
Original, in the 5 and 6.


In the confession, or acknowledging, there is, First the act of confession.

Secondly, the parties. 1 Confessing. 2 To whom the confession is made.

The act sets down the thing done, namely, confession, the manner and the
helping cause, to wit, the being of his sin before him.

Now this act or practice is brought in as a reason, to encourage the Prophet
to persuade himself, that this his prayer is heard, because he does not hide
but acknowledge his faults, according to that, 1, John, 1, 9.

And is brought in, as though the Prophet desired to prevent a doubt, which
thus might be made.

Quest. Why do you so earnestly pray for favor and forgiveness?

Aun. I know my sins better then any other does, how many and grievous they
are, I confess them, this makes me so earnest.

Teaching us hereby, 1 The grief and trouble of a broken spirit, Prou: 18, 14.

2 And that the greater the feeling of sin is, the more earnest will the
desire of mercy be.

But mark that the Prophet confesses, and that first, before he make any
special sure.

Confession of sin is always necessary, by Gods commandment, it declares
that the party is truly touched, as where there is smothering, one may doubt
of feeling of sin. It lays open the sore, that the plaster may be applied.
The wicked always conceal their faults: the godly are accusers of
themselves, neither can they find peace without it.

The manner of this confession follows, set down in the English word Know:
not fully, for the most wicked and unrepentant know their sins, and are
never the better. Better were it therefore translated, I make known to others,
or acknowledge my sins. Well do the Grammarians note, that in the Hebrew
tongue, verbes of sense (as knowing is) do signify action also. Psalm, 1.
God knows the way of the righteous, that is, approves, or shows that he
knows. So Luke 13, 25. I know you not, that is, I acknowledge not you, and
so is it here. I acknowledge. etc.

Now this indeed is the property of the children of God, to make known their
sins, Dan: 9, Paul, Manasses, etc.

In this acknowledging there is:

1 Knowledge, 1 That is, perceiving by the word of God, that the thing found
fault with is a sin, all do not presently yield heereto, as Saul. 2 That
this sin does deserve everlasting damnation.

2 Application of the knowledge of the grieuousnesse of sins to our own
selves, wherein especially consists acknowledging. This is harder then the
former. Better may one in general know sin, then that himself in particular
has committed it, and yet this is necessary. For this end are private
messages to David, Ahab, Herod, etc.

Now this application, or acknowledging, must have sundry properties.

1 It must proceed from the hatred of sin. Take heed of confessing sins in
jesting or boasting: it is as in a vomit casting out things enemies to the
stomach.

2 With faith in the promises of mercy in Christ, otherwise despair will
assault.

3 From a settled judgment, no light opinion, that our selves are sinners.

4 According to the things we are rebuked of by the Word, as it was with
David toward Nathan, not taking exception against his charge.

5 Frank, not by compulsion, but of our own accord.

6 Without excuse, or lessening our fault, nay rather with exaggerating.

7 Without delay, presently.

8 Without opinion of desert for acknowledging sake. Thus much of the manner:
now follows the helping cause, which is the being of his sin ever before
him, this made him the rather to confess, because his sin was always before
the eyes of his mind and conscience, neither could he find ease, till by
confession he had set them aside.

Of this cause we may see, the Kind. Property.
of it Being before, or in his eyes. Ever.


Sin is before one, 1 When one who has sinned, calls his own sin to
mind, and of purpose searches his heart to that end, to humble himself. 2
When the conscience keeps record against a man's will, and so checketh him. 3
When God in mercy (the party not thinking of it) uses some means, as
Nathan to David, Elias to Ahab, to make them for ever after to think thereof.
All which I take it are meant here.

This ever, is with limitation from the committing of sin, and taking true
knowledge thereof in his own heart, by means sent of God.

So as that no marvel, if sometimes Gods children have not their sins in
their eyes. They must pray to have their eyes opened.

Let us besides consider, 1 How necessary this mercy of God is, to prick
our hearts to true conversion, else shall we not see our sins.

2 The force of sin once known, it will never leave checking the conscience,
till it be thoroughly taken away.

3 And that if we will be like the children of God, we must often call our
sins to mind, and exercise our selves thereabout, not seek to forget them,
or drive them out of our mind.

Hitherto is the manner, the persons follow, first confessing. I David, a King,
who had done this matter secretly that few knew of it, whom no man's law could
make me to do as I do, and might seem to shame my self in that I do, I,
for all that, do confess my sins.

It is clear then, 1 That Kings, and the greatest in the world, ought to
confess their sins. 2 Though they might without being detected conceal it. 3
And that the quiet of their conscience, should more be regarded, then all their
honor and reputation, especially in comparison with the glory of GOD.

The second, to whom confession is made, and that verse 4. Now this person is
God, not a Priest, to whom though, in some cases we may confess:

1 If we have scandalized or wronged him.

2 If we endeavor to comfort him, by reckning our faults* and Gods mercies.

3 Or if we desire comfort from him.

4 Or desire him to pray for us.

Not, 1 with conceit, that he has power to forgive our sins.

2 Or with judging that we ought to be acknown of every particular.

3 Neither with opinion that hereby we deserve anic thing.

4 Or are willing to have penance enjoyed to make satisfaction.

To God confession is to be made, 1 For the commandment sake, 2 Because all
sins are most against him, 3 He takes knowledge of all sins, 4 He is able
to forgive them, 5 He promises so to do. 6 And he has so done to David. 2,
Sam, 12, 13, and others.

The party is God, who is set out here, partly by Repetition. Singularity.


Repetition in these words, Against thee, thee only, which manner of speech
bewrays an earnest affection of the heart, as not being able to contain it
self, great indignation against himself, so as that he sees he has broken
the Law of God, procured his displeasure, and yet persuasion of favor,
otherwise he durst not thus be acknowne.

So as that all confession should be earnest, and in faith, besides the
properties we had before.

The singularity of this party follows, in that it is said, Against thee,
thee only, which all do not expound alike. Some against thee, who only
know what I have done. Who sin is very headlong, suddenly from thoughts
it will come to outward act: 3 That none, but should withstand even inward
corruptions, Atheism, profaneness, unbelief, hypocrisy, etc.

Now follows the form, In thine eyes, O God.

God properly has no eyes, but parts of the body are said in the scripture to
be in God, for their works sake. As because the eye is an instrument of
knowledge, therefore it is put for knowledge: so as that the Prophets meaning
is, that God judges this to be sin in whose eyes it is: God judges that to
be sin, which is against his will written and revealed.

1 Learn then, that all men sin God looking on. Sin is in his eyes. 1 So as
that all sinners, ought to be afraid, when they sin. 2 The godly ought to be
very wary. 3 And to know, that as sins committed, are in his eyes, so are
good deeds, that the conscience of his knowledge, ought to support men in
their good dealing, against all hard censures of the world.

2 And that God is very long suffering, who seeing so many sins, for all
that spares them.

3 And that David considering this, had wonderful grief, which we well may
examine, by 2, Cor: 7, 11, and forward. Where are sundry works of this godly
grief set down. The first whereof is care, that is, mature and convenient
diligence, to correct his fault, and to take away the scandal, to the which is
thwart and contrary, when a man not well understanding his sin, can
confess, but deferreth to redress it.

The second, the Interpreters call clearing, in the original it is a speech of
defense for a man's self, whereby one may be justly excused. Now this is when a
man confesses his fault, craves forgiveness, applies Christ's merits,
takes heed of the like sin ever after: otherwise then when in worldly
matters, men deny or lessen their sins.

The third is indignation, to wit, a practice of holy anger against our
selves, whereby we often blame our selves, mislike, even hate our selves, and
judge our selves worthy of any punishment: heereuppon, all that we do,
displeases our selves.

The fourth is fear, which is a stirring of the conscience, whereby we forecast
all worst things unto our selves, doubting least God should not give us
repentance and forgiveness, and thinking that men's, and Gods anger, might
break out upon us.

The fifth is great desire, that is, a longing to satisfy Paul and all other,
who might any way take knowledge of their sin, with desire to be restored to
their favors and likings.

The sixth is zeal, a most earnest affection of the soul, which cannot be kept
in, but breaks thorough all, and will bewray it self.

The last is revenge, a voluntary practice of all duties to keep the body
under, and prevent all like occasions for afterward.

Thus much of repeating his fault, now follows his judging of himself,
worthy of any punishment: and that is, by reckoning up, wherein God might
correct him by word or deed. For word, That thou might be justified in thy
sayings. For deed, and pure when thou iudgest. That is, though thou speak
never so sharply, or deal never so severely, yet all is just; either in
rebuking me by Nathan, or taking away the child by death, or whatsoever else.

But the words and phrase must be opened first.

This small word (that) is sometimes for end or intent, sometimes for
consequent and event, as in this place. For David did not sin to that intent,
that he might make God to be or to appear just: but when he had sinned, then
whatsoever he should do or say to David, were just and deserved.

But here is a doubt. One would think that Paul in the 3 to the Romans and
the fourth verse, does otherwise read and apply this place, then seems to
have been David's meaning. Look the place.

Aun. Indeed he alleges the place according to the translation of the
Seauentie-two Interpreters, which then was most commonly used in the Church;
which though it ^ad some differing sound in words from the Hebrew, yet the
sense not much varying, he thought good to use.

But for the application of it, Paul seems to me to do that which our
Savior Christ in a like case does, Math, 4, 10. where our Savior seems to
insert the word (only) according to the intent of GOD, though it be not in
the Hebrew, so that which the Prophet David speaks of God for his own
person, Paul makes a general, that so it is in all parties, that God will be
justified, and overcome. etc.

Others interpret it otherwise, as though the Prophet should understand this
word I confess, and then should follow, that thou may be justified, that I
must needs acknowledge thou art just, etc.

But I take it that the Prophet has regard to the second of Sam: 12 chap: 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, etc. where God having threatened and taken away the child, yet
David for all this confesses God to be just, etc.

Well then, in that David thinks thus of himself, no doubt but he
acknowledges, he ought to be patient whatsoever should fall upon him, so must
every child of God do.

But return we back to consider of David's casting down himself, and
submitting to the justice of God, in words, and in deeds.

That thou might be justified when thou speak: but first open the words.

Justified, (not to reckon up the sundry meanings of it in diverse places of
Scripture) does here signify, that thou ought to be counted and judged
righteous, speaking not falsely, never too sharply or hardly.

When thou speak, or, in thy speech, declaring no limitation of time and
place, whenever thou speak, that is, at all times.

Speech here (I take) is put for fault-finding, or reproouing, as by Nathan.
The meaning is, whatsoever thy words are, yet notwithstanding, even by and in
them, thou shall be found and judged just.

It may appear the^ by this, 1 That as David was sharply rebuked from God by
Nathan, so sundry times are other the children of God, as Peter by Paul, etc,
and this must they look for, if not personally by word, yet in the open
ministry, or in their private consciences. So are the Pharisees called Vipers,
the Galathians foolish, etc.

2 David would show, that his judgment did differ from the multitude, who
think that God is sometime too sharp, for indeed so do they, as Caine, and
Job in his impatiencie. Take heed then, while we fret and charge God
foolishlie in our heart, we be not of the humor of the world.

3 In that, that David speaks this by occasion of Nathan, he shows, that
Ministers speeches and rebukes, taken out of Gods word, are from God himself.

And therefore should be, 1 Patiently heard. 2 Taken to heart. 3 Made use of for
life.

4 That whatsoever the world or our flesh would move us unto, always should
we acknowledge God to be just and upright.

Now follows David's submitting to the justice of Gods deeds, and pure when
thou iudgest.

As if he should say, whatsoever thou should do unto me, yet must I
acknowledge thee just, and upright, much more in that thou will not let the
adulterous birth to live. For God being infinite, might inflict infinite
punishment, but being good and just, can do nothing but that which is most
good and excellent.

All that David says, is in this speech, When thou iudgest thou art pure.

Wherein are 2. things ascribed to God, Judgment. Pureness.


Judgment is taken two ways, 1 Properly, for giving sentence in a thing, as
Luke 19, 22.

2 Not properly. And then the part for the whole is put for governing, and
ruling the world. So Christ says, John 5, 22, The Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment to the Son. That is, governs not the world, or
orders the world without the Son, but by and with him. So is it Psalm 98,
9, and oftentimes else where in the Scripture.

Que. How is it said here that God judges, and Christ denies that the Father
judges?

Auns. David speaks of God essentially, Christ speaks of the Father
personally, so as there is no odds. For the whole Trinity judges.

And that God does judge the world, it is clear, Gen, 18 25, Psalm, 98, 9, and
even in particular matters, as sparrowes and Hairs, much more in men's crosses:
so as that it shall be needless further to show it.

Know then, 1 That nothing comes by chance.

2 That all things howsoever they seem to us, of GOD are most wisely done.
Though I take it, that judging here is yet somewhat more particularly taken for
correcting, as 1, Cor: 11, 29, that which is translated dammation, indeed is
judgment, that is, correction, so Pet: 1, 4, 17, judgment must begin, that
is, correction, at the house of God.

So as that whatsoever means are used, 1 Know that God orders crosses. Thus
thought Joseph, Job, David.

2 And that thereupon we ought always to be patient. I held my peace because
thou did it. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him. Yea, though it were to everlasting damnation.

3 Insomuch that whatsoever means, yet GOD is to be sought to for ease and
favor.

This judgment is here, with limitation of time, When. Whereby is declared
unto us, 1 That GOD does not always punish. Whereby he shows his long
suffering, and our weakness: for if he should, we were never able to abide it.

2 That in the breathing time between crosses, we should labor for
spiritual wisdom, strength, faith, patience, against the next affliction.

Thus much of the judgment, now follows the pureness.

Pure, it is a borrowed kind of speech, from things not mixed, but sheere,
and like themselves, not as troubled m^rie water, or foming sea, but as wine
without water, silver without dross.

The meaning is, without any mixture of wrong doing, or unrighteousness,
always keeping one tenor of upright dealing, accepting no person. etc.

Who dares doubt that God is thus? When he forbids impuritie to his
creatures, whose inheritance with him is undefiled, who cannot be seen but by
a pure heart.

1 Well then, take heed of charging GOD with injustice, even in the matter of
reprobation, much more in thine own crosses.

2 And endeavor to be pure and upright, like thy heavenly Father.

Thus much of David's judging himself worthy of punishment, now follow the
sins which he does confess: and first actual, in the 4 verse: next,
original, in the 5, and 6, verses.

Touching this, the Prophet first sets it down, then he lays it open.
He sets it down in two manners of speech; First, I was borne in iniquity:
the second, and in same has my Mother conceived me: both which are set out
with the word, behold.

But first let us endeavor to understand the words, so shall we better know the
sense.

The word which is read, borne, does properly signify the time and grief
about the delivery, and being brought in bed. So as that David's meaning is, as
soon as he approached to the light, the darkness of sin ouer-spred him.

Iniquity, does here signify in the full and largest meaning of it, to wit,
guiltiness, that is, faultiness, and deserving punishment, and withal,
pronenes and corruption to sin.

Sin is transgression of the Law, and the same with iniquity. The other word
conceived, properly cherished, or heat or warmed me: that is, in the womb from
the conception and after, that is, as soon as ever the matter whereof I was
made, was in the womb, warm and enclosed, so soon, and even then, began I to
be tainted.

Not that bed company between his Father and Mother, and bed benevolence (as
some fondly have thought) was sin: but that even from thence he was infected.
For the cleanest hand that is, sowing pure wheat, can not cause, but when it
springs it will have straw, chafe, etc.

Whereupon by the way, it may seem that sin is drawn, as well from the mother
as the Father, which the Papists seem to deny. And whereas in the 5 to the
Romans, it is ascribed to man, there I think the woman is to be included.

For the word, behold, which is so usual in the scriptures, I take it not as
many learned do, to note a wonder wheresoever it is set, but according to the
plainness of the style of the scripture, to set out a thing commonly known,
or that which may be, or should be known. Gene: 22, 7. (Hinneni) ecce me.
Almost 600 times in the scriptures, as Luke 7, 37, Iam: 3, 3, 4, and so often
else where in the same sense, as also here, being in such a thing, as no
servant of God should or can be ignorant of.

The words thus opened, let us come to the meaning of them altogether. The
chief drift and intent, is to set out David's first sin, which is here noted
to be, the iniquity wherein he was borne, and the sin wherein his Mother
conceived him. Which two manners of speech, show one and the self same thing.
Which in another sound of words is called by the Divines about Saint Augustines
time, Original sin. Which howsoever David says is in himself, is not only
true in him, but in all mankind, Christ only excepted, as shortly we may
perceive.

We may have in this verse a full setting out unto us what it is. For when
David says, me, he means his whole person, soul and body: and when he
mentions iniquity and sin, he means fault, deserving of punishment,
inclining to all corruption: and naming his Mother and conception, he shows
that it came from the first Mother to all following children.

But first of the name the learned Writers have given unto it, which though in
syllables it be not in Scripture, is grounded thereuppon, as Gen: 6, 5, and 8,
21.

They call Original or of beginning, 1 Because it was from the beginning, as
soon as ever the fall of Adam was.

2 It is one of the first things, that is with the child in the conception.

3 It is the beginning of all sins, of deed and practice. And thus
familiarly may be showed unto us to be: A disorder of the whole man (touching
matters of everlasting life) or a decay of the image of GOD, brought upon all
mankind (Christ only excepted) by the fall of Adam and Eve, whereby they are
subject to the anger of God, and inclinable to any sin.

Disorder does signify a swaruing from that, it was or should have been at
the first, and a continuing so. Whereby is not only, 1 The absence of
goodness, and uprightness, but 2 the presence of sin and evil, 3 and
inhabilitie in it self, to reform it self. These might be proved but for
shortness sake.

In the mind was and should have continued, full knowledge of God to salvation,
with the comprehension of arts and creatures.

The will delighted in Gods will: the affections were stirred holily to their
due objects, in most due sort: the senses likewise, and all other practices
were thereafter. But now most is lost, the contrary come in, and will hardly
be dispossessed.

The whole man, does signify soul and body, powers and parts. Gene: 6, 5.
Gene: 8, 21.

The first motions. Rom, 8, 7. The mind. Titus 1, 15, and so of the rest.

Yet must we not so mean, as though the substance were empaired, or the number
of faculties, but as in a poisoned fountain, there is the water and the
running, only the wholesomnesse is taken away; so the soul and body, the
parts and powers are the same, but the soundness for their work, to fit them
to proper things in due sort, is lost.

All this while this must be remembered, that we understand it of matters of
the spirit and everlasting life. For otherwise, natural men have many excellent
parts, for worldly knowledge of the creatures, arts, policy, and such like.
So Paul shows, 1, Cor, 2, 14.

This comes by the disobedience of Adam and Eve, in whose loins we were, who
is our root, with whom we stand or fall, of whose juice we savor and relish.
For as in matters of treason, the Father tainteth all the blood, so is it in
this case.

The Parents propagate this, neither is it, as the Pelagians dream, only by
imitation. Rom: 5, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19. 1, Tim: 2, 14.

And it spreads over all mankind (Christ excepted) the Virgin Marie is not
free.

Besides, it subiecteth to the wrath of GOD. Rom, 5, 18, and seventh chapter,
24. verse.

Even in the very regenerate. It is not imputed indeed, but yet there it is,
howsoever the Tridentine gloss, would corrupt the Canonical text.

Lastly it inclines to sin. Rom: 7, 23. This never could the heathen
understand.

But here four questions are to be answered.

1 What is the proper seat of this sin? Aun. The whole man, but specially the
mind and will.

2 Against which commandment is this sin? Auns. Against all and every of
them.

3 How comes the soul to be infected with this sin, since it is immediately
created of God, and not begotten by the parents, as the body is?

Auns. Better it were to seek to shake it of, since every one must confess
that he has it, then curiously to search how he came by it, even as to cure a
soar, and lift out of a pit, rather then to stand questioning how those
dangers came.

Some think that this hangs upon the appointment of God, who gave all things
to Adam, not for himself only, but also for posterity, not as a private man,
but as the root and head; who standing, all other should continue with him,
falling, brings all other down: and because the soul is part of the party,
the body infected, causes the soul to be so accounted. But this is not
sufficient.

Others think, that the soul is indeed created at the first pure, but yet
weak, and as soon as ever it is joined to the body, receives tincture and
infection. Both aunswers have learned Authors, I like the last.

4 Can this sin be quite taken away in this life?

Auns. No, so as that it should not be, but is taken away, as that in the elect
and regenerate, it is not imputed. For the relics (as the Fathers speak) are
left to exercise us with.

Thus much for the opening of the words and meaning, see what we may further
learn.

1 In that that David being checked for one sin, thinks of more, and even the
root of all, he does as others of the children of GOD do, and must do, so
seriously think of one sin, as that they find out others, even as when one
uses a light to seek some one thing, he thereby sees others.

So thought David of the sins of his youth, Psalm, 25.7. and others, Gene:
42, 21. Prou: 9.9. Wherefore, that is no good confession, that finds not out
daily more and more sins.

2 By the word, behold, we must remember, that our original sin should be
very well known, and thoroughlie perceived of us: but it is quite otherwise,
few or none perceive it.

3 The more seeing into the heinousness of this sin, so we take heed of
Flacias errors and others, is good profiting in grace, otherwise then the
Papists are wont to lessen it.

4 Seeing this sin is so natural and engraffed, bred in the bone, we had need
arm our selves continually against it.

5 Presume not too much of good natural dispositions, in matters of the
worship of God, the best are infected with original sin, then which there is
no worse poison.

6 Parents must be careful, that as they naturally beget their children, and
so infect them with original corruption, they procure their regeneration to
wash away the filth hereof, by indeuouring to make them partake the merits of
Christ, and also the power of his death, to destroy the body of sin.

7 Never look to be free in this life from it, neither be discouraged if you
take some foyles by it, wish to be clothed upon.

Thus much for the setting down of this sin, now follows the laying open of
it, and making more clear.

Matter. Notoriousnes of it, as before


The matter is in two speeches, 1 Thou love truth in the inward affections. 2
Thou teach me wisdom, etc.

But first come to the words.

Truth, in Scriptures signifies diversely, more then need to be spoken of
here. In this place, I judge it to be put for righteousness, as that which in
Gene: 24, 49, our English books have truly, the 72 Interpreters have doing
righteousness: so is truth taken, Ephe: 4, 21, for true obedience, which is
called righteousness, ver: 24. so Esaias 26, 2, the righteous Nation is said to
keep truth, by way of interpretation, to which purpose look Esaias, 59, 14. but
doing of truth, John 3, 21, is most bright. So is it, I take it here, sincere
obedience actually performed to the Law of GOD. It is called justice, Ephe: 4,
24. And is a part of the image of God, by a meton: of the adiunct for the
subject.

And is first here named, because it is more manifest, though not more
necessary then wisdom.

Love, in the preterperfect Tence, and is always true and present in God,
yet I take it, we may fitliest interpret in the preterpluperfect Tence, had
loved, that is, did always so love, as that at the first, thou createdst
man in it, and art now angry with me for having lost it. For I judge the
Prophet has respect to the image of God at the creation.

Inward affections, in Hebrew, the reins, some say the heart strings. A trope,
showing the seat of desire and affections, which they note is in the kidneis.
Hereby the Prophet means the will and affections.

Wisdom, is knowledge mentioned. Coloss: 3, 10.

In the secret of my heart, the Hebrew is only in the secret, meaning indeed
the heart, which is hid and covered with a filme, that it does not appear. He
means the mind and understanding.

Have taught, I think for had taught, as before respecting the creation.

These are the words. Now because one thing is meant in both these manners of
speech, therefore not curiously speaking of them a sunder, let us consider
them both together, according to their intent.

The Prophet labors to set out his corrupted estate, with that which was at
the first creation, the which the Scriptures call by the image of GOD, which
David no doubt here points out.

Now the image of GOD, is the likeness to GOD, and was in Angels. Men.


We only must consider of it as it was in man, and is here set down to be
truth in the inward affections, and wisdom in the secret heart.

Where by the way, note the error of the Anthropomorphites, thinking God like
to man's body: though Luther think they be falsely charged with this error.

Now, in this description of the image of God, we may consider in what parts,
and what things this likeness is.

The parts are Inward affections. Secret heart.


That is, as we heard before, the disposition of the will, judgment, and
affections. Indeed man's soul is a spirit, somewhat like God, and had
princedome over the creatures, as a shadow of Gods sovereignty: but the seat
of likeness most principally is the heart, judgment, and affections.

The things wherein this image is, first wisdom or knowledge, Col: 3, 10,
which the devil can tell. Gene: 3, 5, and here is called wisdom, and is a
full comprehension of things, to performance of the will of GOD, for happy
estate in Paradise.

This had with it, understanding of the moral Law, all arts, knowledge of
all creatures, as in Adam, and somewhat in Solomon.

And this was engraffed that a man needed no Master.

The second is justice, Ephe: 4, 24. Full obedience to the will of God in
desiring, thinking, willing nothing but Gods will. This is here called truth.

Now these things were loseable, and indeed were lost, which we never here
shall fully recover.

This is it which here the Prophet so dolefully mourns for.

1 Shall we now need to be put in mind, that the word behold, here also
does put us in mind, that every man ought to know these things, which few do?

2 Or that always thinking of this downfall, we should continually mourn?

3 Besides, here have we a glass to trim our selves by, and a president,
whereafter we ought all to fashion our selves.

4 And that in the practice hereof, we should begin from the reins and heart,
where the seat of these things are, otherwise, we bridle the horse at the
wrong end.

5 Lastly, here is matter enough for all a man's life time, so as that he
cannot be idle, but had need be repayring till he prove like God.



Now follows the second particular part, consisting of sundry suits and
desires unto God, from the beginning of the 7 verse, to the middle of the 14.

The first is verse 7, A most earnest desire, and has two branches: the first,
for forgiveness of sin; the second, for imputation of righteousness, whereof
both are conditional, and presumed by faith.

The first, purge me (as I persuade my self thou will) with hysope, I shall be
clean. Which is as if it were, If thou purge me etc. Wherein the setlednesse
of faith, as in all other petitions ensuingly made, is to be remembered. In
vain is it to pray without some persuasion of being heard, when we have
commandment to pray, promise to be heard, and experience that others have
been heard: as before has been declared.

Of this first there be two members, whereof the one is cause, the other the
effect. The cause, purging with hysope; whereof one seems to be the
principal, the other helping.

The principal is purging. The signification and form whereof is to be
considered.

The signification shows, that he desires to be made clean from fault. Not
that there should be none in him, (for who is free?) but that it should not
be imputed. Which though it never be in any party severed from imputation,
yet for teaching sake it so may be.

The form of the verb is the future tence, for the Imparatiue mood, most
usual in scriptures, which declares a full assurance and persuasion of faith.

The helping cause is Hysope, some translate it moss: one thinks it may be
Rosemary, whereof their legal sprinklings might be made. But the Author to
the Hebrews, takes away all doubt in the 9 chapter 19 verse, having the word
hysope.

For the better understanding whereof, it will not be amiss to have recourse
to the ceremonial law. Where Leuit: 14, 7, it is used in purging of Leprosy,
and Numbers 19, 9. for lesser vncleanesses, both which no doubt David thought
of when he penned this: judging of his sin, as of Leprosy, not neglecting
the desire to be purged even from the least. Mention likewise is made of Hysop.
Exodus 12.22. But the other meaning ought to like us for the 9 to the Hebrews.

But some man may say. Why is there so often mention of Hysope made?

Aun. Not for that it has any force of it self to cleanse the soul, but
having some natural property to open and cleanse the body, was appointed of
God as it were a sacramental sign, and does very fitly represent the blood of
Christ, who cleanses us from all sin. 1, Ioh, 1, 9, so do the Bread and Wine
in the Supper, water in Baptism, represent Christ.

Now then this Hysope is not for it self, but to represent the sprinkling of
the blood of Christ. 1, Pet, 1, 2, Hebr: 9, 14, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, that is,
the death and sufferings of Christ applied.

So as that the Prophet desires the sacrament of sprinkling, with the fruit
thereof.

First therefore it is manifest, that he understood the ceremonies or
sacraments, as every Christian should.

Secondly, he knew that they all did tend to Christ.

Thirdly, and rather desired the fruit thereof, then rested in any outward act.

The Papists abuse this place for their holy water, first, whereas all such
legal ceremonies are dead everlastingly. Secondly, neither have they any new
commandment from God. Thirdly, nor can they ever show, that the sprinkling
for the act only done (as in their holy water they imagine) did good to the
soul.

Now in that the Prophet names this first, he teaches that our care should
be first and greatest for pardon of sins, then all other things follow.

Thus much of the cause: Now follows the effect, and I shall be clean.
Metaphor: that is, I shall be free from fault. Whereby he shows. 1 That by
Christ he shall be fully cleansed, so as that he shall need no other means to
take away any remainder by occasion of sin: no there shall be no relics to
be satisfied for in Purgatory.

2. That this is solely by Christ, for he speaks it without doubt, that he
shall be clean, that is, by imputation.

This is the first branch, the second follows.

Wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. This is for imputation of
righteousness. Hereof there are two parcels, as before, the first the cause,
the other the effect.

The cause is in the word wash. Whereby he either has respect to the Priests
washings of themselves, or the leprous persons: but of this enough before.
Which besides purging is mentioned, because Christ came as well by water as
blood. John 1, 5. water signifying full holiness.

The effect, I shall be whiter then snow. An hyperbolicall metaphor: meaning,
he shall be most perfectly clean.

Now by both these sentences, one thing is principally meant, as is often
seen in the scriptures. In both which jointly we may consider, 1 The
necessity of this justice. 2 The desire of it. 3 The commendation of it.

The necessity appears, in that the Prophet makes it his first suit,
wherein alone is everlasting happiness, Psalm. 32, 1, 2. Rom: 4, 7. So as that
indeed without this, there can be no favor looked for at Gods hand. It is the
wedding garment, and the one thing necessary, without the which, like Jacob
in Esaues clothes, we never shall obtain the blessing.

The desire of it follows. Purge me with Hysope, wash me. Wherein are, 1
The person purging and washing: 2 The thing wherewith this purging is, Hysope.
3 The party receiving, I David, purge me. God, even the whole Trinity
purges: the Father, for the Son, and by the holy Ghost. And that only I,
even I for mine own sake put away thy sins. Esaias 43, 25.

God thus doing this, is said in scriptures to impute, that is, to account or
reckon, and is a borrowed kind of word taken from debts or reckonings, as when
I owe a great sum, and my surety paieth it for me, my creditour cancelling or
delivering my band, does impute that payment unto me. This is not a putatiue
righteousness, as the Papists falselie charge it to be: where they fet
themselves against GOD, while their Priests take upon them, the power and act
of forgiving sins.

The second is the thing wherewith this purging and washing is, and that is
here Hysope, and water, signifying unto us the full righteousness of Christ,
which is his obedience unto the death for us.

Christ is God and man, his man-hoode suffering, his Godhead giving merit
thereto.

His obedience is active, or passive.

His active, is the fulfilling of the moral law, in the rigor of it.

His passive righteousness are his sufferings, from the beginning of his
incarnation, to his resurrection, which were very many, very grievous, and with
the feeling of the anger of God, and becoming a curse.

Both these are counted to us, to the pardon of all sins, fault, and
punishment, and the counting of all righteousness and favors with that.

Now that which is said of Christ, is to be understood of him alone, without
mixture of any other thing whatsoever: nothing beside being able to make so
white, as Christ's righteousness.

The third thing is the party receiving, and that is David. And here, as there
is imputation on Gods part, there must be application in the party praying, to
wit, faith. For as the sprinkling of the Hysope and water was received, so must
Christ be. Here therefore faith is most necessary: to the full understanding
whereof are necessary to be known, 1 The object. 2 The parts. 3 The
properties of it.

The general object of faith, is the whole word of God, but more particulerly
the doctrine of salvation by Christ, as the marrow and pith of the Scriptures.

The parts of faith are three. The first knowledge, which is a perceiving of
the meaning of the word of God, but especially of salvation by Christ, which
then we may judge to be sound, when we can discern falsehood, when we rest upon
grounds of Scripture, when nothing can drive us from it.

The second, assent, which is a full persuasion, that the former is true.

The third affiance or application, whereby we are persuaded that the word of
salvation, and so salvation is ours. And here indeed lies the chief force
of faith, whereas the wicked may have the other parts.

The properties follow, 1 Commonly it is small and weak. 2 It desires to
increase.

3 It makes the heart to think most highly of Christ.

4 It will change the whole man.

The commendation of this justice follows, I shall be whiter then snow.

Quest. How can this be, seeing every where the Saints in Scriptures do
disauow their own righteousness, and are ashamed of it?

Aun. Righteousness is twofold, of Justification. Sanctification.


That which the Saints mislike, is the imperfectnesse of their sanctification,
not of justification, which can have no blemish. Indeed sanctification is
never severed from a party justified, yet it must be distinguished from
justification.

Gather then from hence, 1 That Christ's righteousness imputed unto us, is
most perfect, that God cannot in the rigor of his justice find fault with it,
else could not the Prophet by it be so white.

2 When we consider of righteousness to abide the judgment of God, all our
own, of never so inward sanctification, must be removed.

3 That perfectness may stand with imperfectness, that is perfectness of
justification, with imperfectnes of sanctification.

4 That all justified parties, are justified equally, every one partaking the
righteousness of Christ. Mary and Rahab, Peter and the thief. It follows
not from hence, that glory should be equal.

Thus much of the first particular petition: the second follows in the 8
verse, Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

This particular desire, is for the further confirmation of the former, and is
a fruit of that. Wherein we may consider two things. 1 That which is prayed
for. 2 The end. That which is prayed for, is, Make me to hear joy and
gladness. The end, That the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice.

In that which is prayed for, we may consider what is desired from God to be
bestowed, then what of the Prophet to be received.

That which God is desired to give, is to Make to hear. That which the Prophet
would receive, is joy and gladness.

The manner of words, thou shall make me hear, it is in steed of make me to
hear, by a very usual manner of speech in the Hebrew tongue.

Now surely, very fitly is this desire joined to the former, as in the 32
Psalm, after the doctrine of forgiveness of fins, rejoicing, verse 11. So Rom,
5, 1.1, John 1, 4. So as that without the former this can never be, and where
the other is, there this is.

Howsoever the words here stand, the first in nature, which the Prophet
prays for, is joy and gladness.

Joy and gladness, though they much agree in one, yet is the latter some
increase of the former.

Joy is a sweet motion in the soul, upon opinion of having some present good.
Which according to the cause and object is diverse. For when nature is delighted
with any thing pleasing or preserving it, then is natural or fleshly joy, so
when the regenerate part is delighted with some grace or heavenly thing, this
is holy or spiritual joy, which is chiefly meant in this place. Sometimes
indeed God gives comfort of this world, but it is not general, nor simply to
be prayed for. This is a fruit of faith. And is peace of conscience increased,
arising upon the sweet feeling of Gods love in Christ, whereby we can be
cheerful in afflictions.

And that it is peace of conscience increased, it is clear. Bare peace is but
quietness, joy must needs be more, and therefore follows upon peace. Psalm,
32, 11, Gala: 5, 22.

Besides, it is with such a feeling of the favor of God, as that it is part
even of the kingdom of God, Rom, 14.17. And therefore by Peter is called
glorious joy. 1, Peter, 1, 8.

How it makes to rejoice in afflictions, Paul shows, Rom: 5, 3.

Now no doubt David prays for this, as it should be in the children of God,
for Paul 1, These. 5, 16, requires the^ to rejoice evermore, and to the Phil:
4, 4, Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say rejoice.

Having thus in some sort seen the meaning of this first branch, we cannot but
learn somewhat by it.

And first, that howsoever all joy have some sweetness, yet the Prophet
desires none that is of the world: So ought we to do, and if God send it, to
endeavor to use it aright, which is very hard.

2 Again, in that he is thus earnest for this joy, it appears that either he
had it not at all now, (as was most likely by reason of his grievous sin) or
not in such measure as he longed for it. And sure it is, that nothing quaileth
and allayeth this joy more then sin.

3 A man may be in the favor of God, and always not feel joy in the holy
Ghost. Indeed it is an excellent gift, but such as many times Gods children
want, though never they want matter to make them rejoice.

This is the first branch prayed for, the second is gladness: this is increased
joy. He feeling intolerable grief for sin, can never be satisfied, but
wishes all comfort to his broken heart. So did he Psalm, 32, 11, and Phil: 4, 4.

Now indeed well might the Prophet be stirred thus up to pray, for the sundry
great causes of grief, which he might find in himself, as other the
children of God, who sometimes may be brought so low, as to think that all Gods
comforts are too little for them.

1 So as that men must not give over, though sometimes they be brought so low.

2 Besides, it is a good sign to find the want, and long for the having of
this joy, and the more the better.

Now follows the thing which on Gods part he prays for, Make me to hear.
Wherein is the Author, and the means.

The Author is God, who only can give this joy. Ioh: 16, 22. So as that it
never can by any be taken away. To whom we must only seek.

1 The means is hearing. For this joy being a fruit of faith, is bred by the
word of faith, which especially is the Gospel: so as all must attend thereto.

2 In that he desires to be made to hear this joy, whereas joy indeed is
rather in feeling, he shows that we must hang upon the word, waiting against
hereafter to be full possessed of this joy, here we hear of it, after we
enter into it, according to that, Enter into the joy of thy Lord.

Thus much of the thing, now follows the end, That the bones which thou have
broken, may rejoice.

It is allegorical, that is, one thing is said, and another is meant. The
Prophets mind is to find some sweet comfort, after great grief, he uses a
comparison of broken bones, which are meruailously painful to any in whom
they are, and he seems to fetch this speech from the practice of Lions, who
first break the bones, and then devour. So says Ezechiah in his great
grief, Esa, 38.13. He brake all my bones like a Lion. For so in Daniel 6.24.
are Lions said to have broken the bones of Daniels enemies, ere ever they came
to the ground. And therefore it is observed in the first book of Kings, 13.
chap. 27. verse, that when the old Prophet came, and found the body of the
younger Prophet dead, that the Lion had not eaten the carcass, nor broken,
(for so the Hebrew is) that is, the bones of the Ass.

So as in the midst of this grief of David, he seems to himself to see
God as a fierce Lion to come upon him, and put him in great pain and more
fear. All this is in the conscience, so as that unless one have felt the
wound of spirit, he could hardly guess, that it should have such terrors.

See in David, that the greatest griefs that are, do not straightway show a
desperate estate? God can even bring to the gates of hell, and yet raise up
again, as he did him.

2 And yet that it is a good thing, according to the greatness of sin, greatly
to sorrow. Our Savior liked it in the woman, that washed his feet with her
tears.

3 But always in the midst of terrors, we must take heed, we be not driven
from God, and only poare upon our griefs. For David now could pray, that
these his bones might rejoice, that is, that he might feel as much comsort as
he had felt sorrow. Showing, that as God can, so many times he does send
marvelous joy after grief.

Thus much of the second petition, a third follows. Hide thy face, etc. Which
is in part a repetition of that which was generally prayed for, in the first
verse of the Psalm, and is in it self, a desire for to have pardon of sin.

It consists of two branches bearing the same fruit, and signifying the same
thing. The first branch is, Hide thy face from my sins. Which words are not
in their proper meaning. Face, is put for the eyes, and eyes for sight and
knowledge, from whence arises bewraying of mislike. For when we see a thing
that displeases us, we bewray our mislike by our countenance. And therefore
David would have God not to look upon his sin, least he should, as he justly
might, mislike him.

Hiding, is, that David's sins come not into Gods sight.

But here may be a question, How can any thing cover Gods eyes, who is all
eye, and every where?

Answer. These things are not spoken properly, but to our capacity, whereby
David's desire that God should not so take knowledge of his sins as he should
punish them, is set down. Indeed nothing can cover Gods eyes against his
will: yet himself may shut his eyes, or wink, as Acts, 17.30. and though he
cannot choose but know our sins, yet he may choose, whether he will mislike
us (being in Christ) or punish us for them, which is the thing that David
desires.

Now the only veil that covers Gods eyes from beholding our sins, is
Christ, and his righteousness, which God the Father beholding, does so like and
take such pleasure in, as that he respects not our unworthiness, nay looking
through Christ, does account us worthy.

The other branch follows, Put away all mine iniquities. Which because it was
in the beginning of the Psalm, needs not here to be treated of.

Now follows a fourth desire in the 10. verse. Create in me a clean heart,
etc. And this is for sanctification: as also has two parts in it, whereof the
one does serve to expound the other.

The former is, Create in me a clean heart.

Heart, is not put for the fleshy part of the body, but for the soul, which
keeps especial residence there, and not for the substance and powers, but
qualities; and though it be all over the body, yet has it the chair of estate
in the heart, according to the Scriptures, otherwise then some Philosophers and
Physicians write, that it is in the brain.

So as that the Prophet here means the very fountain, and head spring of
life and all functions thereof.

This is the more to be marked, for the order, in that he desires to have the
heart wrought upon: because that, 1 without the heart, nothing will be clean
in man.

2 With the heart always the rest of the soul and body follows.

It is therefore all our duties, to labor to have our hearts wrought upon
first. For as the heart in the body, the root in the tree first are made; so
must it be in grace, the heart and soul must be settled first.

After he prays to have this clean, that is, free, not only from the guilt
of sin, but from the filth and corruption of it, which is especially meant.

Creating, to speak properly, is to make of naught, and is used here
improperly. The Prophet speaks according to his own feeling, and present
judgment of himself, as though he had lost all, and had no goodness in
himself. No doubt the Prophets heart was in part clean, though not so much as
he desired.

These things thus opened, here comes a question first to be answered.

Quest. Whether David could have lost the cleanenes of heart, having once had
it?

Aun. No. The gifts and calling of God, that is (as I take it) the gifts of
effectual calling, are such as God never repents of or takes away. Faith,
hope, and charity, are abiding gifts, as sure as the election of God, which is
unchangeable. Indeed the children of God, if we only considered them in
themselves with their enemies, might fall away, but being founded upon the
unchangeable nature of God, and immutability of his counsel, they cannot, the
gates of hell shall not prevail against them, the elect cannot be deceived or
plucked out of Christ's hands. Nay, certain it is, that David did not actually
leese his former cleanenesse. For sure it is his heart smiting him (as here it
did) so doing before in less matters, it was not wholly void of cleanenesse.
And again, it could not pray for cleanenesse, if it were not somewhat clean.

This is most sure, that by grievous sins much filthiness comes to the
soul, as by a boistrous wind a tree may loose his leaves and some branches,
so as that the party sinning, may be brought into as great passions almost as
if he had lost all, but the desire of the grace is an infallible certainty of
some grace of that kind.

The Prophet therefore desires not a clean heart, because he had it not in no
sort, but because he could not so well perceive it in himself, and take such
comfort in it, as he had done before, and for that he desired it a great deal
more then now he had it. So learned, so rich men think themselves not
learned, not rich, in respect of that which they do desire, and when the
Sun is up, the Moon seems to have no light.

Well then, in that the Prophet desires this clean heart, whereas sundry
other parts were unclean besides, he shows, that, 1. of all uncleanness,
that which is of the heart is most filthy, there being (as it were) the common
sink of all sin in a man, so as that howsoever the channels be cleansed, if
the draine be not, little cleanenesse will be procured.

2 In that his filthiness makes him pray for fresh cleanness, as though he
had not any, see to what a pass some gross sin may bring a man unto, even
to doubt of his estate, touching his cleansing, and so being in the favor of
God.

3 No doubt it is a very hard thing to cleanse a heart, only able to be done
by God himself.

4 There is none but with David may find filthiness in his heart, from whence
he might desire to have it purged. For this purpose read Mar. 7.21.22. and 2.
Cor. 7.2.

5 Now David so prays for a clean heart, as that he does not neglect pure
hands, etc. A pure heart will cleanse the whole body and soul, wheresoever it
is. Psalm. 24.4.

6 Never can any of the children of God, content themselves with the begun
cleanenesse which they have, but they always will be growing in it.

7 Now seeing it is thus, it is our parts to desire cleanenesse as well as
David. For that with it we shall see God. Math. 5, 8. Look Psalm. 24.4. Heb.
12, 14.

8 Now God only works this. Ezech. 36, 26.

By his word, faith, and Spirit, regenerating and renewing.

But here a question may be made.

Quest. How may one know, whether his heart be clean, yea or no?

Answer. If he have the former things, whereby it is wrought. Besides a
clean heart, 1. will desire to have clean hands, and so every part and power
of soul and body, 2. will hate even the garment spotted of the flesh, 3.
will never flatter it self in secret, 4. will be willing to be examined:
unclean persons will be loath to be found in their filth.

Thus much of the former part, the latter follows, and is almost the same
with the former. First somewhat for the words.

Spirit, among many things in Scripture which it signifies, is here put for
the motion and stirring of the mind. So Luke 9, 55. Number. 14.24.

Right, does signify settling, 1. In the favor of God, 2. and obedience to him.

Renew, that is, refresh that which is somewhat decayed and blemished, restore
it to the former perfection again.

Within me; that is, such as may spread over my whole person.

Consider then. 1. That seeing David prays for this right spirit, which is
constant, that there is such an one, and that one may have it, and pray for it
by faith.

2 That all are to labor to be constant in persuasion of Gods love to us, and
in performance of our duties to him.

3 That even first thoughts and rising motions, are to be looked unto and
ordered.

4 That these good motions will fade, and decay in us.

5 That we have great need to have them often refreshed and renewed in us.



Some take it to be all one with that which went before, nevertheless I take
it to be distinguished from the former. For although sometimes in one verse the
latter is all one with the former, yet is it not wont so to be in diverse
verses, and especially in such short Scriptures, but upon some special
occasion.

This desire then contains a request, to have particular judgments or
punishments kept from the Prophet. For to the fault of sin, belong diverse
rods and scourges, which the Prophet here fears.

Now this desire has two parts. The first, Cast me not away from thy presence,
the other, take not thy holy spirit from me. In both the which the Prophet
David seems to have respect to Gods dealing with Saul, whom he cast off from
being King, as to have the kingdom to continue in his line, and from whom
likewise he took his good spirit.

The presence or face of God in Scripture signifies sundry things, which were
too long to recite: here it contains three things. 1. Favor of God, 2. The
place of the worship of God, whence the face and favor of God may be perceived
So Genesis 4.10.14. Ion. 1.3. 1. Sam. 26.19.

3 Service before or in the presence of God. Which in David was his service in
governing the kingdom. So Math. 18.10. Job 1.6. Esth. 1.14.

These the Prophet desires not to leese.

Cast me not, take not these away from me in an anger, otherwise I shall
endeavor to bear the loss patiently.

First now let us learn by David calling to mind Gods dealing toward Saul, to
profit and be the wiser for Gods punishments in others.

2 Let us a little enquire, whether this favor the Prophet fears to leese,
be for and to salvation, or in things only belonging to this life? For the
clearing whereof some sentences must first be set down.

1 David had the favor of God to salvation.

2 David could never fully and for ever loose it.

3 David might have the feeling of it so impaired, as that he might fear that
he should loose it.

4 Nevertheless this favor is not here meant: but that favor whereby God
first gave David the kingdom, aduauncing him to the honor of being Gods
Lieuetenant to govern his people, in having God for his defense and grace, as
Saul had for a time. Which favor among outward things, is the greatest in the
world.

This David desires may not be taken from him, not so much for the kingdom
sake: as 1. That God might not bewray to others, that he was displeased with
David.

2 That David might not by occasion hereof, cause the adversaries to blaspheme.

3 That yet David might have his high place, from whence he might make open
confession and acknowledging of his fault to all his kingdom.

Thus much for that question.

1 Now all that are above others, if they mean to keep their wealth, and
honors in the favor of God, they must take heed of sin.

2 Since that kingdoms are taken from Princes, and so marvelous changings and
troubles come, we had need pray for Kings that they sin not, and if they
sin, that they may repent.

3 That even for sins, God takes away outward favors.

4 That in outward callings, men should remember to labor in them, as serving
before the face of God.

5 That in the lesser matters, as any outward thing, it greeueth the servant of
GOD, to see any displeasure of God.

Hitherto the first part, the second follows, Take not thy holy spirit from
me.

Spirit, does here signify the gift of the Spirit, as else where in
Scriptures.

I do not think that the Prophets meaning is, to speak of the spirit, which
is called of sanctification (which howsoever a man may fear to leese, can
never yet fully be lost) but of the good spirit of the holy God, which spirit
is said to have departed from Saul. 1, Sam. 16.14, Saul had not the sanctifying
spirit of God (unless only in restraining him.) Indeed he is said to be an
other man, that is, furnished with other gifts then he had before, whereby he
was enabled to govern the kingdom, as in the book of Judges, the spirit of
the Lord is said to come upon the Judges, that is, the work of the spirit, in
sundry gifts and abilities of the spirit for government in war and peace.

As Saul therefore lost such gifts, so David prays he may not, to wit, love
of his Country and people, prudence, courage, making good laws, felicity, or
good success.

He teaches us then, 1. That sin deserves not only the impairing of saving
graces, but the loss even of gifts meet for a man's particular vocation. So
God threatens Mal. 2.2. to curse their blessings, and says, Ezech. 20, 26.
That he polluted them in their gifts, so Nabuchadnezzar is said to be turned
into a beast, Dan. 4. That is, to loose the use of reason: after the same
manner Nabal became a sot or a stone. 1, Sam. 25.37.

2 That even the gifts of a man's calling, are from the Spirit of God, so as not
the meanest calling or gift belonging thereto, is to be despised.

3 That every one is to endeavor to have, to preserve and increase the gifts of
his calling.

4 Now as all gifts are good, so those which are for the ordering of family,
city, or kingdom, are most excellent.

5 Mention of the holy Spirit is made to teach us, that all duties are to be
done holily.

They are done holily, when: 1 First the kind of life is warrantable by the
word of God, that is, when it any way sets out the glory of God, or
procures good to others.

2 The party performing any duty is in Christ, and repents for sins.

3 He does the duties for conscience to God, and as in the presence of God.

4 In the undertaking of duties he calls upon God.

Hitherto the fifth petition, the sixth follows, verse 12. Restore me to the
joy of thy salvation. etc.

Of this petition there are two parts: one, to have the joy of Gods salvation,
the other to be established with Gods free Spirit.

Restore, does properly signify to return that which is not a man's own to
the proper owner. But so can it not be taken here. For all things are properly
Gods, nothing our own. Here therefore David desires to have those things
given him again, which he had before, and has now lost.

Joy, does signify cheerefulnes of heart. Look verse 8. and with it always
seeking upon conceit of want, hoping to have in seeking, resting in having.

Salvation, does not here signify the estate of blessed life, but outward
safety, when as the prophet can, wanting any thing, come cheerfully to God,
seek to him, be persuaded of his help, and find it. So is it Exodus, 14, 13.
Psalm. 3, 3. and that we so may understand it here may appear, because,

1 That everlasting salvation can never be lost.

2 God for sins takes away outward safety and deliverance.

3 God does threaten some such thing to David by Nathan, 2, Sam, 12, 10, 11.

Now this outward salvation, or safety spoken of, has with it, 1 Gods promise
to help: 2 and certain performance thereof.

Note then 1 that sinners not repenting, have no security even of outward
estate, nor can have any heart to seek unto God: it is otherwise with the
godly, God hedged Job.

2 That Gods children, even in their prosperity, joy more in Gods favor to
them, then in all outward things.

3 Now howsoever David here prays for outward things simply, he
understands conditions, 1 according to the will of God, 2 as far as God
sees good for him, 3 so as always by them he may the more be persuaded of
Gods love to him: so must we.

4 David ascribes all outward safety to God, what means so ever he had, so
must we.

5 David felt Gods saving of him, men must not use the benefits without some
feeling of them, that they may the more be thankful for them.

Hitherto the former part, now follows the latter. Stablish me with. etc.
Wherein we may consider two things, the kind of favor he prays for, and
the matter wherein he would have that favor appear.

The kind is in the word stablish, and is a borrowed speech, signifying to make
steadie, to hold by the hand, else he should fall.

God vpholdeth all things by his word and power, and so does he every creature,
even the wicked: but he vpholdeth his Church and children more especially with
his grace and love, as a mother or nurse the child, which is like to fall, this
upholding or establishing is understood here.

Now this is the assistance of the holy Ghost, whereby the child of God is
vpheld daily in the duties of the worship of GOD, and his particular calling.
This has always in it, 1 truth, 2 frequentation, 3 continuance, which is
especially understood.

I gather then from hence: 1 That from the corruption of sin in a man, a man
may often fall into the same sins.

2 That God only can uphold them. They who desire to be vpheld by God, must
lay their foundation in salvation by Christ: 2 They must use all means: 3 That
unless a man be established, all is in vain.

The matter wherein he would have this favor showed, is Gods free spirit.
Spirit, does signify (I judge) the motion of the mind, stirred by the Spirit
of God, from whence all good things in us should proceed.

Free, does signify that which the Latins call ingenious, which has in it, 1
honesty, 2 cheerfulness.

This if it be wanting, maimeth all duties.

1 This, sin quenches: so as wheresoever this is absent, sin is present.

2 All must endeavor for such a spirit: only Christ and his Spirit works
such an one. We may know it thus.

1 It always will be busy in the duties of godliness, and ones private
calling.

2 It is glad when it has any occasion to do such duty.

3 It is diligent, first and last.

4 Needs no great spurring on.

5 Does things for the duties sake, and his calling.

6 Is not discouraged though it suffer for well doing.

7 Will hold out though it be alone.

8 Always makes excuses from the businesses of godliness and particular
calling, not any other to excuse from them.

The 13 verse follows,

The promise is to teach thy ways unto the wicked: the effect, and sinners
shall be converted to thee.

Where we see by the way, 1 That true repentance is fruitful: 2 Nay, it will
not rest in it self, but stretch to others.

Now in this duty, we may mark the thing the Prophet says he will do, and
the parties to whom.

The thing is, teaching Gods ways: the parties are, wicked, that is, sinners
not repenting,

1 Who have need of teaching.

2 Whom we may be with by virtue of our calling to do them good.

Teach, a man is said to do when he causes to learn. This a man does by 1
example, 2 in deed, 3 in word.

Here we must understand it of word and example: so as that,

1 We must speak things of instruction to others.

2 Be the first our selves that must do them.

3 Now what kind of teaching this should be, look psalm. 32, 8.

4 So as that every one should be careful of the salvation of each other: and
this work may beseem a King, being as careful to teach as to correct.

He will teach, but thy ways, that is, Gods ways.

Gods ways are either such as himself walks in, or such as he will have his
servant walk in.

Both may be well understood in this place, so as that sinners ought to know
how God deals with conuerts, and what course conuerts are to take to continue
in the pleasing of GOD.

Thus much for the duty, the effect is, and sinners shall be converted.

Sinners, are the same with the wicked.

Here might at large be handled the doctrine of the conversion of a sinner to
God, otherwise called repentance.

Somewhat may here briefly be touched.

Conversion being said to be in men, is taken largely. straightly.


Largely, for any change. Straightly, for that which in Scripture is called
repentance.

Some understand it here for that change which is in man, from the feeling of
his own wretchedness and misery, to the mercy of God. This is true, but not
sufficient and full.

But I take it to be to be understood in the second sense, as most often in the
scriptures the Prophet most fitly sets it out to be turning to God.

Turning unto, implies a former turning away, as indeed every sinner is out of
the way, whatsoever they seem to themselves, or others.

This turning is indeed a change, not of the substance, not of the powers, but
only of the properties in desires, and practices of the soul and body.

The qualities and properties which must be in a party thoroughly turned to
GOD, are of the faculties: 1 to fit themselves to their proper objects, as to
know, remember, see, hear, etc. that which it should: 2 to do their duties in
them cheerfully and constantly of the desires and practices, that they be
because they please God.

This turning is to GOD, which is, when a man in all things consulteth with the
word of God, 2 and endeavors to do all thereafter, 3 never giving over till
in some fort he so can do.

But that we may the better understand this turning, let us consider the
causes, the parts, the properties, and the marks of it.

The principal, efficient, or making cause, is the Spirit of God, making a man
anew. Ierem, 31, 18.

The isntrumental is the word of God.

The matter is whole man in soul and body.

The form is according to the image of God.

The utmost end, the glory of God, other middle ends, 1 to certify our own
consciences touching our adoption, 2 the edifying of our brethren.

The properties are many.

1 It begins from within, and is most careful to have the heart first turned
to God.

2 It never can long lie hid, though it desire not much to show it self.

3 It is always increasing, avoiding the sins the party is most inclined
unto, endeavoring for graces and duties most necessary.

4 In this life it is imperfect.

5 It is wise, and makes great account of great, and smaller account of
smaller things: so preferring the duties of the worship of God, as that it
neglects not the duties of particular vocation, and so performs them as yet
the heart is principally to God.

The parts are Mortification. Vivification.


Mortification, is the continual lessening of the practice and power of sin:
and strikes at, all it can, at original sin.

Vivification is a continual renewing and quickening to all holy duties, and
appears in the desire, purpose and endeavor to do well, recovering it self
again after slippes.

Now follow the properties: which can not easily be perceived by all.

1 Cannot be found in them who are not converted: 2 not easily in such as are
babes in Christ: 3 not of any while they are in the fit of grievous tentations,
especially of particularitie.

In others they may be found. Some of them are:

1 A willingness to set a man's self in the presence of God, to think of death,
the law, the latter judgment, hell.

2 A true hatred of sin, yea of every sin, and that in a man's own self.

3 A desire of spiritual nourishment, word, sacraments.

4 A love of such as are truly converted.

5 A delight in heavenly things, and preferring them before the world.

But here a question may arise, whether sinners when they knew that David was
again in favor with GOD, did convert?

Aun. David speaks not so much of the effect, as of the sufficient cause, and
just occasion. It is hard for a man by the effects to judge that the means
were never used. Good means may make one presume of a good end.

Now if David deemed that upon his finding favor with God, sinners would
turn, what might we do upon so many and great means.

Besides, David shows, that the best thing for a sinner to do, is to convert.

And that if sinners convert upon the knowledge of Gods mercy to David, how
would the godly profit?

Hitherto has been the digression,

The thing is to be delivered from blood.

Some learned interpreters, by bloods understand tragical examples, and bloody
events in David's stock and house: but they cannot well prove this.

I think it signifies manslaughter, and murder. For David now thought upon
the murdering of his most faithful servant Vriah, and slaughter of the other
in his band: thus are bloods often taken in Scripture. Gene, 4, 10. etc. David
prays that that fact be not laid to his charge.

After general confession, a man must come to particulars.

Delivery is freedom from the fault and punishment.

Let us then learn from hence, 1 that seeing David was above the compass of
manslaw, and yet calls himself to a reckoning for sin by the word of God,
other so ought to do.

2 What an horrible sin murder is.

3 Particular sins known, must particulerly be confessed.

4 The same sins will often recourse, and accuse the conscience.

The Author follows, who is repeated, with a special favor of his.

The Author is God, and is here repeated, as a note of faith and boldness in
the Prophet. Whereby he shows, that God, can, will, and that David looks
for help.

And the Prophet does the rather repeat it, 1 to affect himself with the
considerations of Gods majesty, 2 and to stir himself up to pray with his
heart, 3 and with all to show how impatient faith is of delays.

Now this favor is salvation of soul. body.


Hitherto has been the second special part of this psalm in petitions, now
follows the 3, which is thanksgiving, from the latter part of the 14. verse
to the 18.

To this praising is there a passage made, verse 14, 15, and a setting down of
the duty of praising in the rest.

The passage has the profession of this duty, and correction of the speech.

The profession is in the latter part of the 14. verse, and has in it, 1 the
kind of duty, 2 the instrument, 3 the matter.

The kind of duty is singing with ioyfulnes, which has great vehemency,
boldness, and cheerfulness.

Vehemency is in earnest setting of the mind.

Boldness in persuasion, that the duty pleases God.

Cheerfulness is whereby we readily upon the occasion given, break out into
the praises of God, and are glad that we have occasion so to do.

The instrument is the tongue, the mind is not sufficient. 1 God will have the
whole man: 2 others must likewise by us be provoked.

Neither did the tongue only sing, the hand played. So must we, all the ways
we can, testify our desire of praising God.

But some man may say, what does music help to the praise of God?

Auns. Nothing simply: 1 by it the mind of the singer is showed: 2 and
sometimes the mind dull, is stirred up.

The matter is the righteousness of God. This is the dittie of his song.

The justice of God does here signify the truth of God in keeping his
promise, as Rom, 3, 25, 26, to wit, toward sinners repenting. So likewise in
the Syriac tongue, justice is put for mercy.

1 Now David thus sings even in the house of his pilgrimage. Psalm, 119, 54.

2 He does not therefore sing amorous songs.

3 Now indeed, as all the statutes are to be our songs, that is our delight to
meditate in, so especially Gods promises of mercy toward repentant sinners.

4 May not this be some comfort, that he calls Gods mercy justice: so as
that God should not be just, if he were not merciful to sinners according to
his promises?

Hitherto the profession of duty, now follows the correction of the speech,
open my lips. etc.

This correction or mending of the speech, ascribes all to God, the act of
opening the lips, and the effect, My mouth shall show thy praise.

Open my lips, is a part for the whole, the prophet prays for ability
sufficiently to praise God.

1 No man of himself alone can rightly praise God. Natural corruption will
stop his mouth.

2 If a man cannot open his own lips to praise GOD aright, 2 much less can he
direct his heart to please GOD, 3 surely he cannot compose his outward man.

3 And if a man cannot rightly open his mouth, let him not be hasty with it.
Ecclesiast. 5, 1. 4 How earnest would his man be to have his heart ordered?

The effect follows, wherein is the instrument mouth. work. Showing the
praise of God.


Praise, is acknowledging or witnessing of excellency.

God is most excellent every way.

Showing forth, has 1 often repeating: 2 particular reckoning up, 3 clear
setting down.

All which we ought toward God to perform.



And that after two sorts, first by way of denial, then by affirming.

Both, the denial and affirming, have the thing. reason.


That which is the denial, is in these words, Thou desire no sacrisice,
though I would give it, thou delightest not in burnt offerings.

This part denies the insufficient thing to praise God by sacrifice. burnt
offering.


The reason, for that God is not delighted with sacrifice, neither wishes
burnt offerings.

I think the verse might better be distinguished thus. Thou art not delighted
with sacrifice. Thou desire no burnt offering though I would give it. For the
speech increases, greater is burnt offering then sacrifice.

But first know the meaning of the words.

Sacrifice properly so called, is a part of the Jewish worship of God, where
somewhat was offered to God.

It was of two sorts. 1 Propitiatory, to procure favor with GOD. 2
Gratulatory, to witness thanksgiving to God.

The second is meant in this place: and that was sometimes burnt offering, which
all was burnt and offered up to God. Sometimes called sacrifice when some beast
was killed, but part was reserved for the offerer, part for the priest, part
offered to God.

That which in English is translated desire, were better, art not delighted
with, spoken after the manner of men, that is, do neither command that I
should offer it, nor do so approve of it, when I offer it.

That which is translated delightest not in, were better wilt not, that is,
do not care for.

We are wisely for all this to understand this denial, for it may seem
strange that God should not like of that which himself commanded, as
sacrifice, and burnt offerings. etc.

First therefore God likes not these sacrifices only, and for the deed done
as sundry performed them. 2 He likes them not so much as he does the other of
a broken heart. For so denialls are by way of comparison. Look Hosea 6, 6, Joel
2, 13. 1, Pet, 1, 12. Thirdly, God likes them not, as the Jews many times
performed them. Look Esaias 1, and the 66. chapters.

Que. Did the Jews rest only in outward things, and had not those of the life
to come.

Aun. No. The elect Jews enjoy everlasting life, as well as any of us shall.

Que. What difference is between the Jews and the Christians this way?

Aun. In the maine matters of salvation nothing, the same God, the same Christ,
the same Spirit, the same word, the same faith, hope and charity, etc. In
outward things somewhat, they had more sacraments then the Christians, the
outward matter of them was diverse, the continuance was not for ever, as the
Christians are, things were not so clear among them, as among the Christians.

Que. Why did God ordain that, which afterward he did abolish?

Aun. The fulness of time was not yet come, and GOD would break the proud heart
of the Jews by these so many duties.

1 By this we may perceive, that a man may do duties which God has
commanded, and yet not please God.

2 That nothing will please God from us, only for the deed done, without
inward motion of the mind, with faith in Christ, with desire to please God, by
endeavoring according to Gods commandments.

3 Sometimes it so may fall out, that a man may omit some outward duty,
without any great fault.

4 When there is some cause that somewhat of the worship of God should not be
performed, never omit the spiritual.

5 If in David's time sacrifices were not always needful, what shall we now
think after Christ, of the abominable sacrifice of the mass?

Hitherto the part denying, now follows the affirming part,

The reckoning of them sets down two, a broken spirit, a broken and
contrite heart.

The commendation shows, that 1 they are sacrifices, that is in steed of all,
2 of God, 3 such as God despises not.

The spirit and heart, signify as before in the 10. verse.

Broken and contrite, speeches taken from things beaten into diverse pieces.

Contrite, beaten as it were to dust or powder, broken is opposite to solid and
hard, which yields with much a do, of which sort is every man's heart by
nature: hence are those speeches, a brazen forehead, an iron sinew. etc.

The better to know what this contrite heart is, let us first set down what it
is, 2 how it is gotten, 3 how it is tried.

A contrite heart is void of any conceit of the own worth, thinks it self
worthy of any punishment, and esteems all it own things most base, follows
the word of GOD into all forms, is comforted at the least sign of Gods
favor, cast down at the least sign of his displeasure, easily upon just
occasion is moved with affections of love, fear, joy, hope, etc, is always
full of pity to others, makes conscience of small things.

It is gotten only by the work of the holy Ghost. Eze. 11, 19. John 3, 6.

The Spirit works without means, in infants, as in John Baptist. By means
of the word, 1 preparatorily by the Law, 2 effectingly by the Gospel.

The law prepares, the Gospel finisheth, and works grace, as Nilus makes
Egypt fruitful: hereupon it is called the ministry of the Spirit. 2, Cor,
2, 8.

A helping cause to these, are, 1 priuitie to a man's own sins, infirmities,
slippes: these keep the heart the softer. 2 The cross sanctified, as in David,
Ezechias.

Now here is breaking and contrition in two degrees: to teach us how we are to
proceed. Not to rest in a little breaking, but to go on to grinding.

It is tried, for that 1 it chiefly medleth with it self straightly, has
leisure to look to others, for it finds it self so broken, that all pains
is too little to make it up, as in the publican, the woman. Luke. 7.

2 It trembles at the word of God, Esaias 66, 2, not only at his works, so did
Elie, David, Josiah, Ezechiah fear at the word.

3 Is patient under affliction.

4 Looks not to outward things more then needs must.

5 Can abide no delay.

6 Cheereth up it self only in Christ.

7 Is not hasty to use inordinate means, but hangs upon GOD.

The commendation remains. First, that these are sacrifices, that is, one
broken heart is as good, nay better then all the sacrifices in the world.

2 They are of God, that is most excellent, as the hill of God, trees of God,
note an excellency. They are the more excellent, for that they are, 1 of the
greatest price, 2 most hard to be performed, 3 most rare.

3 God despises them not. It is a kind of speech, where more the^ is spoken
is understood: thou despisest not, 1. thou make great account of. Esaias 57, 15.

1 So as that none broken in heart should be discouraged, since God does like
them.

2 We likewise should not think hardly, but most kindly of such.

Hitherto has been the first,

Whereof are two parts petitions for Sion. praises for Jerusalem.


The petition for Sion is, be favorable to Sion for thy good pleasure.

Wherein are the thing. favor. manner, for thy, or according to thy good
pleasure.


But first we may perceive, it is our part to pray for others, as well as for
our selves: 1 because of Gods commandment: 2 for that we are the better if
others be well: 3 We are members of one body, and God is all our Father: 4 but
David does thus more particulerly, because he might fear that for his sake,
God would afflict Sion and Jerusalem.

Sion was the hill in the City of David, where afterward was built the
Temple, and now was the Tabernacle. It seems to be put here for the Church.

And in that for persons. things.


Persons are especially those who are of the household of faith. And,

1 Those parents who beget to Sion, as faithful Ministers furnished, and
endeavoring to instruct in wholesome doctrine. Not Wolves, not hirelings.

2 Nurcing fathers and mothers, Kings and Queens, Magistrates.

3 Daughters of Sion, particular congregations.

These he prays may 1 multiply, and 2 flourish for the Churches good.

The things are: 1 publishing of saving doctrine: 2 frequenting holy assemblies
for exercise of the word prayer, and sacraments: 3 withstanding heresies: 4
procuring godly government of the Church.

The thing be favorable, 1 that is, give these things, 2 continue them, 3
bless them.

The manner, for thy good pleasure, 1 not for our merrits: 2 what measure thou
think good.

The petition for Jerusalem follows, wherein we may consider, 1 object, 2 act.

Object, the wall. Act, build.

Jerusalem, the chief city of Palestine. First called Salem, Gene, 14, 18.
Psalm, 76. After that it was called Iebus, Judges 19, 10. and of these two
names, Jerusalem as Iebusalem, though some think of a verb Iire and Shalom,
which is, shall see peace, and it is in the duall number, as Ramathaijm, 1,
Sam, 1.

With this was after joined the City of David: so were there three Cities in
one.

Now this city was once the joy of the whole earth. Look psalm, 48, 1, 2,
3. and is taken properly for that City before named, improperly for heavenly,
or earthly Jerusalem.

In this place it is taken both ways, for the City that then was, and a
political state of the people of GOD for afterward, as Esaias 2, 3. Psalm. 122,
3, 6.

A political state, is a company of people well ordered and furnished with
things necessary for this present life.

Which may fitly be resembled to Jerusalem. Because 1 that as Jerusalem had, so
other states should have Laws from God: 2 that as in that city, so in
others, God should as it were, keep his Court, 3 where should be likewise the
pure worship of God.

Forget not then, 1 that outward things come from God.

2 That we are to hang upon him for them by faith.

3 So to seek outward things, as chiefly to have care for that which is for
the common good.

Thus much for the City for which the prayer is made, now follows the
object, and special thing prayed for: the walls of Jerusalem.

VValls before gunnes were invented, were the chief strength of a city, so as
here they are mentioned for that which is the surest and safest for a
political state. Of which sort are:

1 Godly laws, which are grounded upon the equity of the word of God, 2
leave least to men and Judges discretions: 3 are most for the common benefit.

2 Good Magistrates for peace and war, these must 1 fear God, 2 hate
covetousness, 3 be diligent, 4 respect no persons, 5 seek the glory of God, the
good of the country.

3 Continual succession of good princes. 4 Loyalty of subjects toward their
sovereign. 5 Repulsing the open enemy, repressing privy seditions. 6 Wealth.
7 Bringing up of children in the fear of God. 8 A life at all hands framed
according to the word of God.

The act follows, build, that is, if these be absent, 1 give them, 2 if they
decay, restore them, 3 increase them more and more. Thou o God who only can.

The thanksgiving follows,

The duty is one and the self same of giving praise, and yet set down in 4
branches, 1 offering sacrifices of righteousness, 2 burnt offerings, 3
oblations, 4 offering of calves, etc.

Acceptance. Thou shall accept the^. Mark that as prayers, so praises should be
in common for the Church.

Que. How will this agree with the 16. verse?

Aun. Look that place.

1 Sacrifices of righteousnesses, as psalm, 46, such as are offered according to
the intent of Gods just law.

2 In that whole burnt offerings were in praise, we may perceive that we ought
likewise to praise God, 1 fervently, 2 with the whole heart, 3 though it be to
our cost.

The acceptance is such, as that God cannot mislike the^. Look psalm, 50, 23.
So as upon this acceptance, Gods children shall be encouraged to continue
their duty of offering praises, in bringing young bullocks. etc.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION upon the ten Commandments.
ALl man's happiness is in the knowledge of GOD. God makes himself known by
his word: a part whereof is the moral Law, imprinted at the first in Adam and
Eues heart: after, when that the light of it began to wear away, it was
proclaimed to the world, engraven in stone, kept for record in the Arc of the
testimony, in opening and applying whereof, most of the Divine Writers did
spend their time: even Christ himself came to teach it, and do it, and of it
one jot or tittle cannot possibly fail. It shall keep the use that ever it
had since the fall, to the general resurrection, and therefore is as needful
now to be understood as at any time.

It is commonly called the Decalogue, or ten words or commandments, for
that there be ten: the moral law, for that it sets down all duties for
manners of mankind, of all sorts and conditions, sometimes the Law, for that it
is the abstract and abridgement of all laws for humane behavior, meaning
though the moral law, not law in general: and is set down in the 20 chapter
of Exodus, from the beginning of the first verse, to the end of the 17 verse.
In all those verses are two things contained, the one an entrance into the
commandments, the other, the treatise and commandments themselves. The
entrance is in the two first verses, for the more orderly setting down of the
commandments, and is likewise double: According to the Register of the Law.
Author of the Law.


This law which thou now hear, is mine, the only true God and Iehoua:
therefore it is to be attended unto, and obeyed.

There can be no doubt in any of this, and therefore God himself, stands not
further to prove it, but only is content barelie to set it down.

The second reason is, from the diverse and great benefits, which God bestowed
upon them, and may be thus framed. His law who has bestowed most excellent
benefits upon you, ought to be attended unto, and obeyed.

I, who deliver this law, have so done by you, therefore, etc. Now what force
benefits have to prevail with receivers, for all obedience, because it is
clear, God does not further prove.

It were enough for God to command, but to prevent with kindness, would
break any good natured heart.

Now the benefits which God bestowed upon them, are mentioned to be of two
sorts, general, or more special.

General, is that which is the fountain of all: viz. Gods covenant made with
his people, and may be set out after this manner.

I who have taken you to be my people, and have promised to be Iehoua your God,
you must attend and obey my law.

But it is thus between you and me, therefore, etc.

And in this benefit, another special reason is implied, from the profession
of the people. For howsoever God couenaunteth with his people, yet unless they
again covenant to take him for their God, it is not sufficient, and therefore
God means this, that they couenaunting to take Iehoua for their God, must
attend and obey his law.

But so they have done, therefore, etc.

And surely, there cannot be any so effectual reasons, to enforce all
obedience to Gods law, as this. For taking God to be our God, we cannot but
perform all fealty unto him: this profession have our parents made for us,
we for our selves in sacraments and prayers.

More special, are such as by name are here reckoned up: and those two, not
but that God had bestowed more upon them: but because,

1 These were very fresh in memory:

2 And in these GOD manifestly showed himself to be the true and their God, 1
by his wonderful power in miracles and strong works, 2 by the constancy of
his promises, uttered so long before, for their entering and going out of Egypt
diverse hundredth of years before, 3 by his vvonderfull mercy and kindness
toward them, in so preserving, multiplying, and delivering them.

3 They were in themselves of special excellency and worth.

The first of these is, bringing out of the Land of Egypt.

Egypt in it self had many and great commodities, but here it is considered,
as given to idolatry, and even of the vvorst kind, to worship Crocodiles, Cats,
yea Onyons and Garlic, and most base creatures: so as that the Israelites
could not live among them with good conscience, neither would the Egiptians
suffer the Israelites (by their good wills) to worship God otherwise then
themselves did: so that deliverance from hence, must needs be a great favor,
where to have done as others, would bring no comfort of conscience, but hell
for afterward, and to have done otherwise, had brought certain outward danger.
Well therefore does God reckon up this favor, as to teach what an
intolerable thing it is to live among idolaters, and what a special favor to
be delivered from amongst them: where no means of salvation are, all sins
reign, and where if one be once entrapped, it is most hard to wind out.

No less slavery then this were the Churches in, in Romish Egypt, so as that
deliverance from thence, ought to prevail alike. For surely the mass, images,
relics, bread, etc. are as vile Idols as ever were among the Egyptians.

The same may be said for all such as are unregenerate, that their slavery is
very great.

The second benefit is, bringing out of the house of bondage, or servant.

Now as the former is spiritual, this is bodily, implying must a man have God,
and then worship him: secondly, for that it is impossible that a man should
well understand the other without this.

It is called great, for that the true understanding and use thereof, is of
great importance, as also for that it is one of the hardest to be kept, and
stretches very far.

Commandment. 1.
This commandment is, Thou shall have none other Gods before me: in which we
may consider the words, and then the meaning. Our English, thou shall not have,
is in the Hebrew, there shall not be to thee: shall not be, for may not be, or
ought not to be, so as if there be, thou sinnest. So as likewise shall not
have, must be understood, ought not to have.

And these words to thee, is not only to thy self, but to any of thine, or
any by thy means or occasion, whom thou may lawfully hinder.

Other Gods. It may be as well read God as Gods. For though the word in Hebrew
be of the plural number, yet it signifies singulerly, and one: and besides,
one worshipping but any other strange God, though he worship not many,
breaks this law.

Other, that is, besides or with the true Iehoua, who I am, and those whosoever
they be, are not Gods, but so called, as says Paul, though there be that are
called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth, 1, Cor, 8, 5,
as there be many Gods, and many Lords, yet unto us there is but one God. And
therefore this name God, is given to them, according to the fashion and manner
of speech in the world. Of this kind were there sundry in Egypt, as Cats,
Crocodiles, etc, and other in other nations.

Before me. The Hebrew is, before my face, which manner of speech is often in
the Scriptures, taken from men, and given to God. Now in the face are the eyes,
which in men are means of knowledge, so as that the face in this sense, sundry
times is used of God, for his knowledge, as Gene, 6, 11. Gene, 10, 9, before
GOD, or his face, that is, in his knowledge. Now likewise because Gods
knowledge is every where, look psalm 139, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, in which
respect, sundry learned men have said, God is all eye, because he knows all
things: therefore Gods meaning is, that they should not have any other God at
all, so as he may know, and nothing can they do but he will know, therefore
must they have none other. These are the words.

The meaning is in the matter contained, the sum whereof is this: Thou must
have me to be thy GOD, and none other. And here are two parts, the one
affirming what we ought to do, the other denying, and forbidding. The
affirming is, thou must have me to be thy God, the which is more largely set
down, Deuteronomy: 6, 5, Josh: 24, 15, Math: 4, 10. Now this gives us to consider of
persons, and duty.

Persons, who is to have, and whom to have.

Who is to have, thou, that is, no party in the world, of whom, or to whom it
may be said thou, as before.

The person whom we are to have, is set down in this word me, who is here
the speaker, and sets out himself verse 2, and must be considered as he
sets himself out in the Scriptures, one God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost:
eternal, omnipotent, infinite, most just, most merciful, and maker of heaven
and earth. Look Exodus: 34, 6, 7.

This God must be understood alone, as Mark 12, 29. Deuteronomy: 6, 4, Math, 4, 10.
Josh: 24, 9.

But it may be said, that in the 2 of the Kings, chapter 17 verse 33, the
people feared the Lord, but served their gods after the manner of the nations
whom they carried thence.

Answer. The Author does not report, that the people so doing did well, but
he only shows what they did, meaning indeed to declare how wickedly therein
they did: and therefore Zephany 1, 5, God threatens to cut off the remnant of
them that worship and swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham, that is, give
any respect unto any other: neither indeed can there be any fellowship between
Christ and Belial. 2, Cor: 6, 15.

The duty is, to have this Iehoua the true GOD, for our God. This having,
means more then it sounds: In the world a man may have that which he does
not regard nor use, man do not himself, but occasion others, he sins. Now
thy self art named, for that if any have any care of religion, it is first for
his own self.

The object is the thing forbidden to be made, graven image, and similitude of
things that are in heaven above, or in the earth beneath. etc.

Graven image, properly is that which is cut or carved with a tool, and
means any thing made by art.

But here we must be wary. For it is not simply forbidden to carue or grave,
then the Tabernacle had not been so curiously wrought, nor Salomons Temple,
but this is to be understood in Gods meaning, and as the fashion of some was to
use graven images, to represent the true God by, or to worship him in them, or
by occasion of them: the which is here forbidden, and no otherwise: so as when
he says no graven image, he means, to set out GOD, or worship God thereby,
otherwise it is lawful to grave.

Similitude, is likeness, which is here set out, by the things the like whereof
is forbidden.

Similitude is put for any representation, either for the thing it self, or
the representing of it, by painting, embrodering, printing, yea for the likeness
of it imagined in the mind, namely, to represent God, or worship him by it,
otherwise it is not forbidden.

The things whereof the likeness is forbidden, are in heaven above, earth
beneath, the waters under the earth, that is indeed, of any creature, for in
these places are all creatures, the heavens signifying the air, as well as the
starrie sky, so that birds, and such like are meant.

Yea the manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ's, and the Angels are meant. Whereby
it may appear, that the holy Ghost in likeness of a Dove, nor the ancient of
days like an old man, should be portreyed unto us.

The second degree is, for not worshipping these, and that in two branches, the
first, not to bow down to them, the other, not to serve them.

This to bow, is of gesture, and (as I take it) signifies to fall down
groueling, in token of honor, and is put for any outward sign of bowing the
knee or body, uncovering the head, etc.

The other of serving, is by no outward deed, of marking our selves for them,
speaking in honor of them, kissing them, or any such like, to show the least
good respect of them.

So as that now it may appear, the strange manner of woshipping of God is
forbidden under one special kind, and the pure manner employed thereby.

This strange manner is forbidden under the name of graven image, and likeness
of other things: 1 because that in these, men did most offend: 2 and to these,
our nature most carries us, as we see in the Israelites who would have a
likeness: 3 and besides, the Egyptians Temples were painted full of such
likenesses.

It would be too long to set down, both strange and pure worship: the pure
shall serve, whereby we may judge of the other.

It is agreed by all, that there is some straight rule of the pure worship of
GOD, whereto it must be framed, from whence if it swerve, it cannot please God.

The rule of Gods pure worship, is his own voice, will, word, Esaias 29, 13.
Colos. 2, 22. and that written and registered in the Bible, and Canonical
books thereof: so as that whatsoever shall not have warrant therefrom, is not
to be admitted.

So as that all heathenish Idols, all Jewish ceremonies since Christ's coming,
must be removed: yea all Romish pictures, crosses, blessings, pilgrimages,
relics, singings, and such like, not grounded on the word, must away.

All that the word teaches for the pure manner of Gods worship, is either for
the parts, or the properties of it.

The parts are, whereof the whole worship of God does consist. And they be
either more principal, or less principal.

Principal are such as cannot be left unperformed: as is the Jealous, is one
who is grieved for suspicion of dishonestie in his married yoake-fellow,
husband, or wife.

This some Interpreters think to be in GOD, as diverse times the word is so
translated by them, and that by occasion of the marriage band between God and
his Church, and likewise the force of jealousy when it does revenge. Which
seems sometimes to be in God.

Nevertheless (be it with reverence to all that think otherwise, with
willingness to be reformed if I err) I think it is not so here to be taken.

1 Jealous, and zealous, are not always both, this word here signifies both.

2 Jealousy is a fault, and not to be ascribed to God.

3 Some very learned men, as Tremelius and Iunius, take it for zealous.

4 It must be that here, from whence comes visiting the iniquity of the
fathers, etc. and showing mercy, now jealousy never shows mercy.

I read it therefore a zealous God, that is, a God full of zeal, as Simon was
called zelotes, or zealous.

Zeal is a most earnest affection, or the great increase of any affection,
love, anger, hatred: so as we heard before of Gods power, now we hear of his
will, whereby he is most earnest to perform whatsoever pleases himself.
Joel. 2, 18.

So as that in this zeal is, 1 presentnesse, that is, God now at this instant
is zealous: 2 is earnestness, 3 is continuance, as a burning.

Now he that is such a God, had need be obeyed. God commanding this, is so:
therefore he must be obeyed.

For that some might doubt whether God be so, yea or no, God himself proves
that by his zealous justice, and zealous mercy.

His justice, in that he says, visiting the iniquity of the Father upon the
children, upon the third generation, and upon the fourth, of them that hate
me.

Wherein we may consider what he does, and to whom.

He resiteth the iniquity of the fathers. Wherein is the action, the object.
Action, visiting. Object, iniquity. Set out by the subject of the fathers.

Visiting, comes of a Latin word to visit: to visit, is often to come to
see, to take knowledge, and to judge and do thereafter, in which sense we use
visitation. So does God proceed. Gene, 11, 5, Gene, 18, 21.

Now because when God so comes and finds men faulty, he is wont to punish,
therefore is visiting sometimes put for punishing, as psalm, 89, 32. I will
visit their iniquity with the rod, and their sins with scourges. And of
Dathan and Abiram. If these men be visited after the visitation, that is, the
punishment of all men. Number: 16, 29. VVhereupon some translate it here,
rendering, or repaying.

The object is iniquity, that is sin, or breach of the law of God, and more
specially breach of this law: the which God never leaves unpunished.

This iniquity is further set out by the subject in whom it is said to be,
that is, fathers and ancetors.

Thus much what God does, now follows to whom, upon the children, or sons,
upon the third and fourth generation. Where we may see, upon whom, and how many.

He does thus to the sons and posterity.

Que. Do children bear the punishment of their Fathers sins?

Aun. Yea, of some, as of the first sin of our first parents Adam and Eve, and
likewise of such actual sins as our fathers have taught us to practice,
otherwise not. For better understanding whereof know, that in sin we may
consider the fault against God, and the punishment, whereby God is wont to show
his displeasure. Wheresoever the fault is, the punishment is deserved.

Punishments are spiritual, or temporal, and of this life.

Spiritual, hindering one from everlasting salvation: these does never God
bring upon any, but for his own fault: and therefore original corruption, is
partly our own fault, because we are part of Adam.

Of this lfie are such as do not hinder a man's salvation, and befall the godly
and wicked both alike, and are to the godly many times profitable.

Now indeed sometimes by occasion of others, the godly feel some outward
smart, but still with Gods love, so as such sufferings, are no punishments, but
exercises and benefits, and therefore God never punishes in anger other men's
sins in us, but such as we have and learn from the^.

Now for that idolatry is learned by parents for the most part, therefore God
shows, that the duty which children owe to their parents, shall not excuse
them if they learn idolatry and false worship of God from their fathers.

Now all this while, no certain punishment is named, that the offenders might
fear all, neither is time mentioned, that ever punishment might be looked for.

How many this punishment concerns, is upon the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me.

Where first we must remember, that this does not stretch (as partly we saw
before) but to such as hate GOD, that is who break this commandment: so as
that we may see, all breakers of Gods commandments, in some sort do hate
God, under what pretense soever it be.

And that it reaches to the third and fourth generation, that is I take it, to
any that do break this commandment, some named for all: thus we see how
God destroyed the Canaanites, etc.

This manner of speech is used, 1 to teach us, that this kind of sin is often
conveyed, by parents to children.

2 That parents should be careful to instruct their children in the pure
worship of God.

3 That children, if they mean to be free from Gods punishments, should
especially seek from their parents, to learn to worship God purely.

So as that it is much for the worshipping of God of what parents one comes:
and here we may learn to answer the Papists, what we should think of
their ancetors and ours, who died in Papistrie. For we see that three or four
generations may hate God.

Thus much for Gods zeal in his justice, now follows his zeal in his mercy,
showing mercy to thousands that love me, and keep my commandments.

Where we may see what he does, and to whom.

He shows mercy, that is, forgiueth their sins, bestows sundry favors of
this life, and of that which is to come, as in Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David,
not for their works, but as the word is, for his mercy.

But some may say, how is this true, seeing that many idolaters flourish? and
true worshippers of God are punished?

Though Idolaters escape here, they are punished hereafter, and though the
godly here are under the cross, yet are they in Gods favor, and shall enjoy
him for ever afterward.

Thus much for this second commandment, and the manner of worshipping the
true God.

Commandment. 3.
Now follows the end in the third commandment, wherein is set down, not
only the end of the worship of God, but of all other duties whatsoever.

The sum of all which is, commanding to purely use the Name of God, and
forbidding the contrary, and that in the charge, and the reason or sanction.

The charge is, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy GOD in vain.
Wherein is forbidden the taking of the Name of the Lord in vain.

Gods Name is himself, and he is his Name, so often have we in the scriptures,
hallowed be thy Name, that is thy self, call upon the Name of the Lord, that
is himself. And it sets out unto us his essence, and divine being: his
titles, or surnames, as God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Lord, Jesus Christ:
all his attributes, as omnipotent, merciful, etc, his word, written, spoken,
read, heard: his works of first creation, of government, in justice, or mercy,
any of his holy ordinances. etc.

Thou shall not take, thou, that is none, shall not, that is, must whereto is
counted happiness. Psalm, 32, 1. Rom, 4, 7. And though no particular punishment
should follow, yet impunitie is punishment enough. God is greatly angry (says
one) when he is not angry, that is, corrects not. And an hard heart, is
punishment enough. So as that a man may be grievously punished, and not feel
it.

How grievously GOD punishes this sin, look Zachary 5.2, 4. Leuit. 24.16.
Number. 5, 27.

The certainty of the punishment appears by the manner of speech, counting
guiltless, he will not hold guiltless, that is, at no hand will he hold
guiltless.

Besides, in this threatening of punishment, no time is prefixed, that offenders
may fear always, for indeed suddenly many times does God come upon the
wicked. 2. Pet, 2, 3, as to Sodom and Gomorh, to Balthaser, Dan. 5, Herod,
Acts, 12, 22, to Ananias and Sapphira, Acts, 5, etc.

Furthermore, no kind of punishment is named (as before) that we may look for
all.

Last of all, there is no exception of person, every one offending, shall be
punished. Hereupon we might do well to take heed we do not offend in this
kind.

The most usual gross way of offending here, is by unlawful swearing.
Unlawful swearing, is forswearing, or vain swearing.

Forswearing, is swearing to a thing which is not true, and that most commonly
against a man's own knowledge.

This we may the better take heed of, 1 if we use not to lie. He that will
often lie, will forswear.

2 If we accustom not our selves to swear vainly.

3 If we remember that in every false oath we curse our selves.

4 If we bethink of the grievous judgments which have befallen perjured
parties.

Vain swearing is, though the thing be true, yet it be not upon just occasion.

This may we avoid, 1 if we keep our mouth as with bit and bridle.

2 Pray against our custom of swearing.

3 Forbear it to day, we may better forbear it to morrow.

4 Get some to admonish you when you swear.

5 Use your tongue to the praises of God.

But some man may say, they will not believe me, may I not swear then?

I answer, use to speak gravely always, they will believe you. Our light
and jesting speech lesseneth our credit, but if they will not believe, it is
their sin, into fellowship whereof by swearing you must not be drawn.

Men likewise offend, which is not so much marked, in abuse, (to the dishonor
of God) of other creatures and ordinances of GOD, the which are comprised
under his Name.

Wherefore it is good to do all we can by direction of the word: 2 without it
not to be hasty: 3 in no case to do only as the common sort do: 4 and if any
should be imitated, they are the most wise and godly: 5 mark what usage is
more to and with the knowledge and worship of God, cleave to that, others
avoid.

Commandment. 4.
Thus much for the end of worshipping God, now follows the time and place in
the 4 commandment. verse 8, 9, 10, 11.

Which is touching keeping holy the Sabath day, wherein is the preparation to
it, and the commandment it self.

The preparation in the word remember. This remember in the Hebrew, is such a
word as may signify, to call to mind somewhat before, or to keep in mind
somewhat for after, and sometimes both, as it may here in this place be taken.
For this ordinance of God was long before, and was to last for afterward. And
by this memorandum we are put in mind:

1 Of our natural forgetfulness of this commandment.

2 Of the excellency and worth of it, so as that God says, Ezech, 20, 20. the
Sabbaths being sanctified, shall be a sign between the people and him, that
they may know that he is the Lord their God. In so much as Jeremy, 17, 24, If
they sanctify the Sabbaths, then shall the Kings and the Princes enter in at
the gates of the City (of Jerusalem) and shall sit upon the throne of David,
and shall ride upon Chariots, and upon horses, both they and their Princes,
the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. etc. Look the place, so as
that the godly have made great account always of this commandment.

3 Of the institution of it in Paradise, after the creation, as being before
the great number of ceremonies, and even in man's innocence.

4 To prepare our selves, for the due keeping of it, so Exodus 16, 24.

This preparation is, 1 by dispatch of our worldly businesses for the week
past, the night before.

2 Spending the six working days so, that with joy we may keep the Sabbath
holy.

Thus much for the preparation remember. The commandment it self follows in
the rest, and this commandment is shortly set down, or further declared.
Shortly set down, keep the Sabbaeth day holy.

This, as other commandments, has the person, the duty.

The person thou, as every one, so especially Governors, as may appear in
that ones son and daughter must so do: a pattern whereof we have in
Nebemiah, 13.

The duty, as others, has object. act.

Object, is whereabout the act and practice is to be. That here is, the
Sabbath day.

Day, is natural, or artificial: natural is the space of 24. hours equal,
from evening to evening, or sun to sun.

Artificial, is from the light rising, to the setting. I take it that
artificial day is here meant: and though the Jews did count their Sabbath
from evening to evening, yet it was but as they counted their other natural
days, not to be up and wake all the night, no more then their bodies will
bear. And because some bodily rest is necessary, and allowed, therefore though
the night belong to the day, to make it whole natural, yet I judge it was no
more to be kept holy then the working days working: so as that day, is the
light, and so much of the night as may be spared without hurting the body.

This day signifies it self wholly, and every hour and even minute thereof,
as the creature without hurt to it self and other can perform.

But this day is not every, but the sabbath. Sabbath of it self does signify
rest, or time of rest. Here it is put for a day specially set a part for rest,
as the particle ha in the Hebrew, and the affixe shows.

Among the Jews were sundry such times, as of years, of weeks, of days, all
which they were to keep. Also among their days, some did not so often
return, some did return in every seven days, which day does manifestly
appear to be meant here, as by repeating of the days of creation, the days
of work, etc. is manifest. This is the object, the act follows: keep it
holy, in one word sanctify it, both are one.

To sanctify or halow, does signify diversely. 1 To make a thing holy, by
putting holiness into it morallie.

2 To acknowledge a thing holy. 3 To appoint a thing to holy, religious, honest
uses. 4 To use things to those good uses wherefore they are appointed.

This day has no more holiness in it self then any other, that for it self it
might be counted more holy then other, only God has appointed it to holy uses
above others, and would have us use it thereunto.

Now follows the further deelaration of this commandment. verse, 9, 10, 11,
and that by way of exposition, or confirmation. By exposition, verse, 9, 10.
Wherein God himself shows his meaning in the commandment. Where because
mention was made of a day, and keeping holy, he shows what day he means,
and what by keeping holy. Day, is the seventh after six, wherein they may (and
unless just cause hinder) they must work.

ties be of charity and kindness to man, or beast, or other creatures, and
can neither be well done, before, or after.

Now then, if work be forbidden, much more jest, playing, sinning.

There are forbidden a man's own self, or any other by his authority, or
suffering.

Ones wife is not named, because she is presumed to be himself, that
whatsoever is forbidden him, must be known to be forbidden her.

Son, or daughter, none to whom we carry most tender affection, and so
might wink at them.

Man servant, or maid, whom thou might have use for to set about business.

Beast, especially the laboring beast, as ox, ass, horse.

Que. Has God care over beasts?

Aun. Yea, for men's sake, least men by tending the beast in their labor, might
be occasioned to break the sabbath. Whereupon we must know, that not only
beasts, but whatsoever may need man's help, as mill, boat, etc. should stay.

Some exception must be made, in regard of war, or a long voyage upon the
sea, or riding post for the Commonwealths great good.

Stranger, properly, Proselite, one who is wone to the Jewish religion, others
are not so to be urged.

Mark that any over others, are to cause all theyrs to keep holy this day.

Thus much for the exposition of the commandment, the confirmation follows.
Wherein are reasons to enforce to the obedience thereof: the first whereof is,
God requires but one of seven, therefore good reason is it that we should
obey.

2 God requires no more then that which himself has done, therefore ought
men to do so. GOD rests from creating, not from governing: from making new
kinds, not singular things.

3 GOD has blessed and hallowed this day to this end, therefore it must be kept.

Thus have we the commandment shortly laid open, but all this while here is
nothing of the place.

The place of Gods worship is every where, nevertheless, the public must be
in public place, which because it was tied to the Arc, and was flitting at
this time when the Law was given, is not mentioned, yet was it set so, as
whosoever should publicly worship God elsewhere then there, did offend. Such
places were the Tabernacle, the Temple of Jerusalem, the Sinagogue. We have
Temples.

But indeed this must be remembered, none is tied so to any place, as the Jews
were to Jerusalem, because the temple there, was a type of Christ, without who^
nothing could please God: and yet again worship as in time, must be in place.

So as that in time of public, pure, and sound worship of GOD, public
places must be resorted unto, neither must men tarry at home, or haunt corners.

But put case some notorious sinners resort thither, ought not I then to
forbear?

Aun. No, other men's sins, if I consent not to them, shall not hurt me.

It may further be demanded, whether a man be tied to his own Parish?

Aun. Indeed parishes were distinguished by men, nevertheless not to be
neglected, when conveniently for distance of place one may resort unto them,
and there be in them sufficient means to salvation, and no other just cause
restrayning.

So then public time must likewise have public places, in established, and
peaceable Churches.

By all this hitherto we may perceive, Gods meaning is to have all public
duties of his worship, to be performed in due sort.

All duties belonging to the Sabbath, are either before it, or on it. Duties
before it are:

1 To desire the Sabbath, for the duties of the Sabbath. Esaias, 58, 13, 14, and
therefore Amos blames those, who wish the Sabbath gone, that they may set
forth corn, etc.

2 Dispatch of all business (as much as in us lies) that neither the rest,
nor holiness of the Sabbath be hindered. Exodus 16, 23, 29. John, 19, 31.

3 That the week days duties do not drown our minds, but that we may freely,
and cheerfully attend the worship of God. This shall we do: 1 Using the
world, as not abusing it. 1, Cor, 7, 31. 2 Taking heed of grievous sins which
harden the heart. 3 Having daily exercise in the word, and prayer.


On the day are sundry duties, which before I name this must be remembered, that,

1 All Jewish superstition must be removed. The Jews will not roast an apple,
peele an onyon, kill a flea, snuff a candle on this day, but hire others to
do thus for them.

It may be demanded what should be thought of him who gathered sticks. Number.
15, 32.

Answ. Though the thing seem small, it was very great, being done upon
contempt.

Que. But what for making fire?

Aun. That none which hinders the sanctification of this day, should be made.

2 We must not judge this commandment as ceremonial, being before the fall.
Gene, 2, 2, 3.

3 We must have more care of the sanctification of this day, then the bodily
rest.

4 This day is as much to be spent in the duties of Gods worship, as other
days in our own works: the manner of speech for both, is all one: 2
worshipping of GOD is more necessary: 3 the time shorter.

Now then the duties upon this day may be considered, as they are of
preparation to duties, or practice of duties.

Helping to preparation is, 1 rising early in the morning, ^ sober and grave
attire, not craving too much time in putting on, or making too gay show: 3
moderate eating and drinking.

The preparation it self is, as to the beginning of this law.

The practice of duties, is according to the kinds of duties.

Some duties are public, others private.

Public duties are such as must be performed by the whole great assembly, in
the common place for Gods worship. Whereof we may consider the properties, and
the number.

They must be 1 jointly of all together, so as that in one voice: all the ears
and hearts present are to attend. So as that in public, none must have his
private devotions, otherwise then the assembly.

2 They must be from the beginning to the end, men must not come slackly after
beginning, nor depart till the end, and that assembly be discharged.

3 There must be all silence and attention.

The public duties themselves are: 1 of the word of God read and preached.

The word read is the Canonical scriptures by peece-meale recited, so as that
(if it were possible) in a year of such competent time, they might all be
passed thorough.

The word preached, is the scriptures plainly opened and applied, to the
necessary uses of the hearers unto salvation. This all that we may, we must
procure.

He that means to profit by the word preached, 1 must bring a teachable
mind, 2 must pray for a blessing upon himself: 3 must diligently mark the
heads and proofs: 4 exercise himself in it afterward.

2 Making of prayer, and giving of thanks to God in the name of Christ, in
faith, in love, in feeling of our wants, not only for our selves, but others,
with endeavor in means.

3 Celebrating sacraments, not only partaking the Lords Supper, but being
present at Baptism, considering our selves in the present infant, examining
our selves whether we find the fruit of our Baptism ^ea or no.

4 Gathering, that is, laying a side somewhat for the poor. 1, Cor, 16, 1.

can fully be performed, so as that likewise all other must be done in it.

The measure is, as thy self.

We must remember love is ordinate, or inordinate. Inordinate is, which neither
has just cause to move it, nor due measure in it.

Ordinate is, which has both: this only is understood, so as loving our
selves well, we must love other folks likewise.

But it may be demanded, is there no difference, between good love of my
self, and others?

Aun. Both must be sincere, earnest, working, perpetual, wise. But I begin
with my self, and things being alike, I love my self in greater measure.

Hitherto the sum of the second table, which Christ commends, in that he
says it is like to the other: 1 hard to be kept, 2 necessary, 3 profitable:
whereupon and the former, the Law and the Prophets do depend: that is, are
chiefly spent in setting down the duties contained therein.

The commandments themselves of the second Table follow, requiring all duties
of all sorts to men, and these are of practice and act, or of motion, and first
thought.

Practice or act, signifies such as are with consent, and these are, verse 12,
13, 14, 15, 16. whereof as the persons toward whom they must be practiced are
diverse, so are the kinds.

The persons are superiors, or betters, and others.

Duties in respect of betters are commanded, verse 12. before the rest, to
show that public must be preferred before private.

The commandment requiring these duties, is the first with promise, Ephe. 6,
2, showing some special regard that ought to be had thereof.

One may doubt how this should be true, since all commandments, if they be
kept, have promise of life, and again, seeing the second commandment
likewise has promise of mercy to thousands. etc.

But we are to answer, that Paul in calling it the first, he means the
first of the second table, and the first which has particular promise: the
commandments all, and so the second, have a general and indefinite promise.

This commandment charge to honor Parents, and forbids the contrary. It
has two parts, the duty, the promise.

The duty is, honor thy father, and thy mother. The promise in the rest. The
duty sets out the parties, and the thing.

The parties honoring, to be honored. The party honoring, or who is to
honor, thou, that is every one, as before, noble as well as others, great men
as well as others. So did Solomon honor his mother though he were a King, 1,
Kings, 2, 19. so did Joseph his parents, he being a great Prince. This must
be thought of for all practices of honor.

The parties to be honored, father and mother. Who signify all other
superiors whatsoever: whom God thus calls, to teach all superiors to be
affected to their inferiors, as parents to children, in which meaning, the
Romans called their chief men fathers: and withal, to teach inferiors in what
kindness they are to perform duty, to wit, as children do to Parents.

But Christ forbids, Math, 23, 9, to call any man Father.

Auns. Christ's speech must be taken in his own meaning. He means here,
father in that sense it was used among the Pharisees, and such as would be
counted learned: So else where does Christ speak, fitting himself to the
conceits of his hearers, as John, 5, 31, If I should bear witness of my self,
my witness were not true. That is, if I were as you suppose me to be. So
likewise, John 7, 16, My doctrine is not mine, that is, as you take me to be a
mere man, etc. After the same sort forbids he to call father.

The Jews and Pharisees used this as a swelling title, being desirous to be
called in Hebrew, Abothemi, that is, our Fathers: as the holy Father the Pope,
so the Romish priests are Prince. etc.

4 Then may superiors look for all duties with a good heart, when themselves
perform theirs.

First among all are natural parents. Their duties are jointly,

1 Before ever they have children, to endeavor themselves to be in the
covenant of God, that their children so may be, else are they butchers of
their children, before they be breeders; out of Gods covenant, better not to
be. Other parents, one calls, parents of dirt.

Parents are in the covenant, when they believe in Christ and are baptized.

2 They must mary in the Lord. Children in whoredom are branded with
perpetual infamy.

Those marry in the Lord, when both professing true religion, have parents
consent, and holily do consumate and solemnize marriage, wherein the children
are begotten.

3 Such children as God shall give, they must consecrate to the Lord, as Hanna
did Samuel, and it is like, Eunica did Timotheus. Especially God required the
first borne.

4 Asloone as may be conveniently, they must procure them to be baptized, in
the presence of faithful witnesses. Esaias, 8, 2.

5 All their life long, they must give their children good example.

As their childrens years will bear, they must bring the^ up in nurture, and
instruction of the Lord. Ephe, 6, 3.

And first acquaint them with the grounds of truth, necessary to salvation, 1
at home: 2 bringing them to public assemblies: 3 looking that they behave
themselves well there.

Secondly, as soon as may be to break them of their corrupt desires. The
neglect of this, marred Ophni and Phineas, Elies sons, Adoniah and Absolon,
David's sons.

Thirdly, to invre them to do things, rather for to please God, then for
flattering, or gifts.

Fourthly, they must not make them too gay in coats, but allow them convenient
diet and attire.

Fifthly at least let them learn to write and read.

7 They must pray for their children.

8 They must observe their childrens dispositions and gifts, and thereafter
prepare them to such a kind of life and calling, as they shall be fittest for
Gods glory, and the common good, taking heed of idleness, and evil company.

9 They must have a care in due time to provide meet marriages for them.

In doing all these, as the fathers gifts are commonly the greater, so the
greater must his endeavor be.

But in any case this must be looked unto, that the parents be not divided,
that that one does, both must do, one must not cocker against the other: one
never mar what the other makes. This is a common fault this way.

The mother she has her peculiar: 1 to nurse her own child if well she may,
otherwise, to get a godly, wholesome and careful nurse: 2 to teach it at home
in the tender years, 3 to look to the cleanliness and handsomnesse of it.

All these same things should others do, who are in the place of natural
parents.

Parents by spiritual office, follow father and mother.

Father as before, so was Paul to the Corinthians, 1, 4, 5, to Timotheus, 1,
1, 2, to Titus, 1, 3, to Philemon, 19.

Such an one is he who is set over us in the Lord, enabled with gifts,
endeavoring the saving of souls. Whose labors if God bless, he is more then a
father. By fathers we be, by such we blessedly shall be, though it be GOD who
is the chief worker. Thus was Elias to Elizeus, Elizeus to king Ioas.

One who endeavors this way, must be in saving doctrine, delivering it
easily to be understood, as particularly as may be, besides prayer, and
continuance in all.

Mother is the Church, Gala, 4, 26, out of the which there is no salvation: so
that he has not God his father, who has not the Church his mother. This is
the Catholic Apostolic Church, built upon the Apostles and Prophets,

Aunsw. Before I do it, I must out of the word of God be persuaded of the
lawfulness of it, and not do it doubtingly, then is it sin.

2 I must take heed of giving scandal.

But what if searching to find out the nature of the thing commanded, I
cannot find it out in the particular, as my Prince commanding me to assist
the distressed King of Portugal, I see no further into it.

Aun. I think I not only may, but should be persuaded of the lawfulness of
it. In this case I take it rather to be the Commanders fault, if there be any,
then the obeyers.

The kind of the thing here mentioned, is honor, showing all manner of due
respect, every way in the highest degree.

Honor contains all other duties in it, and is if we should speak as it
is, praise-much increased and enlarged, declared by all other tokens.

In this place, according to the sundry parties to whom it belongs, it is
diverse to all and every, it is as much as is due. We may consider of it as
general, or special.

General, we may call that which belongs to all parents, and this is
manifold.

1 To judge that they ought to be honored, for that excellency God has put
upon them. Rom, 1, 13.

2 To judge them better then our selves in that behalf. Phil. 2.3. Rom, 12, 10.

3 Purpose to show them honor in all things.

4 Commendable shamefastness in their presence. Job, 29, 20, 21, 22, which
arises from the conscience of our own unworthiness, in comparison of those
who are our betters.

5 Care in all things to hide their infirmities. Gene, 9, 22, 23, 24. We see
how that displeased God.

Infirmities should neither make us show less honor, nor procure us to tell
them to others.

6 We must pray for them, and give thanks, 1, Tim. 2, 2.

7 Show all reverent behavior, to bewray our inward reuerencing of them, and
to cause others so to do: and that according to the word of GOD, and honest
customs of our country, as 1 to stand, and not to sit. Leuiticus, 19, 32. 2 to
be uncovered: 3 to be silent and forbear noise: 4 to give honorable titles.

But what means that, Job. 32, 22. I may not give titles, least my Maker
should take me away suddenly.

Aun. It is meant of flattering and glosing titles. Therefore mark how Sarah
called her husband Lord, Elizeus Elias father, Ioas Elizeus, and such like:
therefore were the children torn in pieces by Bears for calling bald-head.

5 We must prevent their good desires as far as we may know them, and not
stay to show duty till it be demanded.

6 Countenance, gesture, gate, attire, etc, must be thereafter.

Special follows, and is particular, or proper.

Particular, which agrees to some, but not to every kind and party. Therefore
to natural parents, gardians, magistrates, masters, pastors.

1 Care to please even the froward: 2 obedience to their commandments: 3 to
have a care as well what they think of us, as what they do to us: 4 to yield
to their corrections, without aunswering again: 5 to relieve them in their
wants. Christ blames such, who under pretense to give to the offerings of God,
gave not to their parents: it is true of others.

6 Not to dispose of our selves in marriage, without due respect of every of
them, as the word of God requires: 7 when we are out of their jurisdiction, to
keep an honorable conceit and affection to them. So did Hester 2, 20.

Proper honor remains, which belongs to some one kind.

And first to the natural parents belongs the common and particular honor
in greater measure, so as not only he that strikes his father, Exodus, 21, 15,
but also he who curses his father should die, Exodus, 21, 17. Look Prou. 30,
17.

The Mother bare, the father and she brought up, bear their infirmities,
relieve their wants more then others.

To the spiritual father, 1, These. 5, 13, to have them in singular love for
their works sake. Yea, Gala, 4, 15, that they would have been contented to
pluck out their own eyes. etc.

This is called 1, Tim, 5, 17, double honor, which Chrysostom understands
for reverence and things necessary for life.

I think we should not be curious about the number. Double signifies much,
and great honor: so the Spirit doubled, or a double portion, 2, Kings, 2, 9,
signifies very much, as the first borne was to have a double portion.

All this honor is, that the Pastor may with more authority preach the word,
and that the people with more fruit might hear it.

The first is, that the spiritual father may be without fear. 1, Cor, 16, 10.
which is to be delivered from unreasonable and captious men.

Second, that he who is taught in the word, make him who taught him, partaker
of all his goods, Gala, 6, 6, thus were the Leuits provided for.

The third, Rom: 16, 4, that they adventure to maintain the preachers, though
it be sometimes to endanger themselves.

The fourth, not to receive an occasion against them, but under two or three
witnesses. 1, Tim, 5, 19.

The fifth, to use them more secretly in cases of conscience, then we will
others.

To our spiritual mother we owe: 1 to judge that she is the keeper,
witnesser, interpreter of the Scriptures, and that the authority of the Church
hangs upon the scriptures, the scriptures not upon the Church.

2 We must keep the peace of the Church. 3 We must not depart from the Church,
if it hold the foundation. 4 We must duly reverence the just censures of the
Church.

To the father of the country, that is the Sovereign, 1 not to curse him in
our thought, nor in our bedchamber.

2 To take laws and money of his making: 3 to be armed at his commandment.

To the inferior Magistrate, to assist him for the execution of justice.

All scholars, of never so high or great place, must yield all seemly duty
to their Teachers.

Wives owe to their husbands subjection, Ephe, 5, 24, submission, 22, as to
the Lord, this is comlie, Colo, 3, 18, and is from that law, Gene, 3, 16. in
the general honor which was spoken of before. For indeed the wife is the
glory of the man, 1, Cor, 11, 7, that is, she ought to do to her husbands
glory rather then her own, and that in her attire, and such things, which
while they are costlier or gayer then their husbands, is to his dishonor, if
it be with neglect of his commandment to the contrary, with impayring his
estate, leesing his authority over her.

To the nurce we must not be unkind.

Masters must have their honor of fidelity, and counsell-keeping. Look upon
Abraham's servant, Gene, 24, Upon Joseph in Egypt, before he was in prison,
when he was in favor with Pharaoh, look upon Jacob with Laban.

Let old men have their due of experience, never to vpbraide them with the
faults of age. Look Job, 32, 6, 7.

To them who excel us in gifts this honor is due: 1 that we in honest and
plain meaning acknowledge such gifts, without hiding, lessening, deprauing.

2 We must thank God for them.

3 We must imitate them as far as our kind of life will suffer.

4 We must encourage all we can, those, in whom such gifts are.

To such as excel us in blood, we must yield that which the law, and our
country customs and courtesies afford.

Thus much for the thing.

A question may be, whether a man may give over, and not take the honor due
unto him?

Answer. The honor is commanded by GOD, and therefore none may release it
but God.

Quest. What if one be a child one way, and a Father another way?

Aun. He must give and take honor accordingly.

Quest. Must this honor once given, continue the same to the same party?

Aunsw. No longer then he continues in such a kind a Father.

Thus far has been the duty, the promise follows: the which is not read
alike by all Interpreters.

The word which is translated that thy days may be prolonged, may be taken
passiuely, or actiuely. Passiuely, as some other words, Job, 4, 19. Luke 16,
19, in which sense some take it here.

Actiuely, that they may prolong, in such sense speaks Paul, 1, Tim, 4, 16.
Iam: 5, 20, Acts, 26, 18.

Thus it seems to be taken here, as it is elsewhere, and as some learned
men think: wherefore let us read it, that they may prolong thy days, etc.

Wherein we may consider the kind of the gift, and the means of it.

The kind of the gift is, prolonging of days, upon the land which the Lord
thy God gives thee.

The means are, parents.

In the kind is the naming of the gift, and setting out of it. It is named,
prolonging of days, set out by the Land which the Lord gives.

The chief thing is days, set out by prolonging.

Days, by an usual manner of speech in scriptures, signify time, because a
day was the first sensible distinction of time.

Now, though nothing else be named, somewhat must be understood, for only to
have days may be no great favor, as in all of them to be in death.

He means therefore days of life natural, civil, not only so, for though
a man had never so many days, yet live in sickness, want, disgrace, his
increased days should increase his woe.

He means therefore days of life flourishing in good health, and outward
favors of God, as Esaias, 65, 20, 21. for indeed life is not to live, but to be
in good health.

Prolonging, is not a lengthening above the appointed time, but granting from
the first a long time of life.

So that now this prolonging of days, is the flourishing condition of any
state, family, or person, wherein is quietness, and peace, 1, Tim, 2, 2,
Wealth, Rom, 13, 4. Somewhat may appear by the contrary, Esaias, 3, 4, 5, 13,
and Pro. 30, 17.

1 It must be remembered, this promise is not made for the defect of the former
duty performed, but upon Gods own mere mercy, to show how acceptable the
duty is.

2 We are not to judge always of the favor of GOD to salvation, by this
benefit, for sometimes it is bestowed upon the wicked: nor on the contrary to
think that where it is not, that therefore there Gods displeasure to damnation
is.

But then may we judge, that we are in good estate with it, if in it we profit
in all-sauing graces, if we use long life to make us approach the nearer to
heaven, and likewise use it to the good of the Church.

3 This gift is not general and perpetual, but as GOD sees it expedient for
us, wherefore, if the question be asked, why God always does not give to the
godly long life here, it may be answered, it is because that God does see
that it is not the best for them.

Again, this promise is more for a state in general of a kingdom, country,
or corporation, where this duty is performed, that it shall flourish, then
that every special person shall have long life.

Besides, if God while he promises long life, give everlasting life, he
breaks not his promise.

Hitherto the gift named, the setting out of it further follows, upon the
Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Where mention is made of a Land, and the giver thereof.

This Land no doubt was the land of Canaan, which God promised to his people
when they came out of Egypt under Moses conduct, and afterward gave it unto
them by Joshua, wherein they afterward continued, until they were carried
captive elsewhere. Yet so as that it is true of any land where God sets his
people, yea any City, Town, or house.

Now this land above others is mentioned, because it was a sacrament of the
heavenly Land. So as that:

Godliness has the promise of this, and that life which is to come.

In outward benefits of this life, we should be lifted up to think of others,
and that life which is afterward.

The giver of this land is the Lord thy God. These are the words of covenant.

So as Gods covenant to us, is the ground of all his favors to us, in which
if we be not, we cannot look for any thing wherein we may have comfort. We
have nothing of our selves, it is Gods gift.

Any thing that we have, must we thank him for when we have it, and seek it
of him when we want it.

If God give earth, much more gives he heaven, and everlasting life.

Thus far the kind of the gift, the means follow, they, that is thy father
and mother, as says the wise man. Ecclesiasticus, 3, 10.

Now parents are said thus to do, as Timotheus is said to save himself and
those that heard him, 1, Tim, 4, 16, while he is the means of their salvation.

So parents are said to prolong their children, when they are means thereof,
and endeavor themselves in such things as may procure the same.

This they do in discharging their duties every way, as before has been set
down.

And here the Parents blessing is to be thought of, which no doubt is much to
be respected.

We must put difference between the blessings of the Patriarks, Abraham,
Isaac, and Iaacob, and such others upon their children, and between the
blessings of other common men.

The Patriarchs, and such parties were prophetical, and certainly did
foretell what should be, by divine inspiration, other men's blessings are but in
wish, and desires by prayer.

And this blessing of parents, is an earnest desire of a parent, that things
may befall the children according to the will of God. Which in good may be
looked for, when

1 Parents have done their duty toward their children.

2 Children have obeyed their parents.

In evil may be feared, when parents have done their duties, and children will
not obey: but never if parents wish evil when their children do well.

Parents are therefore too blame, which inioyne evil things to their children
upon their blessing as they say, for that curse causeless, shall be
fruitless.

So are those that are given to cursing.

Commandment. 6.
Hitherto duties of and to superiors: now follow the commandments which
require duties toward others.

These duties, 1 are to be practiced as well toward our selves, as others.

These duties, and commandments, according to the number of chiefest things
among men, are four.

The first chief thing is life: The second chastity: The third goods: The
fourth, truth and good name. For every of these are several commandments,
and for the first, Thou shall not kill. Which is to command preservation of
life, and to forbid the contrary.

Wherein we may consider the persons, and the thing.

The persons, who, and whom.

Person, who is not to kill, thou, that is none, what color and pretense
soever thou have.

The person who is not to be killed, thy neighbor.

The person who must not kill, is to be understood without a lawful calling
thereto, and such an one is, who is not a Judge, a soldier, and an
executioner. etc.

Nevertheless, these must remember: that they do it according as their
callings require, and that for good, and the common good.

We may see that the Anabaptists err, who think it not lawful to be a
Prince, or warrior.

And this which is forbidden to all, must so be understood, as that, 1 though
we be provoked, we must not thus commit a fault: 2 though time and place should
seem to serve: 3 though we might escape punishment for the same.

The person who is not to be killed, is as before, neither our self, nor our
neighbor.

The thing is, not to kill. Kill, is to take away life, and yet not simply to
take away life is forbidden, but the life of a reasonable creature: otherwise,
a man may kill his beast for necessary use.

The Manichees therefore do err, who think it not law^ full to kill any
thing, no not to cut herbs.

Life is whereby any thing lives.

Life is spiritual, civil, natural.

Spiritual life, when by the especial work of the holy Ghost, a reasonable
creature lives to the pleasing of God. Paul says, a widow while she lives
in pleasure, is dead while she lives: Dead, that is, in spirit. The soul,
says S. Augustine, without God, (specially working) is dead, that is,
spiritually; and the soul of thy soul is faith.

This kind of life, one takes away, 1 by denying the means, as parents of
what sort so ever, withholding the word of God from theyrs.

2 By giving of scandal. Scandal is occasion of sin: in which respect,
Paul bids to take heed that our weak brother perish not, 1, Cor, 8, 11,
and Christ threatens woe to him by whom offenses come. Luke 17, 1, 2. Look
Rom, 14.

This life we must procure all we can. John, 1, 5, 16. So were the Apostles
commanded, Acts, 5, 20. For this cause would not the Apostles depart from
Christ. Ioh, 6, 68.

Civil life is that estate which one has in civil society, as of honor,
office, reputation: and this must be maintained.

Natural life is that, which is in the joining of soul and body together.

Natural life has three degrees. The first is, cheerfulness of the heart: In
this respect God blames the false prophets, who made the heart of the righteous
sad. Ezech, 13, 22, for indeed a sorrowful mind dries the bones. Pro. 17,
22. Thus did Naball first begin to die. 1, Sam, 25, 37, and thus was Rebekah
weary of her life. Gene, 27, 46, for her grief of heart at Esaus taking of
wives.

The second is soundnes of body, when every member is maintained, none hurt,
none taken away, so as if any be impaired, it is against life, for life is of
all parts. Those therefore who cut off a member, offend against the
commandment.

The third and last is health, when every member and power does his work.
Hence is it said, that life is to be in good health, and not only to live:
therefore does Jonathan note his fathers fault, who made the people weak and
faint. 1, Sam, 14, 30. Therefore is it, John, 4, 50. thy son lives, for is
in good health: so says Paul, now are we alive, that is, are whole and well,
if ye continue steadfast. etc.

Wherefore, all such who procure surfeit or drunkenness, break this
commandment.

But what need we go far for opening of this commandment? our Savior Christ
has done that most excellently, Math, 5, 22, etc. and that by showing the
true meaning, for the breach thereof in three degrees.

In every of these three degrees, he sets down the fault, and the
grieuousnes thereof.

The first degree is, Who soever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall
be culpable of judgment.

The fault is, to be angry with his brother unadvisedly: this is murder in
heart.

Brother is as before.

To be angry, is to be displeased, with desire of revenge.

In vain, is when it is without just cause or occasion, as Caine was angry
with Abel, Ahab with Naboth, Saul with David.

2 When it is too long. Ephe, 4, 26. for the sun should not go down upon
our wrath.

3 When it does unseemly appear, in countenance, in gesture, in deed, or
word.

So as that Christ's meaning is, that we should be moderate in our anger. So
says James, 1 We must be slow to anger, and Paul, Be angry, but sin not.

In this behalf, is Moses much commended. Numbers, 12, 3.

And here we are to take heed, that neither anger do vainly arise, and that
though it do justly arise, it do not rage, and both these from others to us,
or from our selves toward others.

And first, that it do not arise in us by others vainlie, it shall be good for
us,

1 Always before hand to consider our corrupt nature, how easily it is
provoked to inkindle by anger, as gunpowder, and flax by fire: and therefore
as they who have such commodities, knowing their quality, by wariness
preserve them long from burning, so may we our natures, that they be not
consumed by anger, if we will watch over them. Besides, in this behalf, some
men's complexions, give them occasion moore to look unto themselves.

2 Never to think our selves worthy of great matters, but to acknowledge in
heart our wretchedness, so shall we the better when things fall cross,
without anger bear them.

3 To acknowledge that nothing befalls us without Gods will, whereto we must
learn in all meeknes to yield.

4 Not to be suspicious, one small suspicion that we are neglected, will raise
great anger.

5 Be practicing with our selves often, to resist our own desires, so shall we
more easily bear it from others.

6 Avoid occasions.

7 To mark the behavior of angry men, that seeing how unseemly it is, we may
bethink to take heed of it in our selves.

And that we cause not anger to arise in others, we must be careful.

Always provided, that if they be angry at us for good duties necessarily to
be done, we are not to be discouraged: else should Christ, and other of his
servant, have forborne their duties for other folks angers.

But to be free from giving just occasion.

1 Never meddle with any without virtue of thy calling. Anger most commonly
arises, when men are out of their callings, idle, unprofitable, busybodies
in others men's matters.

2 Deserve well of all, they shall be more then beastly that then will be angry.

3 Mark men's dispositions: such as are given to anger, take heed of provoking.

4 Always give as good speech as possibly may be.

5 Be not hasty to tell reports, and when you report, make the best of it, so
far as you may with good conscience.

6 Though you be much provoked, sometimes hold your peace. Ierem, 28, 11.

7 You must sometime forbear your right.

If anger arise in our selves, 1 let it not continue too long, it continues
too long, when it hinders or lesseneth any duty of godliness, or love.

2 Do nothing while that stirs in you. Athenedorus wished Augustus when he
was angry to repeat the letters of the Alphabet, before he did any thing:
thinking that in the mean while, anger would alay. The same practice had
Theodosius. Artichas said he would have corrected his servant, but that
himself was angry. Frederick the Duke of Saxony, when he was angry, would
shut himself up in his closet, and let none come at him, till he had
maistered his anger.

If it arise in others by our means, we must follow Christ's counsel, Math.
5, 23, 24, 25. God himself was careful presently to pacify Jonas, 4.

The same must we do, yea though we give no just cause.

Though the grieved party be inferior to us, though we be counted fools for
our labor.

Yea, so far ought we our selves to be from anger, that though all things
were taken from us, we should not for our own sakes be angry.

A trial whereof Luther says, is, if we can wish to be wronged and injured.
Nay one says, then shall we be free from anger, when whatsoever evil befall
us, we can think that we are not worthy of so good an estate.

Now indeed well does our Savior forbid anger, for of it comes hatred,
envy, backbiting, and such like, so as that unless the door of anger be
shut, the other as in an open flood-gate come rushing in.

This anger is so forbidden, as that the contrary thereto is commanded.

Contrary to anger is that which we call liking, whereby without passion or
stirring we rest well contented, and apayed with our brother or sister.

This is the fault, the greeuousnes follows in the desert of it, which is to
be culpable of judgment, that is a great fault deserving punishment, which our
Savior sets out by the manner of proceeding in the civil Courts among the
Jews.

They had diverse: the smallest was wherein the Triumuirie or three in
commission sat, who ended smaller matters, and set punishments accordingly.

Now as those Judges did punish malefactors, though with gentle punishments:
so this fault of being angry unadvisedly, though it seem small, shall not be
unpunished, as in those Courts.

This place therefore, and the like following of this kind, make nothing to
prove venial sins: all shall be punished according to their desert. Now the
wages of sin is death.

And that unadvised anger is punished, it may appear in Moses, who though he
were otherwise meek, grew when he smit the rock twice so impatient and
froward, as some think it to have been a chief cause why God was displeased
with him, that he would not let him enter into the land of Chanaan.

The second degree follows, Whosoever says to his brother, Raca, shall be
worthy to be punished by the Counsel. Where is the fault likewise, and
greeuousnes thereof.

The fault is, saying Raca to a brother.

Brother, as before neighbors.

Raca, all do not interpret a-like.

It seems to be a broken speech, of an angry mind, breaking out, and
bewraying it self somewhat, though not fully in token of mislike, whereof
there are diverse in every language, as tush, fie, pish, etc. in ours.

Some think it to be a disgraciue speech, much like when we speak thou to one
in scorn and contempt.

Some think that it comes of the word Rach in Hebrew, which signifies to
spet, as if Raca saying, did signify that the party to whom it were said,
deserved to be spet upon, or as that in contempt of him, we would not forbear
spetting in his presence.

Sure it is a note of mislike, and may come of the word Ric, which signifies
empty or light head, before whom we care not in contempt to use some unseemly
gesture in witness of mislike. Number. 12.14. If her father had spet in her face,
that is used some disgrace unto her, as this spetting was wont to be one, Look
Deuteronomy. 25, 9.

Raca then is the bewraying of an angry and festering mind, by some unseemly
and imperfect speech or behavior: And may be

1 In countenance, 2 mouth, as in mowes, etc. 3 in words, as tush, fie, etc. 4
in making a loud and unseemly noise. Ephesians. 4, 31. 4 in scoffing. Gal. 4.29.

5 In bitterness. Ephesians. 4, 31.

Now here as before, liking was commanded, so open love contrary to raca is
enjoined, so as that we should declare it by all the means we can: as
gesture, voice, and sound, and such like.

This is the fault, the punishment and greeuousnes follows, shall be worthy
to be punished by the Counsel. Here as before, our Savior takes a
comparison from the Jewish courts: for as before he expressed the punishment
due to the former faults, comparing it with the punishment in a lower court, so
does he here. Above the former Court was one wherein 23 Judges were in
commission. These dealt in greater matters, and inflicted greater punishments.
So shall they who offend in this kind of saying Raca, have greater punishment
then the former.

The third and last degree follows, Whosoever says fool, shall be worthy to
be punished with hell fire.

The fault is to call fool. This term is put for all unseemly manifest
behavior, bewraying a ranckling and festered mind with anger and hatred: so
as that this word is not only meant, but any of the like, or worse meaning,
as ass, block, dolt, knave, and drab, whore, etc, whereby we disgrace the
party made to the image of God.

And seeing that vile words are forbidden, it necessarily follows, that
blows and such like must be forborne.

But it may be demanded, may not Governors use such speeches some time?

Answer. The sildomer the better: and though that Christ himself did so, yet
is it hard for us to do as he did. He had the Spirit without measure, and
could not sin. Indeed, sometimes Governors may sharply rebuke, 1 faults rather
then men, and 2 men, only in hatred of faults, with 3 love, which desires the
reformation of the offender.

If they be angry unadvisedly, or discourage their inferiors, they sin.

Here then all manifest signs in speech and deed, bewraying anger and
hatred, are condemned. Which being many, I forbear to reckon them up.

Now as all these practices are forbidden, the contrary i^ required, in all
that we can, most manifestly to witness our love.

The punishment of this fault remains, shall be worthy to be punished with
hell fire.

The most hardness is in these words hell fire. In the Greek they are, The
Gehenna of fire.

The word Gehenna, comes of two Hebrew words, Ge, which is valley, Hinnom,
which is a man's name, who was the first owner of the place, the valley or dale
of Hinnom, as Dushen dale, etc. so is it called, Josh. 15, ver. 8.

In this valley the Jews had the place Topheth, to burn their sons and
daughters in the fire, as Ier. 7, 31.

Now by reason of the great fire which was usually there, sometimes Gehenna is
put for the place and torments of the damned, as Math. 5, 29, 30. Math. 10, 28.
Math. 23, 15. The doubt may be, how it should be taken here. Some think in
the latter sense. True it is that this sin of calling fool deserves hell: but
yet I take it as in the former, so here: our Savior had respect to the
customs of the Jews, who besides the former Courts and punishment, had where
grievous faults were punished, by strangling, beheading, stoning, burning: and
because that burning seemed to be most terrible, and was used in the valley of
Hinnom, therefore our Savior shows, that he that says fool, deserves a
greater punishment then the former, in as much as the punishment in the valley
of Hinnom by fire, is more terrible then other punishments.

All sins are deadly in themselves, yet one is greater the^ another, and
deserves sharper punishment then other.

By this exposition of our Savior Jesus Christ, we may see, that as the
murder of the heart and mouth, so necessarily must the murder of hand and
deed be condemned: which is not only in taking away life, but in giving any
occasions of taking it away.

A man takes away life from himself, or from another. One may not take away
his own life. The commandment is general, Thou shall not kill. And he that
kills himself, offers violence to Gods image, which to preserve, this law
does especially command.

We read not that Job or Lazarus, or any in never so miserable outward estate
so did: and indeed so to do, proceeds from unbelief, by occasion whereof
the wicked have laid hands on themselves, as Saul, Achitophel, Judas and such
like. Nay Lucrecia so renowned among the heathen, was too blame.

But it may be said, Razias in the book of Macchabees is commended for killing
himself.

Answer. That book is no part of the pure Canonical scripture, properly so
called. And there is the party commended ciuillie, rather then godly.

What may we say of such as in war have put themselves into such dangers out of
the which they never had hope to return: of this sort are they who run upon
the Pikes, the forlorn hope, do these kill themselves?

Aunsw. No. War is grounded on the word and warrant of God, so as that all
duties thereof are of ones calling: besides, howsoever things seem very
dangerous and desperate, yet many in the midst of all them escape.

Neither may a man take away another man's life, by Italian devises, by force,
or any way else.

Yea, we must take heed of occasions thereunto. Whervppon, to show how far
(...) people should be from this, he would not have them so much as to eat
with blood, to take the damme and young birds together, to kill the dam and
young in one day, to sees a kid in the dammes milk.

Here all oppression of the poor is forbidden. Esaias, 3, 15.

Pity is to be showed to the beasts. Prou. 12, 10.

Forbidden in this kind is Combat, when the Judge will have a matter tried out
by the sword, between two or more.

This has 1 no warrant out of scriptures. It may be said, thus did David and
Goliath try it out. Answer, that this was extraordinary: 2 it was in war,
when some few may be hazarded, that thereby the rest may be the safer.

2 Though it seem too mean to try out truth: yet because the innocent may be
slain, we must not tempt God, nor do evil that good may come of it.

3 It is sildome without unjust anger, and vainglory.

The like may be said of making a fray, which is not by law, nor so deliberate
as the former, it is altogether unlawful, being from anger, in hatred,
kills all charity whatsoever it does else, overthrows patience, which is
none if for every conceived wrong we must go into the field.

But one will say, he has done me great wrong. Aunsw. Bear, or let the laws
revenge for thee, not thine own arms.

Wherefore such frayes as these must not be appointed, and if they be
appointed, they must not be kept. It is a great fault to make them, greater to
keep them.

We must not forget to speak the same of giving the stab, for giving the
lie, this is murder, what color of valor and souldiour-like worth soever it
has: here may a man abuse the art of defense, Beare-bayting, and Bul-bayting
is very dangerous.

Commandment. 7.
This is the commandment for preservation of life, that which is for chastity
follows: Thou shall not commit adultery.

Where first, consider the order. This is set before that which follows, to
show that the breach of this commandment, is a greater fault then to steal.
Whereupon in Gods law, he who did steal, did only make restitution, four
or five fold, but he who committed adultery was put to death, if it were but a
breach into contracted marriage.

So as that we should not think of the breach of this commandment, without
great detestation: Howsoever some take it to be but a trick of youth, Jude
seems to account is brutish, 7, 10, and sure there is nothing which more
dulleth the heart then this.

Mark it in Solomon, who when he followed fleshly desires, became most
sottish. And this sin is the greater, for that GOD has allowed a general
remedy for all sorts, to wit, marriage: so as the offenders have nothing to
excuse themselves by.

Besides, he that fails herein, sins against his own body, 1, Cor, 6,
15, making his body instrument and object: otherwise then it is in every other
sin.

Quest. Why do our Governors set a greater punishment upon theft, then
adultery?

Aunsw. They think that theft hinders society more then adultery.

In this commandment as in others, we may consider the person, and the thing.

The person, thou, as before, none whosoever, Courtier or any that think it a
token of love, etc, none must offend.

The thing forbidden, is adultery. Adultery is properly between two persons
whereof one at the least is married.

Adultery is here put for other uncleanness. The word in Hebrew may signify
whoredom, and may be read thus, Commit no whoredom. Whereby chastity is
commanded.

Chastity is abstinence from all strange and rouing lusts about the desire of
sex. Strange lusts are those which are not according to nature, and which are
not in or toward our married companion, husband or wife: or else Chastity is
the pure and honest use of the power which GOD has given to beget with, not
only for deed, but thought and desire. So teaches Christ, Math, 5, 28, which
is likewise to be understood of a woman, so as if she do likewise desire to
that end, she does offend: if it be beside the own husband, or own wife.

So as that a body may be free from touch, and yet not chaste. Peter says
there be eyes full of adultery. 2, Pet, 2, 14. Or it is,

The possession of ones vessel in holiness and honor. 1, These. 4.4.

Possession is continual so keeping, as Luke 21, 19, by your patience possess
your souls, be constant in patience, so as that if one fail but once, he
leeseth the credit of continuance.

This continuance is to be thought of for the returning of desires, for desires
are at one time more stirred, and stronger then at an other: he that can
forbear in all stirring, he possesses if he yield not, but resist the
temptation.

Vessel, all do not understand alike: some take it for the whole body, and
every part: not much amiss, for indeed the whole body must be chaste. It was
well said by one, It skilleth not in what part one be unclean, if he be
unclean. Wherefore eyes, hands, etc, must be ordered.

We might stretch it though, somewhat further to the soul, and so the whole
person of man, wherein in every power he must be clean.

But submitting that which I shall say to be judged by other, I take it by
vessel is meant that, which honestly cannot be named, and puts difference
between man and woman. In which sense that place, 1, Sam, 21, 5, is to be
taken, the vessels of the young men were holy, for he had said before, Women
have been separate from us these two or three days.

Where he shows what it is to have the young men's vessels holy, that is,
separate from women. This place the most learned Tremelius and Iunius, have
interpreted amiss, taking vessels for implements necessary for their journey.
So speaks Plautus in Paenulo. I do otherwise then adulterers taken in the
deed doing, I come home with my vessels safe and sound: They were wont who
took them in the deed, to cut of their priuities.

Vessel is the instrument of generation, as the Canonists speak of unnatural
venerie, extra vasa.

Now it is thus called, to teach us to speak and think honestly and chastely,
to forbear all ribaldry and filthy speech.

This vessel must be possessed in holiness. This holiness is in the pure use
of it, even in the presence of God, where neither the person is defiled, the
duty and instrument not abused, by deed, word, look, thought, etc.

Besides, it must be in honor, which is when we so use our selves, as that
neither in our selves, nor before others, we need to be ashamed. Sin in this
kind causes shame, instruments of this sin are likewise shame. Now then as on
our uncomely parts we put on more honor, 1, Cor, 12, 23, that is, let them
never show their vnseemlinesse, but make them as handsome as we can, so must we
procure all things here.

This chastity is in single, or married life.

Single life is when one lives alone without the other sex, and this is in
maidens or widows life.

Maiden or virgin life, is before one is married.

Widows life is after marriage, when the husband or wife is dead.

Each of these is a pure forbearing of the act and motion, or stirring to
begetting.

Pure forbearing is that which is free from all pollutions. Look Ephe. 5, 12.
so as that we must have continent eyes and looks.

This chastity in single life, is not, nor never can be, without a special
gift. So says Christ, Math, 19, 11, 12, and Paul, 1, Cor, 7, 37.

So as that without this gift, all vows whatsoever, are impossible in law, and
void at the instant.

This gift is called continence, and is a special gift of God, whereby one can
live without the need of other sex to satisfy desire.

This gift, 1 GOD only gives: 2 it is rare, all have it not: 3 it makes us
not more acceptable to God: 4 sometimes it is preferred before marriage
chastity.

Only in respect of some afflictions that then were upon the Church, and for
that sometimes the duties of marriage leave not a married party so free from
worldly cares, as single life does.

5 It is not perpetual, he that has it, may have it taken from him afterward.

Chastity in marriage life, is the bed undefiled, Heb, 13, 4, in the lawful
use of the married companion.

Bed company in married parties one to other with themselves, is no sin,
though many corruptions creep into it, which it pleases God for Christ to
forgive. Some cautions in this must be remembered.

1 Call to mind what Moses has, Leuit, 18, 19, and 20, 18.

2 To fast and pray they must forbear. 1, Cor, 7, 5, that is, extraordinary,
and set solemn prayer upon some great occasion, else must they pray every day.
1, Pet, 3, 7. upon extraordinary occasion. The bridegroom newly married,
must come out of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride-chamber. Joel, 2,
16.

3 Parties must use gravity and modesty. One says, a party may commit
adultery with his or her married companion. He means, he may sin, in want of
gravity and modesty. As if,

1 Either party be intemperate, and use marriage for brutish lust, not for
necessity, and child-procreation.

2 Too much boldness be before others. This was Isaacks oversight, who though
he might do that which he did, should not have done it in other folks
sight. Gene, 26, 8, therefore, Gene, 25, 67, he took her into his mothers
tent. Mark that Sampson, Judge, 15, 1, would go into the chamber.

It is too much to use open dalying with ones own companion: too bad is the
foul and filthy speech of some married folks, speaking openly of the secrets
of marriage.

Marriage is a lawful knitting together of one man and one woman, in undivided
society, for remedy of lust, comfort of life, bringing forth of children.

This knitting is the most near that can be, and has full communion of all
things between them, so as that their bodies, etc, are not their own. 1, Cor,
7, 4.

Undivided society is that, which no cause, but warrantable by the word of God
can dissolve.

Lawful is that which is according to Gods laws, and the laws of honesty.

Gods laws require that marriage should be in the Lord. 1, Cor, 7, 39.

That is in the Lord, which is, 1 between parties that do truly fear the Lord
in pure religion. It is not lawful to marie an Idolater.

2 Is in reverence.

3 Is with consent of parents: that is of the necessity, not only the
honesty of marriage.

Parents must not be too hard, or wilful, but what God will, that ought they
to will.

And this marriage must be but of one man, and one only woman. Many husbands
for one wife, or many wives for one husband, are not allowable.

To have many wives, was a sin in the Patriarchs.

Marriage is dissolved according to the word of God by death, just divorce,
malicious desertions: and then the suruiuer, and innocent party, after due
proceeding, may marie again, though never so often: so as that second, third,
etc, marriages are not unlawful.

They of the Roman religion err, in counting one to have two wives, who has
married again after the first marriage dissolved, or who has married a widow.

To marriage God calls all such as have not the gift of continency, so as
that they may not forbear marriage without sin. Look 1, Cor, 7, 9.

Yea any whosoever have made a vow to the contrary. For no vow must bind to
sin, and a man must sin, where he has no gift to do otherwise.

Those have not the gift of continency who do burn. 1, Cor, 7, 9.

To burn, or to be burnt, all do not understand alike. They of the Romish
teaching hold, that it is to commit fornication, that is (I take it)
whoredom, as though effeminatenesse, Sodomy, and such like, were no faults.

The Apostle speaks of a thing that few did take to be a sin, many knew that
fornication was, but he notes the root, and original thereof,
concupiscence, or desire, which few did know. Rom, 7.

And surely it were very strange, if only before fornication the Apostle
should prefer marriage, such an honorable ordinance of God as was given in
man's innocence.

To burn therefore, or to be burnt in the place before alleged, is to be
interpreted according to the use of tongues and speech. Virgill says of Dido,
wretched woman, she is burnt, or burns after Aeneas. Another says, that
Cupids darts are dipped in fire.

Earnest desires are meant. So Hosea, 7, 4, they are as an oven heated by the
Baker. Paul speaks more plainly, Rom, 1, 27. they burned in lust one toward
another. So is it taken here to be burnt, or burn with lusts: which is when a
party has an unconquerable army of unchaste thoughts and desires in him,
dishonouring him and his vessel.

Thoughts and desires, signify all motions, army, many and often, for sildome
is any alone.

Unchaste are those which are not toward ones own married companion.

Unconquerable they are, when they cannot be overcome, but do overcome and
make one yield to them. This one shall find in himself, if he cannot with
quiet conscience live in the fear of God, and discharge of his duty, but
these thoughts will possess, they are unconquerable. We may not use physic
which destroys nature, to take them away, since that we have a remedy.

Such as may be mastered, must, neither must we for the^ be called to marriage.

Means to quell lusts and thoughts are, 1 moderate diet, especially in not
being given to wine or strong drink: 2 Not too much sleep, nor too soft
attire: 3 Company: 4 Talk: 5 Spectacles, pictures, or such like readings
amorous. To these must always be joined; 6 exercise of the word, 7 prayer with
fasting, not to hurt the body.

But one may say, how may I know whether I have used these means sufficiently?

Aunsw. Indeed it is somewhat hard so to do: 1 but be constant and earnest in
the means, and God shall in time give us to see. 2 Choose out some faithful
eperienced men to whom open your heart, and hear them. 3 After the use of
means, finding no settled persuasion, I take it the safest for a party to
think that he has not the gift, because it is rare.

What if in marriage I cannot contain?

I hope none is so vile, that were most fearful, there is no remedy for
such, till they die.

This is the thing commanded, whereby the contrary forbidden, might easily be
set down but to spare labor, and least while I should set it out to avoid,
some might take to follow it, this that has been said of one only part, shall
suffice.

Commandment. 8.
Thus much for chastity, now follows the commandment for maintaining of
goods, and it is, Thou shall not steal. Wherein is the party thou, the thing,
steal. None under any color whatsoever, must steal.

To steal, is privily to take away, but here it signifies any kind of
injustice about the commodities of this life, and in the same sense is called
oftentimes in the scriptures covetousness. This is called idolatry, the root
of all evil, which should not be so much as once named amongst us, Ephe, 5, 3.
that is, with liking.

Commodities of this life, are such as are valued by money, to say it is so
much worth: life and chastity are above all worldly price.

These commodities are other folks, or our own.

Other folks commodities, we must not, 1 possess if we have them, but restore
them.

1 Whatsoever we get by force or craft. Look Luke, 19, 8, in this kind sinned
Ananias and Saphira, withholding part of the dedicate thing. Act. 5.

2 The laborers wages to him when he has earned it. James, 5, 4.

3 The pawn, or gage of the poor. Deuteronomy, 24, 12. of this kind is any thing
that is committed to us of trust to be restored, as fruit of the vineyard,
Math, 21, 41, and Exodus, 22, 7.

4 A thing found, Deuteronomy, 22, 1. But what if I know not, the true owner? the
safest is to give it to the poor, except the law of the country do otherwise
appoint.

2 We must not take other folks goods, yea all bribes taken, are condemned.

3 We must not so much as desire other men's goods. 1, Tim, 6, 8, 9.

Neither in bare desire, nor any other practices.

Desire is in longing and wishing, by thoughts and words, as to say, I would I
had so much of the King of Spaynes gold, etc.

Practices are infinite, out of bargaining in bargaining.

1 All conny-catching is condemned whatsoever: 2 All Usurers practices.

3 All gaming to win by. 4 All hurtful and cosening arts, of
fortune-telling, casting natiuities, telling of things lost, etc. for money.

4 Never a trade but has his mystery or mischief, whereby it beguileth others.

These all, and other infinite, are condemned, though they do not succeed.

4 We must not impair any of our neighbors goods. Exodus, 21, 34, Exodus, 22,
24, 25, 26. David's heart smit him when he had cut off the lappet of Saules
garment, though himself was never the better for it. Thus did Absolon wrong
Ioab in setting his corn on fire, not to benefit himself. 2, Sam, 14, 30.

5 All that we can, we must increase and maintain the goods of other.
Philip, 2, 4.

Thus much for other folks commodities. For our own some duties concern us.

Quest: May one be a thieefe in his own?

Answer. Yea in such things as he thinks is own. We have nothing ours, we
are but Gods stewards and baylieffes, we must be accountant unto him: so as if
we do otherwise then he will have us, we embezell and steal.

God will have us not to live idle, but in the sweat of our brows. Look 2,
These: 3, 10, 11, 12. Be we of what estate and condition soever, prince,
people, one or other. To this end must we have an honest and lawful calling,
which God must like.

Calling is a way to live by. Honest it is when none can justly speak evil of
it. Lawful, when according to the laws of our Country.

God likes it, 1 when it serves to some good, personal or public, worldly
or heavenly.

This good is for necessity, or delight.

Necessity is that which the person or state cannot want for the being
thereof, as the word of GOD for the soul, meat, drink, and apparel for the
body, etc, and here the more necessary, for the more in the same kind a thing
is, the kind of life that deals therein is the better.

Delight is for the more comfortable being of a person or slate, and must be
always without sin, to duties of honesty, as music, and such like: besides,
it must be always seasonable, and moderate.

2 When he that is in it, discharges the duties of that calling as he should.

First in pains taking or sweat, rusticall, political, ecclesiastical.

Secondly, in fidelity, which has, 1 diligence. Diligence has earnest
bending of the mind to do the thing well, and frequenting oftentimes so to do.

2 Sincerity, while one does it from the heart: 3 conslancie with continuance,
and not giving over.

2 Besides pains taking, GOD will have us thriftie, and good husbands, not to
spend more then need.

3 He will have us to be contented with that which we have.

Quest. May not one desire to be rich, and to better his estate. Ann. No. He
must follow the duties of his calling; leave the success to God.

4 We must freely lend as we are able. 5 We must give as we are able,
cheerfully.

But what if one take from me that which is mine? May I not recover it? Yes.
But not by force, but by law: and not by law, 1 if the matter be a trifle,
which shall not impair your estate being forborne: 2 unless you have tried
other means first: 3 if it should be to the discredit of your profession: 4 if
you do it with breach of charity.

Commandment. 9.
Thus much for duties about goods, now follow such as are for truth and good
name.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

But some man may doubt, whether truth and good name should be less then
goods, because they are set after them? They are not, but are far to be
preferred before them, and yet here set after, for that goods are necessary
for life, truth and good name for good and comfortable life: and therefore
only in that respect set behind.

In this commandment, beside the person, we must consider the thing, which
is, bearing false witness against ones neighbor. This does forbid. The thing
forbidden, is false witness bearing, the party against whom is our neighbor.
A party whom you have need of, or may use, or who may use and have need of you.

Our English is, that we must not bear false witness against such a one, as
though only hurt to our neighbor hereby were forbidden: in Hebrew it is
Beth, which the learned know may be read as well toward, or concerning, about
or touching, etc. So as that not only hurt is forbidden, but any falsehood any
way of, or to our neighbor.

That which is translated bearing, is in Hebrew, shall not answer, that is,
shall not say, or cause to be said.

So is aunswering in scriptures put for speaking, as Math, 11, 25. So Prou, 15,
1, A soft answer, is a soft speech.

False, in the Hebrew is of falsehood, implying that the party means falsely.

Watnes, any showing of any thing, as Ioh, 1, 7.1. Cor. 15.15. This is said to
be false when it shows otherwise then the thing is, in whole or part.

This witness is toward things, or persons, and so it is false generally,
specially.

Generally it is false, when it witnesses otherwise then the thing is.

Specially it is false, when it witnesses otherwise then the person is.

Here therefore is commanded: 1 love of truth, which by the light of nature
the heathen could acknowledge.

Truth is, showing a thing as it is. Truth is assertorie, or promissorie.

Assertorie, of a thing present or past: promissory, of a thing to come.

Promise must be voluntary: 2 of a thing lawful: 3 in the promisers power: 4
till it be upon just occasion altered.

And this is required, Ephe, 4, 25, performed, Psalm, 15, and Psalm, 101.

It appeateth publicly, privately.

It must wholly be told when just occasion requires, otherwise not.

Not to tell the truth when one is called (though he say no falsehood) is to
offend.

Truth being commanded, the contrary, to wit, lying, is forbidden, as Ephe,
4, 25, Hosea, 4, 2.

In a lie, is: 1 falsehood, 2 knowledge in the speaker or vtterer, that it is
false which is showed.

Some say it is one thing to lie, and another to tell a lie. Tell a lie he
does, which tells a falsehood when he thinks it is true.

Lying, is when one knows it false, and yet tells it.

3 Purpose to deceive. Wherefore parables, tales, as Esops fables, hyperbolae,
ironies, etc. are no lies.

Every kind of ly is forbidden: 1 hurtful, which is against the good of any,
in solemn judgment, or otherwise, by flattery, foolish speaking, writing.

2 Merry, which is but in jest and sport.

3 Officious, which some call a good lie, when it is for some bodies benefit,
without any bodies hurt. Even this is condemned. Psalm, 5, 6. Job, 13, 7. Rom,
3, 7.

It may be said that Abraham, Gent, 20, 2, Isaac, Gen, 26, 7. the Midwiues,
Exodus, 1, 19. Rahab, Joshua 2, 4, and others did lie.

Aunsw. They might sin, we must not look what they did, but how well, and
upon what warrant I take it, it was these worthy personages fault that they so
shifted for themselves.

But what may we think of stratagemes and devises in war to beguile an enemy?

Answ. They are lawful, so be they be not by forsworn espials, without lying.
From an enemy in war, men look for the worst, and all means of weakening
force and craft are used. Nay God himself in the scriptures, teaches to use
such devises.

We have the more need to strive against lying in our selves, for that we
have many prouocations thereunto. Our own 1 lightness, and corruption: 2 too
much respect of other: 3 our own pleasure and commodity: 4 want of zeal for
the glory of God.

We may be discouraged from lying, if we consider that we ought to be earnest
for Gods glory, with the desire whereof, lying will not stand. Joshua, 7, 19. If
we think of the danger by lying. He that will lie, will easily forswear. Lying
ouerturneth all humane society, in that one cannot tell whom to trust. Mark
likewise how God punished lying in Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5, 3, 4, 5, and
Simon Magus, Gehesai, 2, Kings, 5, 25, 27. etc. Lying is of the devil.

Thus much for false witness against the thing: against the person follows,
which is, against the good report of a party.

In regard of witness touching a party, we may consider our selves and
others, for getting good name, and for keeping of it. And first for our selves
and others jointly. What a treasure a good name is indeed above all outward
things, may appear. Eccle. 7, 3, Pro. 22, 1. whereby is declared that a good
name is precious, of worth in it self, and profitable and of use: it is
profitable now and after, like sweet perfumes, presently refreshing,
preserving against afterward. Now we are commanded to procure things of good
report, and for that who has an evil name, is half hanged, and will hardly
ever recover a good name again. So as that he is dissolute, who cares not
what others think of him.

Besides, a good name is of great force to make our duties better accepted of
others, and to draw others more to Christ.

And as the parties place is greater: so more care is to be had, for and of a
Magistrate and Minister.

But first of all, we must consider what good name is, that we may know the
better how to procure it.

Good name is the witness of such as can well judge of the gifts of God in one.

Well said Aristotle, that honor was rather in the party who honors, then
in the party who is honored.

Parties who will witness, are the world, the godly, God himself, a man's own
conscience: will I say; not that all are competent witnesses, especially the
world, in so much as Christ denounces woe to such, whom all praise, that is,
the common worldings, Luke, 6, 26. Christ shows, that it is impossible to
believe for them who receive honor one of another. Ioh, 5, 44, being of the
common sort. So as that we are not to depend upon the common voice.

But must a man therefore neglect witness from evil men?

Aunsw. No. For Paul requires witness for them who are without, 1, Tim, 3,
6, 2, Cor, 4, 2.

Our chief care must be, that we give them no just cause to speak evil of
us, rather then if they speak without our desert, to be much grieved for it.

We may keep good report from the wicked, so long as it is for our well-dooing
which we continue in, and if it be witnessed by the godly, and God himself,
as well as by these.

The godly who witness, are such as are effectually called. These can best
distinguish the gift and grace of God: good witness from these is comfortable.
Every one best judges the things he knows.

Nevertheless, sometimes brothers will dissent, as Paul and Barnabas,
Hieronimus and Augustine, this will sometimes exercise one.

God and a man's own conscience remain, in whose witness for good, we may
more rejoice, then in all other besides.

The things for which one has good fame, are the gifts and graces of God, so
as that all faults and sins are to be removed. It is disgrace to be praised
for a sin.

Good fame now thus set out, or as John sets it out, Epistle 3, verse 3, 6,
the witness of the brethren to the truth, and love in the party, must we our
selves, for our selves first seek,

1 Rather doing the things which may deserve good fame, then seeking good
fame barely for it self.

2 Never seeking fame but for the glory of God, and greater good of others, to
whom thereby our gifts may be the more welcome and profitable.

3 Though we want good fame from men, always to have good witness from God,
and our own heart. This when we be dead, shall be our credit.

Well then, we may get good fame: If we be just. The memorial of the just
shall be blessed. Prou, 10, 7.

And 1 here we must take heed of secret sins, for which sometimes it
pleases God to correct us by suspicions that go of us, which hinder our good
name. A man must take heed of small sins, they will be increased if once
they be spoken of, and once spoken of, they will stick long, occasions must be
avoided. He that will do no ill, must do nothing that belongs thereto. The
world is given to make the worst of any thing in another.

2 If we be careful to preserve other men's good name, others will preserve
ours.

3 Do well, and seek not good fame, you shall find it sooner, it is like
your shadow, the more you run after it, the less you catch it.

But what if doing my best, I cannot get a good word?

Aun. Examine your self whether you have not some sin upon you, open or
secret: if you find you have, seek forgiveness thereof, amend your fault,
look to your self for afterward.

If upon due examining you can find none, know that God is trying whether you
will cleave unto him, without good report, yea or no, and think that God thus,
may correct some former sin in you, or make you wary that you co^^^t none
afterward. One keeps good report by the same means he gets it.

This is for our selves. For others we get good report, 1 if we make them good.

2 If we take heed of such things as lessen good report, deeds are infinite,
so are sayings, as bewraying of secrets infirmities, scoffs, whisperings,
backbiting, bitterness, deprauing thoughts, as envy, suspicions, taking
things in evil part, inuenting evil things, dissembling, or neglect of the
gifts of God in others.

3 In excusing them who are absent, so far as we may with good conscience.

4 In interpreting reports of others to the best, burying some, aduertising the
party of whom they are thereof, that he may look to himself.

5 Hoping well of such as have sinned, and are now turned and converted.

We keep their good report by the same means.

Commandment. 10.
Hitherto have been the commandments for duties of act and practice: now
follow for motion and first thought, and that in the tenth and last of all.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc.

Why, but do not the former commandments intend thoughts and stirrings? Aun.
Yes, but here of purpose God does in special give order for them, that we
should not pretend any ignorance, as our corrupt nature easily would. Again,
it may be doubted, whether here be two commandments, or no, for that the
verb covet is twice repeated. It is but one only, as Paul shows, Rom, 7, 7.

In this commandment as before, is person, thing.

Thing forbidden, is the coveting of that which is an others, where the kind
of thing forbidden is to covet, the things coueted, house, wife, servant, etc.
of ones neighbor.

Coveting, or desiring, is natural, or not natural. Natural I call that
which was in pure nature, as of meat and drink for preservation of nature,
etc. this is not forbidden.

Not natural, is that which though it arise from us, yet was not in pure
nature, which is not simply forbidden, if it be with condition of my
neighbors liking, as if I wish to buy his house at his own reasonable price.

Again, couetings or desirings are diverse, according to the occasion whence
they arise.

Some are occasioned without us, by devils, men, other creatures, whereto
unless consent do come, they are not sin. The devil tempted Christ, he
resisted and sinned not.

Others are occasioned from the root of sin in our selves, these though the
least, are sin. These are chiefelie here meant.

The things, house, wife, man servant, maid servant, etc. signify all other
things whatsoever of our neighbors, these are named as most usual and
necessary. Paul fetteth it out generally, Rom, 7, 7, whom we may most safely
follow to find out the meaning of this place, which is to condemn the
imagination of the thoughts of man's heart. Gene, 6, 5, and 8, 21, which indeed
are so by nature in all men and women. Neither is that speech more then plainly
true, Gene, 6, 5, as may appear, for that the like is repeated after the
flood. Gene, 8, 21. and is also repeated by Paul, Rom, 7, 7. And though Noah
be called just, it was not for that he was so of himself, but by Gods special
grace in forgiving his sin.

This imagination is the first corrupt natural motion of the understanding,
and the will.

It is in us before and after Baptism, and is likewise sin: before Baptism it
is called original, after Baptism, some Divines call it concupiscence.

This certainly after Baptism is, as the Romanists do not deny. 1 This is
sin, which most specially is noted in this commandment.

Paul calls this sin, Rom 7, 8, 9, so as one would marvel why the Counsel
of Trent should say that it has not the proper nature of sin, as it does.

2 Besides, it lusts against the Spirit.

3 It is breach of the law, for by it one cannot love God with all his heart,
etc.

But it is said out of James, 1, 15, that lust when it has conceived brings
forth sin, and sin when it is finished, brings forth death: as if
concupiscence did not bring death, and so were no sin.

Aunsw. That James means actual sin by the word sin. Concupiscence indeed
is not actual sin, yet is it sin, for it is original. Besides, James shows,
verse 14, that when a man is tempted, he is drawn away by his own
concupiscence. That drawing away, is from Gods law, and is a sin, so as
concupiscence is a sin. Wherefore James especially wills to take heed of
concupiscence, because it draws away, and brings out actual sin.

Now this cursed mother concupiscence with her brood is forbidden. These are,

1 Thoughts of things which should not be. So as thought is not free by Gods
law, thought it may seem to be by man's law. Thoughts ought to be ordered
well, else they will rise from any thing.

Bernard compares things to a Mill, which presently as meal, grind forth
thoughts.

2 Dreams arising from concupiscence.

3 Sins of ignorance.

4 Vain wishes without deliberation. Infinite such like.

Hitherto the words and meaning of the ten Commandments, and moral law.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION upon the Lords Supper.
1. Corinthians. 11.23. and so forth.
AS the whole Epistle, so is this chapter correctiue, that is, to redress
disorders crept into the Church of Corinth. Whereof two are mentioned here,
the one touching their habit and attire in prophesying and praying, the other
about the Lords supper: the which is set down from the 17. verse to the end of
the chapter. Wherein are two things showed, one what the fault of the
Corinthians was, from the 17. verse to the 23. the other what the truth is,
touching the supper of Christ, from the 23. verse to the end of the chapter.

This which shows the truth to be had and held, sets down the first
appointing and ordayning hereof, to the 28 verse, then the right using and
communicating thereof.

The first appointing is taught, by the Author and ordainer of this duty, by
the time, and the parts, and the use or end.

The Author is the Lord, that is Christ, yea the Father, and the holy Ghost,
that is the whole Trinity. For none has power to ordain any thing to bind
all Churches, and to continue for ever, to assure everlasting salvation as
sacraments do, but only the Lord.

Que. But Paul here says, that he delivered this unto them.

Answer. No further then he received from the Lord, even that for matter and
manner which he had from him. And if we compare this place with the
Evangelists, we shall see that Paul word for word has set it down as they
did. Wherefore,

1 It is not only dangerous, but not lawful to add or take from the
sacrament, otherwise then at the first was necessary for the same.

Quest. Does one celebrating the supper in the morning with men and women, more
then twelve, etc. agree with Christ's first institution?

Aun. Yea, but this must be remembered. Some things are of the nature and being
of a sacrament, whereto nothing must be put in that meaning, or taken from:
other things are but accessory and besides, in regard of time, place, persons.
So were sundry things in the Passover, and in the Lords first supper, which
though they be now altered, do not show that we break Christ's first
appointment. Such are the time, the place, the number of persons, the bread
unleavened, and others of that kind.

The time when this was ordained, is the night, in which Christ was betrayed.
Not only to show the abolishing of the Passover, but withal to declare the
love of Christ to his Church, who immediately before his bitter suffering, had
such care of his, as also to make all think the more of this sacrament, as
being Christ his farewell token, as a pledge of his wonderful kindness.

The parts and whole sacrament follow. The which before we can well understand,
somewhat must be known, as to make a more easy passage heereunto.

1 Of all mankind some only are saved; that is, live here in the favor of
God, and shall fully enjoy it afterward.

2 Whosoever are saved, are so by Gods merciful agreement with them in Christ,
and for his sake. So Jeremy 31, and Ephe. 2, 12.

3 Gods agreement, is his covenant and compact with his to save them.

4 Those who are in Gods covenant and agreement, are at one time or other
called, that is, acquainted heerewith.

5 Those who are called, have this agreement and covenant between God and them
made known and assured.

6 It is made known that there is such an one in general, by the preaching of
the word.

7 It is assured sometime by the Spirit alone, sometimes also by outward other
means.

8 By the Spirit, when the third person in Trinity, other means not being to
be had, persuades a party, that he is in the agreement or covenant of God.

9 By other means, when with the Spirit, some outward things are used to
assure in particular, and more evidently even to sense.

10 These means are by learned Writers in the Church, called Sacraments. This
word, though it be not in the Scripture thus taken, yet is the meaning of it.

11 A sacrament is an ordinance of God, in the right use whereof the partaker
has assurance, of his being in Gods covenant of grace. In the due receiving,
I say, not otherwise.

12 Every sacrament shows to sense one thing, and signifies and means
another. In circumcision, the cutting away of the flesh, signifies the cutting
off of sin, in the Passover the Lamb, Christ: the water of Baptism,
Christ's blood, and the work of the holy Ghost. etc.

13 Every sacrament has bare things or elements (as they call them) and
actions or ceremonies.

14 Thing or element is a single creature, as of water, bread, wine, etc.

15 Action is some practice thereabouts, as sprinkling, breaking, pouring out,
delivering, taking, eating, drinking, etc.

16 The chief thing signified in every sacrament, is Christ, God, and man,
with all his merits, having fully wrought the recovery to salvation, of every
due receiver of the Sacrament.

17 The actions are of the Minister, showing unto the partaker gods actions.
Partaker, showing to God and the church the partakers actions.


18 The thing signifying, and thing signified, are in some sort joined
together, not every way.

19 They are not together in the same place, not both given by one party, not
given at one time, not to one part, not in one manner. For the bread, water, or
wine is here: Christ his body is in heaven. The Minister gives the bread: GOD
Christ his body. The bread may be given now: Christ's body after. The bread is
given to the hand and mouth: Christ his body to the soul and faith. The bread
is given after an ordinary manner: Christ's body otherwise, for our souls by
faith mount up to heaven, and lay hold of it there.

20 They are together, 1 In the right use, that is, the party duly partaking
has both. 2 As a sign and the thing signified are together: for as the sign
makes the thing signified to be remembered, so do the outward things cause the
other to be thought of. 3 As a promise to be performed upon condition, if the
condition be kept on the one, the promise is on the other; so if we keep the
conditions of the sacraments, the things signified by them are likewise.

21 Sacraments are Jewish, Christian. Jewish among the Jews till Christ's
death: Christian ordained by Christ, to continue among the Christians to the
end of the world.

22 Christ's sacraments are two Baptism. The Lords supper.


23 Baptism is a sacrament Christian, assuring the first receiving into, and
being in the covenant of grace.

The Lords supper is a Christian sacrament, assuring co^tinuaunce and
maintenance in the covenant of grace, the doctrine whereof is set down 1,
Cor. 11. as before. The parts whereof are two, one concerning the bread, the
other concerning the cup.

The bread is taken, and after thanksgiving broken, with saying, Take, eat,
this is my body. etc.

This bread, though now unleavened by occasion of the Passover, was the usual
bread they were wont the^ to have, such as ours in the sacrament should be, not
wafers, not unleavened bread.

By this bread was and is signified Christ. First his person God and man,
performing all things for our salvation. Secondly his offices of King, Prophet,
Priest. Thirdly, his deserts in his living and dying, doing and suffering for
our justification, sanctification, redemption, and whatsoever else for our
everlasting happiness.

It pleased Christ to use bread to signify this.

1 That because that bread is a chief maintainer of natural strength even
alone, so we should know Christ is for our heavenly life, that if we have
nothing but him, we may make good shift.

2. That as bread is usual and daily, so should Christ be unto us.

3. That as bread is parable and at hand, so we should know God is as ready
always, and offers himself to them who seek him.

4. To put us in mind, that as his natural body is one, so we his mystical
should be. 1. Cor. 10.

This bread Christ took, according as the ceremony at the Passover was.

This taking of the bread was into the hands: and in the first institution it
was taken by Christ, as the good man of the house used at the Passover,
showing the duty of all Ministers to succeed.

This taking must be considered as of the bread. thing signified.


Of the bread, showing first the separation of it from a common use, now it is
food for the soul, so is Christ set apart from common men. John 17.

Christ does it first, to show that himself willingly gives himself for his
Church, which serves to strengthen our faith and persuasion in his love to us.

The Minister does it as to represent God the fathers action, giving his son
likewise to that end. So as that the whole Trinity seals these things unto us.

A second action follows, giving thanks, Matthew and Mark have, blessing, all
is one.

This was also according to the ceremony in the Passover, in the name of the
assembly.

Giving thanks and blessing may have two meanings, first as to God, so are they
all one, secondly over the creature of bread, is all one. So that here

1 Is showed, that the outward creature is reverently to be used, with calling
upon the name of God, in craving assistance to use this holy ordinance as we
should.

2 That we should praise God, as for all favors in general, so for our
redemption by Christ, and assuring us thereof by this Sacrament.

He brake according to the ceremony at the Passover.

1 To divide it. 2. To represent Christ's sufferings.

1 Whole bread is not to be delivered.

2 Bread must be broken to be divided among sundry, not as with the Papists,
who break, but do not distribute always.

3 We must never be present at this ceremony, but call to mind Christ's
torments for us.

4 If Christ were tormented for us, we must be grieved for our selves, for this
served the sour herbs at the Passover, in these was Judas sop dipped.

Matthew has, that Christ gave to his Disciples, and did not offer to God.
Indeed some writers call this a sacrifice: not properly, 1 but a memory of
Christ's sacrifice, 2 wherein we sacrifice our selves to God. 3 Give alms to
the poor, which is a kind of sacrifice. And said, that is, aloud and plainly
that all might understand.

All coming to this Sacrament, must have knowledge of the word and this
sacrament.

The Minister must not mumble as among the Papists.

In the speeches of Christ following in 4 branches, we may mark a
commandment, a promise, a duty of the receauer.

Take, not only into your mouths, but into your hands, representing the soul
and faith: Ye, every of ye, even at this instant.

A marvelous strength to faith.

This we are commanded to do. I promise that unto you which I command and
you do.

The Minister in Gods place puts us in mind of particular faith.

The receauer professes faith, and that particular, even now quickened at this
sacrament.

Eat, that is, divide by chewing and preparing to concoction.

1 We must not reserve the bread.

2 We must have some strength of faith, as it were to chew the ^^d.

3 We must be able to distinguish things in Christ.

4 Christ must be mistically incorporate unto us.

This, not the shows which cannot be divided.

Not in diuidium vagam, hoc does determine.

Not that which is with or under the bread. Christ is present but in the right
use, these words are in the beginning.

This, that is, this very bread.

Is, not properly, no more then the cup is the new testament. Else Christ
should have eaten himself. 2 His body should be baked, not by
transubstantiation. Transubstantiation has no ground in scriptures.

There was none at the first supper, for then Christ's body was seen. It is no
otherwise here then in Baptism. Paul calls it bread: If it should be
transubstantiate, there should be no sign. Accidences should nourish, should
be without subjects.

Not by consubstantiation. 1 Christ sat visible at the first, 2 He is now in
heaven: If thus, his body should not have partem extra partem, one part out of
another.

Is, in the due use, is to faith. Thus the word (is) in sacramental speeches
is for, signifies Genesis 17. etc.

My body, (syne^d: I take it) my self with all that is mine, or belonging to
my person, office, or merits as before.

Which is broken for you, that is, which shortly shall be crucified for you.
Luke has it, which is given for you, that is, straightway shall be given to
death for you.

This do in remembrance of me. Where is a duty commanded, and the manner how.
The duty is, do this, not that here the Apostles were made Priests, but that
Christians are commanded to practice this duty.

1 So as that it is not in their choice to do it or no, if they be not fit,
they must presently make themselves fit.

2 Christians must often do it. Indeed there is no set time, but the oftener
the better, so that due reverence and regard be had thereof and therein.

3 It must be done always according to the first institution. The manner is,
in remembrance of Christ.

Christ signifies as before in the word body, and before that bread.

Remembrance is a word of sense, and signifies calling to mind, or keeping in
mind, in the English. The Greek signifies calling to mind, such words as
these of sense, do signify besides, actions and affections. So as that
hereby are we put in mind.

1 That we are by nature forgetful of Christ, and his merits, and our own
duties.

2 That we should know Christ. 3 Love him. 4. Believe in him. Hitherto the
first part of this sacrament, now follows the other concerning the wine,
Where we must consider again, the element. actions.


The element is wine, the actions as before.

Mark first that God uses two signs in this sacrament, because he would the
more strengthen our faith, and seek all in Christ.

So as that no man may keep either from any communicant, and every communicant
is to desire both.

This cup, that is, this wine. Wine was their most generous drink.

It is likely that it was mingled with water in those hot countries. We must
use wine, not mingle it with water, it is not our usual drink, as it was
theirs.

The thing signified is Christ's blood.

Is, that is, signifies. There seems not to be the same manner in Paul and
Matthew for the words following.

Paul says, this cup is the new Testament in my blood, that is, this wine is
my blood, which confirms and ratifieth the new testament, and that it
belongs unto you.

Matthew has, This is my blood of the new Testament, to the same sense. So
that the thing signified is the blood of Christ, and by wine,

1 To teach that we must have some sweet feeling of Christ. 2 And that it is
he who cheareth our hearts.

Now this his blood is shed and poured out for us, whereby is signified his
death and merits for us.

Note by the way the leprosy of sin, which could not be cured, but by the
blood of God.

Testament in effect here is the same with covenant, save that testament or
will implies death. And is nothing, but Gods agreement with mankind for their
salvation.

This to continue and be effectual, is but one. And is the pleasure of God to
save men for Christ's sake, and according to diverse considerations is old, till
Christ, for the Jews, in ceremonies, and to vanish:

New, not but that it was heretofore, but was by Christ so clearly published
as it seemed new. 2 Shall not decay. 3 Renueth us more and more. The benefits
of this Jeremy sets out 31 chap: and are the same we have heard of before in
Christ. All which, this wine is given as a seal to confirm, that they belong
to the due receiver.

This must we drink as eat the former, by commandment in remembrance.

Matthew has, drink ye all, as if our Lord would prevent the corruption in
the Church of Rome.

Object. Luke makes mention of two cups. 22, 17, 20. How will both stand?

Aun. The former was of the Passover, the latter was only of the Lords
supper.

Thus much of the parts, the use follows in the 26. which is easily
understood by that which went before.

Hitherto has been the doctrine of the institution, now follows that which
is for the meet partaking thereof; from the beginning of verse 27. to the end
of the chapter.

In which is declared the necessity of meet partaking, and the manner how.

The necessity is verse 27, and is from the danger of unmeet or unworthy
receiving, for none can receive but worthily, or unworthily.

The danger is that the unworthy receiver shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. Where first we must know what it is unworthily to receive,
then what it is to be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Worthy or unworthy, is with comparison or respect, and that between
Quantities. Qualities.


Worth in quantity, is equality, as a penny for a penyworth: worth in quality
is likeness, or coming near.

This unworthily is meant of quantity, but quality.

Unworthily is not contrary or beside the excellency of the mystery, or not
in every point not according to the duty of the receiver.

For then none should receive worthily, as not being able to do as they ought.

But unworthily is vnmeetly, or unlikely, so Math. 3. And the Ruler of the
Synagogue thought himself not worthy, that is, not meet. etc.

This unworthily must be judged according to Christ's institution of this
sacrament: so as that if we use it otherwise then he appointed we should use
it, it is unworthily.

To be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, is to sin against the body
and blood of Christ, that is against Christ himself, and to be subject to the
punishments therefore, so Math, 5, 21, 22. James, 2, 10.

The fault is most grievous, being against God, offering us the blood of his
covenant. Heb. 10, 28, 29. The wishing whereof to themselves, what has it
brought but notorious, and extreme misery?

But some may say, how may this be, seeing Christ his body is not there really?

Aun. It is sufficient that his ordinances are abused, and those holy signs
which he ordained, so despighted.

So the reproach done to Princes pictures, arms, Letters, Ambassadors,
redoundeth to the Prince. We our selves so interpret things done toward our
selves.

None can from hence therefore gather, that wicked or worldly men, do eat the
body of Christ. They may eat (as S. Augustine says) the bread of the Lord,
they cannot eat, the bread the Lord, who to all receivers is life.

Thus much for the necessity of meet partaking, now follows the manner how,
and that from the 28 verse on, the which first is shortly named, after is
further enlarged.

It is shortly named, verse 28, and is said to be examination. The which we may
consider by the properties of it, and by the nature and parts.

The properties are first the necessity, second, the generality, third,
integrity, the special parties who^ it most chiefly concerns.

The necessity appears by therefore, the commandment, so as that otherwise
they ought not to partake, neither can they please God, or have comfort in
their hearts. And indeed if men consider the greatness of the mystery, search
and trial cannot be but most necessary.

Men must take heed that custom do not take away care, we must do it for
conscience.

The generality is in the word man, which signifies male or female, old or
young, of any degree. So that none to be admitted must be accepted, nor any to
be accepted not examined.

So is man taken. John 3, 27. John 5, 7. John 7, 46.

The reason of this generality is, that Christianity, and the duties thereof,
are as well for one as other. Neither is there any who has not just cause to
try out himself. Well therefore does our Church appoint the names to be sent,
that help may be had. None may be without his garment.

The integrity or vprightnes in this trial, is implied in the word, examine.
Which shows an exquisite and most diligent search, as Lapidaries, and
Goldsmithes do, to find out true from counterfeit, good from bad.

Where a man had need of great skill, seeing the thing he seeks is most
excellent, and to be deceived, is great loss. Now this examination must be
such, as ever to search till we find our selves in good estate, as they who dig
for metals, like the Shunanite to Elisha, so Christ commands to seek.

But some will say, what if I find not the things I look for?

I answer. Presently so set your self to seek as you give not over till you
find. The things you look for, are of mere necessity to everlasting
salvation: and that not only at the Sacrament, but all times before, and
afterward.

Therefore in this case must we do as they who are sick, hungry, for physic
and meat, not differing, and it is a manifest evil sign not to be earnest
this way.

The persons whom this examination concerns, is every man and party toward
himself.

Not but that others, who have charge of others, must endeavor. as Exodus 12,
26, 27. Deuteronomy, 6, 7, Gene. 18, 19.

But that though they should fail, yet every party, must be able, willing, and
practicing to examine themselves.

No man can do this but he must 1 Take some time for it. 2 Remember in the
doing of it, he has to do with God, who sees to the ground of the heart. 3
Had need of some instruction, and exercise before. 4 Must do it as at other
times, so specially renew the doing hereof at every time of administering the
Sacrament. 5 That which he now endeavors to find, he must have for ever
after.

Hitherto have been the properties of examination, now follow the nature and
parts thereof.

Examination is an exercise of godliness, whereby a man descends into
himself, bethinking what he ought to have, never giving over till he have
such graces, as whereby he may partake the sacrament of the body and blood of
our Lord worthily.

This exercise is many where is commended in scriptures. 2. Cor. 13. the neglect
blamed. No man considers what have I done. Look Haggeus.

It calls a man home to himself. Psalm, 4, 4. Zepha: 2, 1. Will not let a
man be more busy then needs, with others.

Being bethinking, it must be with deliberation.

The things which examination looks for, must be according to the particular
intent in examination, as if I examine whether I have things to make me fit to
hear the word, I look one way, if to make prayers, I look another way: so if
for the Sacrament, there is a special course for that likewise to be taken.

Now the things which examination for this Sacrament must look after, may be
considered in their number, quality, and measure.

The number we will not stand precisely upon, four is the smallest. The first
is knowledge. This is the perceiving of the meaning of truth necessary to
salvation.

Which must be as of truth in general, 1 That there is one God, three persons.

2 That man was created at the first to the image of God.

3 That man fell, and plunged himself and his posterity into misery, from
whence by nothing in himself or others he can get out.

4 That there is no way to be recovered from hence, but only by Christ,
according to the articles in the Creed.

5 That then he know what faith is, and how that only by that, Christ is
apprehended.

6 That faith is never sufficient if it be without repentance.

7 That repentance always cleaves to Gods ordinances and commandments.

So also in special touching the doctrine of the Sacraments, and this in
particular.

The second is a man's own sins, which has as far as one can endeavor, 1
The finding out of the number and grieuousnes.

2 The acknowledging of them to God and others, against whom they have been.

3 The being truly sorry for them.

4 The desiring of forgiveness for them.

The best way to find out, is to lay the law and word of God rightly understood
to our hearts, and bethink of our particular practices.

The third is faith of salvation, which is a persuasion by the holy Ghost, that
the doctrine of salvation by Christ, belongs unto the party.

The fourth is repentance, or amendment of life, which must be 1 Of the whole
man. 2 Always. 3 Profiting and going forward. And has two parts,
mortification, vivification.

Mortification is keeping under, and weakening of sin.

Vivification is renewing of desires and endeauours to all good things.

This is the number, the quality follows, which is, that there must be 1
Truth of every of the former.

Which one shall judge of, if in the presence of God, he can find these things
in himself. 2 If they be working.

2 Presentnesse, that even at the instant the party can find them in himself.

3 Refreshing, that even by this sacrament he must find all the former
quickened, and renewed.

The measure is last, which is to be wished as great as may be, and must not
discourage if it be but little.

The measure of saving graces, are not in all equal.

The weaker our grace is, the more need have we of the stronger means.

Competent measure is judged by an upright heart to please God in the use of
this ordinance.

So as that no weakness or slippes must discourage us. 2 No crosses. 3 No
tentations.

Thus much for the manner how meetly one is to partake, now follows the
further enlarging thereof, and that from repeating this danger of neglect of
examination, 29, 30, as also from the fruit of due examination. verse 31.

The danger of neglect is in the punishment general. 29. special. 30.


The general punishment has the kind. cause.


The kind is that he eats Krima ^ayton.

That is, he so eats as will occasion krima, because the Lords holy
ordinance is profaned, as before in eating unworthily, and being guilty of
the body of Christ.

K^^^a many translate damnation, meaning as it seems eternal, which though
every sin does deserve, yet God does not always inflict, neither is here
(as I take it) meant. For that the Apostle expounds himself. verse 30.32.
And for that sundry thus offending, were the children of God, who could not be
damned.

I take it therefore to signify judgment, as 1, Peter 4. that is, punishment,
or correction, as is said, Correct us in thy judgment, etc. in which case
Hezechiah prays, 2, Chron, 30, 18, 19, 20.

So the meaning is, the parties neglecting shall be subject to punishment, even
upon the carelesnes or rechlesnesse about this sacrament, and justly, this
being an ordinance of God, so full of good for us.

Now that which is true in the receiving, God punished the contempt of
circumcision.
is as true in the forbearing, and not endeavoring to receive worthily, and
indeed, in sharper manner. For here seems to be understood punishment
indeed, but easier, there a man may justly fear hell fire.

Considerations to persuade us not to contemn this sacrament, I mean for such
as profess the same doctrine with us, and such as neglect when they may
conveniently resort thereunto.

1 First it is Gods commandment. 2 It has likewise his promise. 3 Is a
special prop to stay our faith. 4 Brings with it Christ and all heavenly
treasures. 5 Quickens a man to all good duties of thankfulness to God, love to
men, etc. 6 Was very often in the primative Church.

Considerations to make us resort unto it, with due consideration. Where first
we might bewail, that it is of all so slightly regarded.

1 There are many things to be done which require study.

2 The Jews taught one another to keep the Passover.

3 It is a duty of greatest consequence almost that can be for a man.

4 No great thing can be well done without good case.

Now no judgment is expressed, because we might fear all. No time named, that
always we should fear them.

The cause is, for that he discerns not the Lords body, that is, that which
is his body by his ordinance sacrame^tally.

The special punishment follows. verse 30. Bodily diseases, and death.

1 Not only these, but decay in name, goods, friends, estate, etc.

2 Learn when these come, among other things to call to mind slight regard
of the Lords supper.

3 All are not sick or weak, that we might learn to profit one by another
harms.

4 Neither must such as feel no outward crosses, think that they are, or
shall be free.

The fruit, which due examination brings, follows, verse 31. and is,

1 Freedom from judgments, which is set down with the forerunning duty of
judging our selves, which is so to try out our selves, that we may judge
aright, that we come duly, and if that we find we have not so come, to humble
our selves, and be revenged of our selves.

And indeed this freedom is from all plagues, as they come from God angry.

2 And obtaining of all excellent things, for what can a due partaker be said
not to have?

Quest. Are not such as come worthily corrected?

Aun. Yes: but being without particular conscience for some particular fault,
it is no judgment, but an exercise.

Que. What may we think of those that are afflicted in this kind by God?

Aun. They are chastened, that they should not be condemned with the world.
Chastising is somewhat to the grief of our nature, proceeding from Gods love
to us, to make us the better for afterward.

That it is the grief of nature. Look Heb, 12, 11. And necessary it is, that
so it should be. It is also moderate. It is likewise with Gods love: To make us
better.

The utmost end why God sends it, is that we should not be condemned with the
world. The world are the unrepentant men of the world. These shall be condemned.

Condemnation is everlasting punishment, with the anger of God, and misery of
the party punished.

FINIS.
THE DOCTRINE OF FAITH.
Romans. 1, 16.
Hitherto have we heard of preparation to grace and salvation: now follows to
consider how grace and estate of salvation is wrought in a party.

All which consideration is in the means, or in the gifts of grace.

Means I call those which are appointed by GOD, and blessed for the working of
grace: gifts, the very things wherein salvation does consist.

Now the means it the word of grace and salvation, so called Acts, 13, 26, as
the devil himself confesses. Acts, 16, 17, word of grace, Acts, 14, 3, so
Acts, 20, 32, and that because it is the ministry of the Spirit, 2, Cor, 3, 8,
that is, which conueieth the holy Spirit into one, and brings all grace.

This word is called by another name, usually the Gospel, so Acts 20, 24, the
Gospel of grace, word of the kingdom.

For the name we heard of it, in the entrance to the Harmony of the Evangelists.

This doctrine is all that truth in the Canonical scriptures, touching
salvation by Christ.

A sum and brief of this doctrine, is that which is commonly called the
Apostles Creed. So says S. Augustine, Ista verba quod audistis, per diuinas
scripturas sparsa sunt. etc. These words which you have heard, are strawed all
over the scriptures, but gathered together from thence, least the memory of
forgetful parties should fail, and that every man may have what to say, and
hold.

Wereuppon Marcellus in Epiphanius, repeating the Creed, faith he had it out
of the divine Scriptures.

In which sense, S. Augustine calls it the foundation of the Catholic
faith: and S. Ambrose, a key opening all the Scriptures.

In considering of this Creed, it shall be good to know the title, and the
contents of it.

The title is, The Apostles Creed. Wherein is the kind of the thing, and the
parties whose it is said to be.

The kind is, that it is a Creed. If we should speak to such as understand
Latin, it might not be unfit to speak of the Latin name, Symbolum. But here
it shall not need. Only I think that diverse learned men are deceived, who
think that it is called symbolum, of part in a shot or reckoning, which diverse
make up. That (I take it) is symbola in the feminine gender, not symbolum.

This name of Creed, in English (I take it) arose from the abuse of the first
word in Latin, Credo. Where, on their beads they were enjoined to say so many
Auemaries, Paternosters, and Credoes, whereon this was called creed. Which is a
Latin word, and does signify as much to say, I believe my creed, that is,
that which I do believe: whereof we shall have better cause to speak by and
by. So then the creed is that, which one by direction of the word of God,
does, and ought to believe.

The parties are the Apostles, whose it is said to be. The Apostles are those
twelve, sent out by GOD into all the world to preach the Gospel.

Some think it is called theirs, as being in matter and form penned by them,
by divine inspiration, after the holy Ghost came upon them, before they
departed from Jerusalem to preach the Gospel. So as some set down, what every
Apostle did set down.

This is not so, for then it were Canonical Scripture, which it is not, for
the Romanists themselves grant it to be but tradition.

Others think, that it is said to be the Apostles, as consonant to their
doctrine, as an abstract and abridgement thereof. So is it, though this be not
all, for I judge that this name is added, to put a difference between other
forms of creeds used in the church, as the Nicene, I believe in one God,
Athanasius, Whosoever will be saved. Now for difference, this is called, the
Apostles, as of their doctrine.

Now touching this title, some questions may be asked.

1 Que. What authority is this Creed of, divine, or humane? or how binds it?

Aun. It is divine for matter, though not for form, for the Apostles did not
pen it. And therefore so far binds, as it is agreeable to the Scriptures. And
therefore, when a thing is said to be as true as the Creed, it is only for
the matter.

2 Que. Whether all things to be known, necessarily to salvation, are
contained herein?

Aun. I think they may be said to be implied, though not expressed. And if God
reveal, and give means of knowledge of no more, these may suffice: otherwise
not. We must believe all that God will have us.

3 Que. whether is it certain damnation not to believe every of these?

Aun. we must distinguish between articles of the foundation, and others.
Articles of the foundation believed may suffice, when others are not revealed.

Again, we must consider for articles or doctrines, not of the foundation,
whether they be clearly revealed or not, if they be not, they shall not
prejudice.

Again, whether we err of simplicity or wilfulness: vvilfull error
damneth, simple does not in things not of the foundation.

Things of the foundation, I call faith and repentance, most necessary.

4 Que. Are we bound to sunder them into twelve?

Aun. No. Remember that as God reuealeth, man must believe.

This for the title: the contents follow from the beginning to the end.

These contents have the profession, the assent. Profession, in all to the
particle Amen. Assent in the word Amen.

In the profession, is the manner, and matter.

The manner is, I believe. The matter, the rest.

Whereof before we can as we should speak of any, some general rules are to be
remembered for all.

1 We must build our faith in every of these points upon the written word of
GOD, not only the words of this Creed, and therefore, Acts, 24, 14, Luke 24,
44, and must understand all according to the scriptures.

2 Every one must make it for himself, Job, 19, 25, Gala, 2, 20, John, 20, 28.

3 To every clause, in heart this (I believe) must be adjoined, though it be
not expressed in word.

4 We must labor more and more to grow in fuller assurance of every parcel.
Mar, 9, 24, Luke 17, 5.

5 Our life must be aunswerable to the profession of faith. James 2, 18.
Therefore says Irenaeus, to believe, Lib, 4, 14.
is to do as God will.

6 Though we cannot dissolve all doubts, Lib. 15, de trinitate capit, 2,
we must not shrink from the profession. First believe, after you shall more
and more understand. Faith seeks, (says S. Augustine) understanding sindeth
out.

7 The Creed is no prayer.

Hitherto the general rules, the manner of profession follows. I believe.
Whereof we may consider feuerally in it self, and jointly with the matter
following. And first we must consider the grounds of scriptures, whereof in
this point to believe, and personally I believe, we may note these heads.

1 Commandments to believe. John 20, 27.

2 Promises made to belieuers. Mar. 9, 23.

3 Rebuking of unbelief. Math, 6, 30, Math, 8, 26, Math, 14, 31.

4 Commendation of parties for their belief sake. Math, 8, 10, Math, 15, 28.

Whereupon men are often noted by this in the New testament, that they are
belieuers.

5 The means appointed by God to work and increase true faith, the word and
Sacraments, and even the whole ministry.

The same means are for personalitie, as I may call it.

First therefore this I believe, is that I have belief. Belief is sometime
put for a thing which I do believe, sometimes for a gift, whereby I do
believe.

For a thing which I do believe, as 1, Tim, 1, 19, Jude, 3,

So is it not barely to be taken here.

For a gift whereby I do believe. Mark, 9, 23.

So is it taken here, and thus do I say, I believe, as Philip, 1, 19.

Now for the better understanding of this manner of profession, we must
consider, 1 what parties have faith: 2 where faith is in such parties as have
it. 3 vvhereabout faith is hestowed, as about her proper matter. 4 what be the
parts thereof. 5 what properties it has. 6 and lastly how it is wrought.

The parties who have faith, are reasonable: 1 God, who is said to be faithful
in keeping his promise. This to believe, is to believe a promise.

2 Creatures. 1 Angels: 2 Men. In mankind infants have not faith.

So as devils have a kind of faith. Nevertheless, there is difference of
Angels and devils faith, and men's.

Angels faith is in God the Creator, legal, no other then Adams was. Men's
faith must be likewise in the Redeemer. Angels are not properly said to be
redeemed, but rather confirmed by Christ, as some Divines hold.

Devils faith is only of the truth and power of God in general, out of
themselves.

For the second point, faith is said to be in the heart. Romans 10.9, 10. Acts, 8,
37. Ephe. 3, 17.

Now so is it said to be in the heart, as to be conveyed into the whole man,
especially into the chief powers of the soul.

Whereof the one is the mind, the other is the will. In both which I do judge
that this faith is. All agree for the mind, some doubt for the will, which may
thus be proved. First, because it is said to be in the heart, which implies
the whole soul.

Secondly, for that faith knitteth to God. Thirdly, faith and hope differ not
(I take it) in place, hope is an affection.

This is most certain, that every one who belieueth, must do it with his
heart: Yea, with all his heart.

The proper matter which faith regards, is the whole word of God, as God
reuealeth it. And therefore, before the word was written, faith was bound to
believe divine visions, dreams, and special promises of Gods special power,
whence did arise faith to work wonders, when there is no such special
promise, that faith cease.

Since the word is written, it is tied to that in the right meaning of it, and
to that only.

The parts of faith, are knowledge, and application.

For knowledge, the scripture is plentiful.

Whereupon, faith is sometimes called wisdom, understanding, etc.

This knowledge is perceiving of that which I do believe.

And has two parts, notice, and assent.

Notice is the perceiving of the meaning of the thing. Which can never here in
this life be full in us, and is not to be understood, as some precisely speak,
of knowing to be by causes.

To this notice is required always: 1 Some direction and warrant of scripture.

2 Meaning of the words, and matter believed.

3 Discerning truth from falsehood. Ioh, 10, 4, 14, 16, 1, Cor, 2, 14, Phil, 1,
10, Heb, 5, 14.

Whereupon follows, a light to try and examine things by.

4 Ability to increase therein by the right use of former knowledge.

5 To be able to teach others that which our selves know.

Assent, is persuasion of the certainty of the truth of the former every way,
whereof we have notice. John, 21, 24. 2, Pet, 1, 16, 17. 2, Tim, 1, 12.

This is called Plerophorie, or full assurance that the contradictory is false,
in assurance whereof, a belieuer will suffer any thing rather then to deny.

Whereupon faith always strives against doubting.

Of these two alone, arises that which is called historical faith, that is, a
believing of the history of the Bible.

Application is, whereby the belieuer is persuaded, that the thing believed,
belongs to him, in every point as it is known and assented unto.

This is the hardest in tentations, and is most assailed, by the devil, by the
Papists.

First therefore let us prove this.

The Papists so mislike application in faith in general, as that they deny
that application is in justifying faith. Bellar: de iustificat: lib. 1.30.
Insomuch as he says, eleven articles of the Creed, belong only to credultie,
that is, willingness to believe, not to affiance.

We prove it thus: 1 Where particular mercies are promised, there must be
particular faith.

But to diverse in scriptures are particular promises, Abraham, Math, 9, 2.
Luke, 7, 48, etc, therefore.

They answer to the minor, these parties were extraordinary, and had indeed
special revelation.

We answer, that as true as Christ's word was to them, so is his Spirit now
unto his children, so as they ought not to distrust it. Neither does Paul
speak, Rom, 8, 38, 39, more of himself then of us

That Gods Spirit witnesses with ours, it is evident. Romans 8, 16. Gala, 4, 6.
2, Cor, 1, 21, 22. Ephe, 1, 13, Ioh, 1, 2, 27.

2 In all faith, there is as it were a syllogism made, whereof the minor is
with application.

3 Particular persons are rebuked for infidelity.

4 Practices of particular parties, Thomas, John, 20, 28, David, etc.

The Fathers are large here. Qui de Deo non praesumit veniam, non
animaduertit, plus peccato suo posse Dei clementiam. August: Whosoever does not
presume of pardon from GOD, does not consider that the mercy of God can do more
then his sin. Patot quia non aliter quam Thomas confessus est, cum diceret
domine mi, Deus mi, nos quoque confiteri vult Deus. Cyrill in 12. John.

It is manifest, because no otherwise then Thomas confessed, when he said, my
Lord, my God, God will have us also to confess.

(...). Chryso: ad Romans

He said not to God, but to my God, even as the Prophets also do, making him
who is common, peculiar unto themselves.

Qui omnium Deus, meus specialiter. Hieron: who is God of all, mine in
special.

Tertullianus notat dogmata Christianae fidei Ethnicos appellasse
praesumptiones. Tertullian notes, that the heathen termed the positions of
Christian belief presumptions: as the Papists charge us.

So therefore is faith with application, as every branch to salvation has it.

Hereof are these degrees: 1 Approbation, whereby one is persuaded of the
worth of the doctrine to be believed.

2 Expedition, whereby one desires it above any thing.

3 Apprehension, whereby one having once hold of it, will never let it go.

4 Oblectation, whereby one rests and stays himself on the thing believed.

5 Expectation, looking for the benefit thereof.

This with the former, is the faith of Gods elect, sometimes by the learned
called iustifiying, or saving faith.

The properties of faith may easily be perceived, even by that faith is said to
be in the heart.

1 It will profess or confess it self when occasion serves. Rom: 10, 9, 2,
Cor, 4, 13.

We must be ready heereunto.

But here a question or two may be demanded, 1 Que. How far is a party bound
always to make profession of his faith?

Aun. Profession may be said to be in deed, or words.

In deeds, when we lead a life according to the doctrine of faith. This
kind of profession must always be, and every where.

In word, when we give out what we hold and believe. And this may be
considered in matters that are of the foundation of salvation, or accessory,
and not of the foundation.

In such things as are not of the foundation, we must remember, 1 order, to
do that after things of the foundation: 2 our calling, to deal in such
matters, as if we be preachers, 3 to take the fit season for hearers.

For such things as are of the foundation: 1 We must never deny any of them.

2 When we are called upon by lawful authorie, we must profess our faith.

Here some exception may be, if it be before scoffers, Christ held his peace.

3 We must speak so as men may perceive our meanings, we must not affect
doubtful speeches.

4 Though we be not demanded, if our silence should be very hurtful, or our
profession profitable, we must make profession.

A second question, whether it be lawful to compel to make profession?

Aun. We must distinguish the parties toward whom compulsion is used. For if
they be such as never had knowledge, nor made profession of the truth, they
must not be compelled first, but taught.

Why then are Papists punished? Aun. Some are punished for their treasons,
others for their refusing to be taught.

If they have made profession, and stand not to it, they must be compelled.
None must be suffered to profess a false doctrine, unpunished, or unnoted.

Two diverse religions, are not to be permitted by one sovereign authority.

How far may a Sovereign proceed in punishing, for not professing the faith?

He must make laws for the keeping of the Catholic faith, any teaching
idolatry wilfully, he ought to punish with death.

Whether may a Prince suffer the Ambassador of a foreign Prince, to use his
conscience?

Aun. I think he may, because he has no authority over him, not being his
sovereign: but none of his own subjects must be permitted to communicate with
him in false worship.

2 The second property is, that faith is explicit, not only to believe as the
Church believes, but to say what we believe, why we believe, what we mean by
that which we say we believe.

3 The third, that it is lively and formed. No true faith is dead. Charity is
not the form of faith.

4 The fourth, it can never be lost, if it be rooted, and confirmed.

5 The fifth, according to the doctrine it belieueth, it must be taken diversely,
and therefore it is sometimes to believe, sometimes to believe in.

Faith is wrought effectually by the holy Ghost, instrumentally by the word.

Hitherto have we spoken of the manner of this profession in general, and
severally in it self: now follows that we consider it with application, to
every branch following.

First therefore, as every one of discretion must believe, so must they in God,
and so the rest following: secondly from the heart: thirdly, according to divine
truth written. Fourthly, we must know grounds of scripture for every one,
understand the meaning thereof, perceive the difference, from others, be able
to teach them to others, apply them to our selves. Fifthly, profess them in due
time, express them, and lastly, our faith must be lively.

And thus much for the manner of profession: the doctrine and matter professed
follows, beginning at in God, and so on to life everlasting.

The matter has two parts, 1 of God. 2 of the Church. Of God, to I believe the
holy Catholic, etc. exclusiuely of the Church in the rest.

This of God is essentially and generally, or personal, and particularly.

Of God essentially, in name, or attributes. Name, in God.

In attributes. Almighty. Maker of heaven and earth.


That belief is to be in God, look the commandment. 1, Tim, 6, 17. Promise,
Iere, 31, 33, Heb, 8, 10.

Unbelief, or not believing noted, Rom, 11, 30. punished, Psalm, 78, 22.

Belief in this kind commended. John, 14, 1.

Neither is this only true in general, but also in special, and particular:
so Exodus, 3, 6.

So God promises, Gene, 17, 2, no more to Abraham then others, Rom: 4. For
Abraham is father of the faithful. Thus did Daniel, 6, 23, Paul, Acts, 27, 25.
David, Psalm. 22, 1.

Now this, in God, has to be considered, the meaning of God, then what is
this, in him.

God must be understood, as in the scriptures.

The scriptures set out God, as he is toward his creatures in general, or
toward his Church in special.

Toward his creatures. That, 1 God is. 2 God is one. 3 God is a Spirit
infinite. 4 God is present every where. 5 God knows all things. 6 God can do
all things. 7 Loves mankind. 8 Is most just. 9 Is most certain, and sure of
his word.
Toward his Church, as he makes covenant.

The form of the covenant is, I will be their GOD, they shall be my people.

This form in general is set down, Ierem, 31.

In particular, Gene, 17, 2.

In this covenant is a promise and commandment.

Promise on Gods part, that he will be our God, as Gen, 17, 1, Gene, 1, 11,
where are promised all things to happiness, full and for ever.

So as if we tell him of our loss, he will restore it, of out sickness, he is
physician, of death, he is our rayser.

In particular, God promises: 1 To teach us all things necessarily to be
known of us: They shall be taught of God. Look Esaias, 30, 21.

2 To maintain and nourish us.

3 To defend us.

4 To govern us.

5 To deliver us.

6 To be happiness, and all that heart can think to us.

The commandment is, that they shall be my people, that is, that we should
believe all these, and do duties thereafter.

This is God, then do we believe in him, when we profess that we believe
all the former of God to our own behoof, and do all duties aunswerable
thereunto, as God is in general, and special toward his Church.

Memorandum that this article professes the first commandment.

1 First therefore every one disavoweth all Atheism.

2 Belieueth in God as the scriptures reveal.

3 Acknowledge but one God.

4 Who knows whatsoever they do. 5 Is present to them. 6 True of his promise
made. Whereby they seek unto him: rest in his judgment of them: are persuaded
that all things shall work for their good here, and that GOD shall be full,
and for ever happiness unto them, so as they make him their portion above all
other things.

Thus far touching GOD by Name, now follow the attributes.

Ob. The Father is first named, therefore should it be first opened.

Aun. So might it. Nevertheless, seeing that attributes are of the essence,
and Father is a person, and essence for easy teaching should go first,
therefore we may without offense (not blaming the order of the Creed) speak
first of the attributes. These rules must be remembered of them.

1 Though here they be joined with the Father, that is but for orders sake,
they belong likewise to the Son, and holy Ghost, and so must be remembered.

2 There are more belonging to God, and to be believed in God then these. Look
Exodus, 34, 6.

The attributes here are two, Almighty, and maker of heaven and earth.

Que: Why are these named, and no more?

Aun. These are named, 1 as being very well known even to some of the
heathen, Give me (says S. Augustine) a Pagan, a worshipper of many Idols, a
servant of devils, who says not that God is almighty.

Plato could see that the world was made.

2 These put a manifest difference between the true and false god. God
himself by his power, proves himself to be the true God. So does Elias
convince the people, 1, Kin: 18, 24, 34, 38: and for making the world, look
Iere: 10, 11, and Augustine, Let any make a world, and he shall be God.

3 These are of special use for faith and life.

Que: Is there any thing in the order that these are here named?

Aun: The creation proves the almightines of God. There are here no more
then these named, for shortness sake, and memory.

Now for the grounds of this article, 1 Consider the general promise, 2, Cor,
6, 18.

More specially applied, Exodus, 6, 3.

To Abraham, Gene, 17, 1.

2 Where the almighty is prayed unto, there must be faith, he is prayed unto,
Gene, 28, 3, Gene, 43, 14.

3 The practice of Gods children was thus to believe in the almighty. Paul, 2,
Cor, 6, 18, the three men, Dan, 3, 17.

4 Unbelief in this kind is punished in Zachary, Luk, 1, 20, in the Prince,
2, Kings, 7, 17, in Benhadaes servant, 1, Kings, 20, 28.

That God is almighty, it needs not to be proved, yet to satisfy such as are
ignorant, this may serve.

Namely, the consideration of the sundry mighty works of God, general,
particular. He is the God of hosts.

In this article we may consider the meaning, and the duties which we profess.

The meaning may easily appear in the name Almighty, which is, who has all
might.

Might in God, is whereby he is of power, and can do things.

This might and power, is absolute, or actual.

Absolute power in God, is whereby he can do more then he will, as Math, 3,
9, to raise up of stones children to Abraham. To give Christ more then legions
of angels, which he would not.

Actual power is that whereby God does what he will.

Quest: Whether of the two powers is meant here?

Aun. We must believe both. Nevertheless, actual is that which more nearly
concerns us, wherein we can have comfort in. Of this it is said, Psalm, 115,
3, And he spoke the word, and they were made.

God is said to be thus Almighty, 1 Doing whatsoever he will: and here Gods
omnipotency is not in doing sin: Sin he wills not. Again, sin is of
weakness, not of strength.

2 Hindering what he wills.

Object: Why does he not then hinder sin?

Aun: Because he is not bound so to do: 2 for that he can bring out of sin,
good.

3 Doing all things with ease: he but wills, and they are.

4 Causing all power where it is, even making weak strong. etc.

Thus far for the meaning, the duties remain which we do profess.

1 Never to presume of the Almighty power of God for us, unless we know his
will to that end. For though our faith believes, he can do more then he will,
yet we never can reap comfort of his power disioyned from his will. So as
Roman Catholics not proving Gods will for transubstantiation, say nothing
to purpose. Or loose professors resting on Gods power, as able to convert them,
and not using means, do but beguile themselves.

2 Never to doubt, but whatsoever God will, shall surely come to pass,
promised, threatened, generally, particulerly.

Object. May one then neglect means? Answer. No. They serve for Gods
Almightines to work by, and in deed in the most usual we may easily perceive
Gods power.

3 To renounce all trust in creatures.

4 To trust wholly in God. 2. Cor. 1, 9.2, Cor. 12, 9. Ephesians. 6, 10.

5 To be strong in faith. Romans 4, 21.

6 To be assured of the performance of our prayers.

7 To have contentation in God. 2, Cor. 9, 7. Heb. 13, 5. For indeed God so
promises to be to us. Genesis 15, 1.

8 In what estate so ever we be, to rejoice in God. Psalm. 46 Job, 22, 25, 26.

Thus much for the former attribute, the latter follows, Maker of heaven and
earth.

In speaking whereof, we may consider it joined with the rest, and in it self.

As it is joined with the rest, first why at all it is set down.

Aun. I take it against the poison of Marcions heresy, who thought it not
meet to believe in God the maker of the world: whereas the scriptures though
teach so to believe.

It is set in this order after the former, as a proof thereof. For the maker
of heaven and earth cannot choose but be Almighty.

In it self mark three things, the grounds of scripture, the meaning, the
things professed.

The grounds of scriptures are, 1 Gods making of himself thus known. Hier.
10, 11. Esa, 45, 7. Esa, 66, 2, Acts. 7, 50.

He is so prayed unto, Act, 4, 24.

So believed in, Psalm. 124, 8.

So professed. Ier. 32, 17.

By this name and title praised. Psalm. 136, 5, 6.

So as S. Augustine says, Let any creature that you will come and make a
world, and I will say it is God.

Thus is God preached to be believed in, Act, 17, 23.24. Act, 14, 15.

This for the grounds of scripture.

The meaning will appear by the words, where the cause is joined with the
effect. The cause, Maker, the effect, heaven and earth.

Maker in the scriptures is properly called Creator.

Creator is who did create. Create is to make of nothing.

1 This God did.

2 By his commandment.

3 Not all things together, but in six days.

4 When time began, so as there are not yet 6000. years, since the world began.

5 So as that he rules and governs otherwise then Athiests think.

God rules and governs for ever.

Gods ruling or governing is his providence.

Providence is either general or special.

General providence, is whereby all things jointly are ruled; such there is.

Particular is whereby every several is ruled, especially and most choisely,
man. As to the lighting of a sparrowe upon the ground, to the number of our
hairs.

O thou omnipotent (says S. Augustine) who rulest all as one, and one as if he
were alone.

The effect is, Heaven and earth. Where, by a manner of speech when that which
contains is put for the contained, all things are meant, all being contained
in heaven and earth.

Heaven is all from the face of the earth upward.

There are three heavens ayrie. starrie. glorious.


The ayrie heaven is from the face of the earth, to the lowest part of the
sphere of the Moon. Wherein are fowls, meteors, as wind, rain, snow, hail,
thunder, lightning.

The starry is from the Moon upward, as far as motion goes. Wherein are the
stars fixed, or planets, the diverse motions, the influences.

The glorious heaven is above all motion, where the glory of the Trinity does
most appear. There is the humane nature of Christ, the souls of the elect
departed this life, the blessed Angels ministering.

These Angels were created.

They are ministering spyrits for the necessities of the Church.

The earth is put for the earth and water together, from the face of it to the
center and middle.

In the water are fishes, pearls, in the earth are metals, diverse kinds of
precious earth, stones, etc, on the earth are beasts and cattle, but
especially man. All creatures have some print or vestigium of God, man has
Gods image.

1 Now all these things are good, Genesis 1, 31.

Object: Some things are hurtful to us. Aun: They are of very good use, being
applied by God.

Quest. Whence comes evil? Aun. By the disobedience of the reasonable
creatures to God.

Object. God makes evil. Aun: Of punishment, not of fault.

2 All these make but one world.

Quest. What say you of the devils? Aun. God made them at the first good
spirits, but they have left their first beginning. For their substance they are
good, not in their qualities.

This is the meaning, the duties professed remain.

They are of two sorts, either in respect of the creation, or providence.

In respect of the creation, 1 That we believe that the world was ordained by
the word, etc. Heb, 11, 3.

2 That seeing the creatures were made by GOD, we ought to meditate of them.

3 By the creatures to rise more to the knowledge of God. Psalm, 19, 1, Rom, 1,
25.

4 From the consideration of the creation, to get increase of faith, for
persuasion of performance of our prayers. Act. 4, 24.

5 To praise God, Psalm, 136, 5, 6.

6 To consider of our own soul and body: Look psalm, 139, 13, 14. and Job,
10, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Thus much for duties professed in respect of the creation, duties in respect
of providence follow.

1 That we acknowledge all things to be most wisely ruled by God.

2 That he has particular care of us.

3 That the Angels watch about us.

4 All the creatures shall work for our good. Job, 5, 22, 23.

5 Be contented with whatsoever God does.

6 Use not the name of fortune, luck, chance.

7 Tempt not God by neglect of means.

8 Remember, Iam, 4, 15.

Hitherto touching God essentially, now follows of him personally.

Whatsoever is said of God in general in this Creed, or in the scriptures, is
true of every person: the Father only is not Creator and almighty, but so
likewise is the Son, and holy Ghost.

It may be objected, that the Son does nothing of him self.

Aun. True, not without the Father, but all with the Father. 2 Not in the sense
the Jews conceived of him, taking him for a bare man, so he does nothing.

Que. Why are these ascribed to the Father?

Aun. Only for order.

Of God personally it is said, that he is Father, Son, and holy Ghost. First
is Father.

Father is a name that cannot be understood without respect to child, or son.

God is father of a son who is GOD, or of sons who are men.

To understand God the father, of a son who is God, somewhat must be touched,
concerning the mystery of the Trinity.

There is (as was said before) but one God. There are 3. persons, Father,
Son, holy Ghost.

A person is a manner of being in the Godhead, distinguished by an
incommunicable property.

The persons be coequall, and coeternall.

The Father is of none.

The Son is begotten of the Father.

The holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son. The Son may be
considered, as not incarnate, and now incarnate. Not incarnate, he was called
the Word, incarnat, the son of man.

In respect of his person and manhood, he is the Son of God.

To understand God the Father of sons who are men, somewhat must be touched
concerning the mystery of our redemption and adoption.

Of mankind, which might have perished by the fall of Adam, it pleased God in
Christ, to adopt and make some to be sons unto himself, Ephe: 1, 5, John, 1,
12.

Que: It may be demanded, whether we must believe in God the Father of
Christ, or our father, or both?

Aun. Both. So says Christ: your father, my father. Praying, himself calls
father, and teaches us so to pray: Our Father.

Let us then consider the grounds of scriptures, the meaning of this article,
and what we do therein profess.

But because there be two branches implied, first consider of the first, then
of the latter.

And that we ought to believe in the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
appears, for that God himself, makes himself known by that name. Math, 3,
17, Luke, 3, 22, Heb, 1, 5.

He is praised under that title, 2, Cor. 1, 3, Ephe, 1, 3. Christ promises,
John, 14, 23. Is prayed unto, Ephe, 3, 14.

The meaning hereof is, that I acknowledge to believe in that God, who is the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And hereby do disavow all Turkish, Jewish doctrine, which holds not the
doctrine of the blessed Trinity.

Now for believing in God who is my Father; God promises himself so to be, 2,
Cor, 6, 18, Iere, 31, 1, more particularly, Exodus, 4, 22, 23.

God commands so to be called upon, Iere, 3, 19.

And finds fault that any other should be so called, Iere, 2, 27, Math, 23, 9.

Christ himself applies this name. Math, 6, 8, 14, 15, 18, and that very
particularly, Math, 6, 18.

Thus did the godly, Esaias 63, 162 So are we taught, Mat, 6, 6. Luke 11, 2.

I mean then, that I know the doctrine of adoption, and am persuaded that it
belongs to me.

I know it, when I know whence I am redeemed, namely from misery, for whom I
am adopted, namely for Christ, how I am assured hereof, to wit, by faith.

I profess in this branch, 1 To make more account of this, that God is my
father in Christ, then of all things in the world beside.

2 To look for all favors from God, as a Father, being now made a son of
his.

The first favor is Gods sparing, as a father is wont to do, Mala, 3, 17.

This is in 1 not imputing faults, 2 not inflicting punishments, 3 moderatly
and gently chastising, 4 in taking in good worth the weakness and imperfectness
of our obedience.

Hence must needs arise great peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost.

The second is the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, father.

This Spirit, 1 has boldness to come into the presence of God.

2 Ability or gift, to pour forth prayers and desires and praises.

3 Persuasion, that al are heard and accepted of God.

The third is, his care to provide things necessary for us, 2, Cor, 12, 14,
Math, 6, 32, Psalm, 23,

From hence we have that, 1 which is enough.

2 Wherewith we are contented, 3 That which God blesses, as the woman's oil,
the Jews apparel.

The fourth is his defense of us.

Keeping us from evil.

Delivering out of evil.

The fifth, title to the creatures, which we lost by the fall of Adam.

The sixth, certainty of inheritance in heaven. All men's children are not
heirs, but Gods are, and fellow heirs with Jesus Christ.

3 I profess to perform all duties to God, as a child to a father.

For there is no benefit, but requires a duty.

All the duties which we owe to God, or can perform, are honor. Exodus, 20, 3,
Mal, 1, 6.

This honor may be considered in respect of God, our selves, and others.

In respect of God, we ought,

1 To acknowledge this our being sons, is merely of grace.

2 To seek to God in all our wants.

3 To thank him for all favors, 4 To take all his instruction.

5 To obey his commandments.

6 At his corrections to acknowledge our faults, and amend.

In respect of our selves, remember whence we came into this favor, to carry
our selves humbly, all the time of our lives.

In respect of others who are without, and have not yet given their names to
Christ, we must do nothing to the shaming of our house and father, but all
things to his glory:

Who are of the Church, all of us having one father, to be one to other brother
and sister.

Hitherto of the first person, the second follows to, I believe in the holy
Ghost.

For the doctrine touching the second person, we may speak of it joined with
the former, and in it self.

It is joined with this word, and.

And, shows that it goes with the rest, and in this order.

It goes with the rest, as may appear every where in scripture, so as that it
is not enough to believe in the former.

The order is, that it follows the former, not for any unworthiness it has in
respect of the former, but for that somewhat must go first, and the Father
being the first in order, the doctrine touching him must be so, and again the
doctrine of Christ being clearly manifested after that of the Father, it is
not without just cause set after it.

Thus much as it is joined with the former, as it is in it self, it is
concerning Jesus Christ, etc, more largely set down then any other doctrine
in the creed.

Whereby is declared unto us, that as we should make account of all other so of
this in more special sort. Hence it is, 1, Cor, 2, 2, Philip. 3 7, 8, 1, Cor,
16, 22.

In it self it is from this in Jesus Christ, etc.

And sets out the second person by names or estates. The names are simple.
relative.


Simple Jesus: this of person. Christ: this of office.


First, let us see the grounds of scripture for this.

1 He is so called by the Angel, Math, 1, 21,

2 So preached to be believed in, Act, 2, 36.

3 Being made the sum of the Gospel, 2, Cor. 11, 4,

4 So as God justifies him who is of the faith of Jesus, Rom, 3, 26,

5 To which very end Paul speaks, Phil, 2, 10, 11,

6 Thus does Christ himself command, Ioh. 14, 1,

7 Paul and Silas particulerly speak, Act, 16, 31,

8 He is in that name prayed unto.

This name Jesus is a broken Hebrew word of Iehosuang, thus written and
pronounced in Greek, for that the Greek tongue has no aspiration in the
middle of words.

This name has in it (as Chrysostom says) a 1000 treasuries of good things,
and is (as Bernard says) honey in the mouth, music in the ear, a joyful
showte in the heart.

In delight, wherein Genebrard observes, that Paul uses it five hundredth
times in his Epistles.

Yet for all that, we must take heed we do not abuse it.

1 To make it a word of wonder, as some do, Jesus.

2 To think it will drive away devils.

3 To give more reverence to that name, then to other of God.

Object: But Paul, Phil, 2, 10,

Aun: The meaning is, that Jesus is the true God, and that all creatures should
be subject to him, as to the Father. Name is for person, bowing the knee, a
bodily ceremony, to express inward subjection.

4 Not to make it a name of sect, or order, as those have done, who call
themselves of the society of Jesus, or Jesuits.

This Jesus in Greek is SOTER, 4 in verr.
which cannot (as Tully says) be expressed in one Latin word, who gave or
gives health: and therefore the Latin Divines, do call him rather saluator,
then seruator.

He is, who recouereth out of miserable estate, sets in happy, and keeps
therein.

The Angel gives a reason of this Name, He shall save his people from their
sins. That is, 1 from the fault of sin.

This is Adams, imputed to us.

Ours, original, actual.

2 Punishment of sin. 3 Corruption of sin. And indeed every way is Christ a
Savior.

1 By rescue, and recovery by strong hand.

2 By ransom. He gave himself for us.

3 He forgiueth our sins.

4 He destroys sin in us.

5 He fully recouereth us in the life to come, from all remainders of sin, and
calamities coming therefore.

And all this he does alone, so as justly he is our Jesus and Savior.

We profess then hereby, 1 To have need of Jesus by the feeling of our sins.

2 That the Jesus set out in scriptures, is our Jesus alone. Acts, 4, 12.

Ob: Some are called Saviors. Obadi: 21, 1, Tim, 4, 16.

Aun. Those in Obadiah are bodily Saviors. Timothy was a Minister of the
doctrine of salvation.

3 That in all our need we will run to Jesus.

4 That we rejoice at the preaching of the doctrine of salvation by Jesus.

5 That in heaven he will fully save us from all crosses and calamities.

Hitherto the name of person, that of office follows, Christ.

Consider likewise the grounds of Scripture, the meaning, the things to be
believed and professed.

1 It was thus prophesied by Moses, Deuteronomy, 18, 15. repeated by Esaias, 61, 1,
expounded by Peter. Act, 3, 22, applied by Christ, Luk, 4, 21,

2 God himself does in some sort command it, Esa, 42, 6,

3 Consider, 2, Cor, 5, 20.

4 Even particulerly, Luk, 2, 26,

5 The Apostles preach thus, Act, 2, 36, Act, 8, 5. Act, 9, 20, and 24, 25,

6 God threatens if we refuse, Deuteronomy. 18, 15, 19,

7 Peter is highly commended for thus believing, Math: 16, 17.

8 It was a common known thing among the Jews, Ioh. 1, 41, and Ioh, 4, 25,

The meaning will appear, 1 by considering wherewith it is to be joined, 2
how it is to be read, 3 what the signification of it is.

It is to be joined with Jesus, not to be set alone. It is not enough to
believe in Christ, we must believe in Christ Jesus. The Jews believe in a
Christ after a sort. Therefore are both joined, Act, 2, 36, Luk, 2, 26, 27.

It is to be read not only and barely Christ, but the Christ, as if it had an
article notificatiue.

Such an especial one looked the Jews for, Ioh, 1, 41, and Ioh, 4, 25, Math,
16, 16, 17,

The signification appears by the right knowledge of the name.

Christ is a Greek word, and signifies anointed. It is as much as the Hebrew
Messms.

This name by a part for the whole signifies appointing to an office, whereof
oil or the ointment was a sign, signifying that as many spices went to make
that oil, so many graces should be in the party anointed, which should make
him nimble to do, and acceptable in the doing of his duty.

They were wont to anoint Prophets, 1, King, 19, 16. Priests, Kings.

Thus is Christ here to be understood: look Act, 4, 27, and Acts, 10, 38,
wherein we may consider his calling, his gifts, his office.

His calling is, whereby he is of the whole Trinity appointed and designed to
his office. Esa, 61, 1.

His gifts are, whereby he is enabled fully to do it. These are the fullness of
the holy Ghost, Psalm, 45, 7, John, 1, 32. Acts, 10, 38.

The office is remaining, which is most properly and effectually in himself.

And is prophetical. sacerdotall. princely.


Prophetical is, whereby he teaches his, the whole will of God to salvation.

This office is said to be his, for that himself, first did it: sends
others so to do.

Requires that all their teaching should be according to his.

He teaches, foretelling: expounding, Law, Gospel.

He expounds by publishing. making effectual.


Sacerdotall or priestly, is whereby he is a Priest, properly so called, for
his Church.

He was the last properly called Priest.

In his priesthood, he makes reconciliation. intercession.


In respect of his priestly office, he is our Mediator. Princely or kingly,
whereby as a King he is over his.

Governing the Church, 1 by giving gifts: 2 by ruling by his word, and Spirit.

Keeping under the enemies, by taking away their power. themselves.


Now of this Christ are we called Christians, partaking the same Spirit,
doing in some sort the same things.

There is difference. Christ has the Spirit and fullness.

1 Of himself: we have that which we have from him. 2 He has it without
measure: we have our allowance. 3 He meriteth: so cannot we.
The things to be believed, which we profess, are 1 That Jesus is the Christ.
2 That in him is all fullness of the holy Ghost. 3 He only is the sufficient
teacher, and preaches with power. 4 All favor to be had, and kept with God,
is by him. 5 He will procure all things for his Churches good. 6 We must have
the annointment, 1, John, 2, 27.


Whereby we are to teach our selves, and others. To offer up our selves a
living, reasonable, acceptable sacrifice to God.

To keep under all our rebellious affections, and motions. For we are said to
be a royal priesthood.

Hitherto have been the simple names, in nature first: the relative, or to be
understood with reference remain: his only son our Lord.

And here the order is not amiss in relation to consider him first toward
GOD, afterward the creatures. And indeed first becomes God, our Father,
before we can so much as acknowledge him a Lord.

The former of these, is his only son.

His, that is, of God the Father, as before.

The grounds of scripture are.

1 The witness of God the Father, Psalm, 2, 7, expounded by Paul, Acts, 13,
33. Heb, 1, 5. 2 The witness of Jesus, John, 10, 36. For which the Jews
blamed him, John, 10, 33. 3 Even the devil confesses thus much, Math, 8, 29.
4 It is the very sum of the Gospel. Rom, 1, 3, 9. 2, Cor, 1, 19, Gala, 1, 16.
5 The end of the ministry, Ephe, 4, 13. 6 John witnesses this, John, 1, 34. 7
Who does not thus believe, is damned, Ioh, 3.36. 8 Who does believe, has
everlasting life, Ioh, 3, 36. 9 Christ himself does propound it particularly
to be believed. John, 9, 35. 10 The Eunuch believing this, is baptized, Acts,
8, 37. 11 For faith in this, Peter is so highly co^meuded, Mat, 16, 16.
The meaning of this branch will appear, if

1 We consider, that it is to be joined with Jesus Christ, Rom, 1, 3. Math,
16, 16, 2, Cor, 1, 19.

For we must believe in Jesus the Christ, the son of GOD.

2 If we consider the contents, which are,

1 That he is the Son of God.

2 Only begotten.

A Son is by nature. So is this. favor.


This branch that he is a son, implies two things.

1 That he is God.

2 That he is a distinct person.

That Christ is God, many things may show.

1 He is so called, Ioh, 1, 5, 20, John, 20, 28, yea the very name of Iehoua
is ascribed to him. Iere, 23, 6, as appears, 1, Cor, 1, 30, 1, Cor, 10, 9.

2 The properties belonging to God, are his

Eternity. Esaias, 9, 6.

Omnipresence, Math, 18, 20, and 28, 20.

Omniscience.

Omnipotence. Philip, 3, 21.

3 Works.

Creation, Colo: 1, 16, 17, Heb, 1, 2.

Forgiveness of sins.

Working of miracles.

Sending the Holy Ghost.

Being free from sin, etc. Look Rom, 1, 3.

4 Adoration proper to God.

It may be objected, that Christ is a creature, because he is called first
begotten of creatures, Colo, 1, 19.

Aun: He is before all creatures, that is the meaning, to whom right over them
does belong.

And whereas, Gala, 4, 4, it is said he was made of a woman, it is meant
according to his flesh.

So are many places to be understood.

Neither is it true only that Christ is God, but it is requisite that so he
should be.

1 Else he could not save, Esaias, 43, 11.

2 Unless he were infinite, he could not bear the infinite wrath of God.

3 It increases his merits. Otherwise he could have but deserved for himself.

4 The scriptures did so foretell.

5 It was the best way to set out the love of God.

Thus for that Christ is God: now follows that he is a distinct person from
the Father, as may appear, Math, 3, 16, 17, Math, 28, 19, 1, John, 5, 7.

It follows, only begotten. John, 1, 14, and John, 3, 18, 1, John, 4, 9.
Somewheres he is called first begotten. Aun. Look a little before.

He is only begotten in respect of the Father and divine nature, he is first
begotten is respect of his mother, and humane nature.

This only begotten, implies begotten. alone.


He is begotten of the Father, Psalm, 2, 7, Heb, 1, 5.

Object. God is not begotten, Christ is God. Therefore not begotten.

Aun: God is taken essentially. personally.


The person GOD the Father, begets the person the Son God. So is Christ
God of himself, Son of the Father, as Gregory of Valence, and Bellarmin
confess that Calvin truly thinks.

Quest. How is this Son begotten?

Aun. I cannot tell, and I would wish you not to seek, adore this mystery.

He has the whole essence communicated to him.

Que. When was he begotten? An. Before all worlds.

He is alone.

Object: God has other sons.

Aun. By favor, not nature.

This name implies partaking all the essence, the whole love and counsel of
God. Therefore is he said to be in the Fathers bosom. Ioh. 1, 18.

Hitherto the meaning, the things professed remain.

1 That Christ in whom I believe, is true God, otherwise then the Jews, who
judge him a man.

2 That Christ is a distinct person from the Father.

3 That God the Father loves me wonderful well, Ioh, 3, 16.

4 That unless I believe in him, I shall be damned.

5 If I believe, I shall be safe, Ioh, 3, 36.

6 That God giving his Son, will give all things with him, Rom, 8, 32,

7 That all the good I have, is by means of the Son of God.

The latter remains, our Lord. For the which are grounds of scripture.

1 Psalm. 110, 1, interpreted and applied by Christ, Math: 22, 43, 44, 45.

2 In this name does Daniel pray, 9, 17.

3 Thus has God ordained, Act, 2, 36,

4 So do the Apostles every where write, 2, Cor, 4, 5,

5 To this end did God, Phil: 2, 9, 10, 11,

6 In so much as Paul highly prefers this, Phil: 3, 8, and denounces an
horrible curse to the contrary, 1, Cor. 16, 22.

7 In particular did apply this to themselves, David, Psalm. 110, 1. Mary, Ioh:
20, 13, Thomas, Ioh: 20, 28, Paul, Philip 3, 8.

The meaning we shall best understand, if we remember, that.

1 This must be joined with that which goes before, and follows.

In so much as Christ after an especial manner, is called the Lord.

2 Consider the words in which the relation is, our Lord: Lord and our.

Lord in scripture is taken 3 ways.

1 Essentially, so is it with Jehovah. As in the translation of the old
Testament.

2 Ciuilly for a name of reverence. As Act, 16, 30, Lords or sirs. And so it
answers to Adonai.

3 Possessiuely, an owner, and so it answers to Baal. So does Sara call
Abraham Lord, and servants their masters.

Every of these are true in Christ. Yet I think the last is chiefly meant, as
he being the owner of us all.

Now Christ is so Lord, as the only, 1, Cor, 8, 6, Ephesians, 4, 5.

In so much, that whereas Suetonius observes that Augustus refused the name of
Lord, Orosius notes, that it was at the time when Christ was borne, that all
Lordshippe might be ascribed unto him.

As every way, so also for that he rules in the conscience.

Object: The Father and holy Ghost is Lord.

Aun. True: but the Son is called for that all Lordship is committed to him
to execute, and that he only does it in the human nature.

As Christ is only Lord, so is he Lord of Lords, 1, Tim, 6, 15, Revel: 17, 14,

He is said to be our Lord: our who profess this Creed.

True it is that he is Lord of al, but specially of the church, For,

1 Being Lord of all, he is also of his Church, Psalm, 2.

2 He created us all of nothing.

3 He has delivered us all from the hands of our enemies.

4 He has paid the price for us, 1, Cor: 6, 20,

The things which herein by direction of the scriptures we profess, are,

1 That we have the holy Ghost, 1, Cor, 12, 3.

2 Christ is Jehovah.

3 I must always speak, and think honorably of him.

4 That he being our only Lord, Peter is not, Mary is not our Lady.

5 That Christ only commands the conscience, 2, Cor: 1, 24, Iam: 4, 12,

6 I am not mine own, nor any thing which I have.

7 I must do all things for the credit, profit, honor of my master, and that
cheerfully, and from the heart.

8 In that Christ is our Lord, if I think of favors, they are for me and
mine: if of duties, I and mine must perform them.

9 We must carry the same mind one to other as fellow servants, and of the
same cloth.

10 I must not condemn my brother in indifferent things, he is an other man's
servant, Rom: 14, 4.

11 Lords over others, must remember that there is a Lord over them, and
therefore they must not tyrannize over their inferiors, Ephesians: 6, 9.

12 Neither should we fear any Lords whatsoever, above this Lord.

Thus far of the titles. It may be demanded, whether there be nothing but
these, besides the estates, to be known of Christ.

Aun. Yes: but these are the most necessary and easy.

Now follow the estates, beginning at conception, and so forward, till I
believe in the holy Ghost.

And herein we may consider, 1 the occasion, 2, the distinction of the estates.

The occasion whereby they begin to be, and that is conception. birth.


For conception is the article, Conceived by the holy Ghost.

The grounds whereof are, Luk, 1, 35, Math: 1, 20, Math: 1, 18, Rom: 1, 3, 4.

Object: It may be objected, this article is not word for word in the
scriptures.

Aun: It is in sense manifestly enough, that is sufficient.

The meaning of this article shall appear.

1 By expounding, Luk, 1, 35, Where the Angel delivers this doctrine, and
that by two speeches.

The first, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee.

Where is mention of the worker and work.

Worker, the holy Ghost, that is, the third person in Trinity, whereof more
hereafter.

The work is coming upon the virgin, whereby are signified first, that this
came from heaven, and was wrought by God extraordinarily.

Secondly, that it was in a moment wonderfully, whereupon S. Augustine says, O
conjunction without filth, where speech is the husband, ear is the wife. He
means that as soon as the virgin had heard the Angels message, and assented
to it, that she was conceived.

The second, The power of the most high shall ouer-shadow.

The power of the most high, is the holy Ghost, as before.

Ouer-shadowing implies that this is a mystery, and can not clearly be seen
into, so that the virgin her being as it were in a cloud, cannot tell how it is
wrought. So as that we must not seek curiously.

2 By opening the words of the Creed, which show what is done, conceived, and
by whom, of, or by the holy Ghost.

For understanding, that he is said to be conceived, we must know, 1 who is
conceived, 2 what it is to be conceived, 3 wherefore it was necessary this
conception should be.

The party conceived, is, Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

1 So that it appears, that he that was conceived, is God, that he might ad
merit to the sufferings, Act, 20, 28.

Hence is he called Emanuel.

2 That he was the Son of God.

3 1 Because it was meets, as by the word all things were made, so to be
renewed: 2 the natural son of God might make adopted, 3 the beloved might
bring into love: 4 the image of God might renew to Gods image.

5 In the word life is said, Ioh: 1, 4, to be: 6 God the Father might set out
his wonderful love to man, in giving his son.

Object: The second person has the whole divine essence, therefore the whole
divine essence was incarnate.

Aun. He was incarnate according to person, not essence.

Now follows what it is to be conceived.

Conceived is of conception. Conception is a work in the mother, whereby the
young she is with begins to be.

This, if we speak properly, is for the first beginning, but here it
signifies, besides fashioning and forming. So is it, Math: 1, 20. For the holy
Ghost did frame him in the womb, as well as work his conception.

Conceived, then he is said to be, when he began to be man.

In this conception we may consider the parties. properties.


The first part is fashioning and framing the humane nature. This has body.
soul.


The holy Ghost made the body of Christ, of the sanctified substance of the
virgin, whereby it was free from sin.

This body, 1 was true.

2 Had infirmities, which came not of sin.

The soul was made of nothing in the womb of the virgin, and person of the
word.

The second part is assumption, whereby the Son vouchsafed to take to him
the manhood, and not angely.

The third is personal union.

Union is whereby diverse things are gathered into one.

Personal, when but one person, or being is made.

For better understanding, know that union is, 1 of persons in nature, as the
Trinity in the divine Essence: 2 of natures in one person, as in Christ: 3 of
persons and natures in will and affection, as diverse men.

The middlemost is here meant. Whereby the word takes the human nature
into unity of person.

From this union arises a kind of speech, which they call communication of
properties, when that which belongs to one nature, is said of the other, or
of the whole person.

The properties of this conception are in this, and no other.

First at the same instant was joined to the word, a reasonable soul, and
organicall body.

The soul in other conceptions comes after the conception.

It is most probable that Christ's body at the first in the body was
organicall, and not Embrye, though it might in time increase.

1 For the Word was being to man's flesh. Man's flesh is not where there is not a
reasonable soul, a reasonable is not where there is not a formed body.

2 He was at the instant a person, therefore perfect.

3 It was not meet that the Author of all perfection should be imperfect.

Secondly, the human nature did not subsist, or had no being out of the Word.

Thirdly, the union of these two after conception, is inseperable.

Fourthly, in this union there is no confusion or mixture of natures,
properties, or actions.

Now follows, wherefore it was necessary that this conception should be.

1 That the fall of man might be repaired by man.

2 That our Savior might die and fulfill the law.

3 That he might be our brother, Heb: 2, 11.

4 That he might be merciful. Heb: 2, 17, 18.

5 That his pure conception, might excuse our impure.

Quest: It may be demanded, when he was conceived?

Aun. Immediately upon Mary's speech, Behold the handmaide of the Lord.

This was the 25 of March, one year sooner then our Church of England: so as
for 1601 ended, is 1602.

One might marvel why this day was not called, the feast of the conception of
Christ, but annunciation of Marie.

The day when this conception was, was (as some think) wednesday.

Now follows by whom, Of the holy Ghost.

Holy Ghost, the third person in Trinity.

The word of, in Greek E K, signifies effectiuely or materially.

Here it signifies effectiuely.

Well says Damascene, The holy Ghost begets, not spermatically, but
operatiuely: and Justin Martyr, Not by company, but power.

Object: If Christ were conceived of the holy Ghost, then is the holy Ghost his
father.

Aun. The Father gives matter, so did not the holy Ghost.

Christ according to his manhood had no Father, according to his godhead had no
mother.

Thus far the meaning.

1 We profess hereby to disavowe all fond opinions touching the incarnation
of Christ, of Marcion, Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutyches, Anabaptists.

2 We profess that Christ is without sin.

3 That we need not be ashamed of our conception, since Christ vouchsafed to
be conceived.

4 That women should sweeten their pains of conceiving and bearing, in
meditating of Christ's conception.

5 That Christ's pure conception, is to excuse my impure.

6 That weaknesses natural without sin, are no disgrace, since Christ had
them.

7 That we should come boldly to the throne of grace. Heb: 4, 15, 16. Look
Heb: 2, 14.

8 That as Christ took my nature, I ought to labor to partake the divine
nature in the qualities and holiness thereof. 2, Pet: 1, 4.

Thus far the conception, the birth follows, Borne of the virgin Mary.

First, consider the grounds of this article.

1 Genesis 3, 15.

Object. But it may be said, there is mentioned a woman, this place speaks of
a virgin.

Aun. Woman is a name of sex, opposite to male, not to virgin.

So in the law, woman compriseth maid or virgin. It is (S. Augustine says)
the property of the Hebrew tongue, to use Woman for female.

Paul to the Gal. 4, 4. so uses the word woman, Made of a Woman.

2 A second place is, Esa, 7. Avirgin shall conceive.

Some Jews take exception, and say, it is meant of a young woman.

The Hebrew is Gnalma, that signifies one kept secret, and untouched of man.

It is observed that it is but thrice in scriptures joined with He
notificatiue, as Genesis 24. Exodus 2, and Esa, 7, 14. Now as in the former, it
signifies a virgin, why should it not here?

Well have the translators said, the virgin, as of one special. Therefore the
72 Interpreters have translated it a virgin.

Again, God here showing a strange sign, would never tell of a young woman
to have a child, that were no news.

Besides, Luk, 1, 27, is manifest, and Math: 1, 23.

Wierus reports a strange story out of Sudas, if it be true.

The Fathers would show it by likelyhoods from other things, as of Aarons rod
budding, Adams being formed of earth.

Adrichomius tells a strange thing, if it be true, of flowers at the
fountain of Elisaeus, he says, they are called Hiericho roses, which shoot
out on the day of the nativity of Christ, and shut again, in token of the
birth of the virgin. One may believe this that will.

The meaning will appear by the words, where we may consider the thing
mentioned, and the person.

The thing is, borne, person, virgin Mary.

Borne, shows that after conception and perfection in due time, he was
brought out into the world.

For the better knowing whereof, confider, where, when, how Christ was borne.

He was borne at Bethlehem, a small village, laid in a manger.

When, In the fullness of time, Gal: 4, 4, According to the prophesies of
Daniel.

From the creation of the world the 3967.

Of Augustus reign. 45.

After her conception nine months, as Vsuardus and Adrichomius think: or as S.
August: nine months and six days.

Some say he was borne on a Friday, when the first man was borne: And that at
midnight. These are uncertain.

The manner how, as other children the Virgins wornbe opening.

For he took upon him all our weaknesses.

The virgin was purified.

Christ was presented, as first opening the womb. Luk: 2, 22.

Tertullian says, who opens the womb, as he who opens it when it was shut.

Origin, The mothers womb was opened when she was delivered.

The person follows by note, and first, that she is a Virgin.

Virgin, is of virginity.

Virginity is untainted chastity in single life, such had Mary.

She was a virgin before her delivery, in her delivery, and after.

Object: But one may say until is used, Math. 1, 25, as if afterward Joseph
knew her.

Aun. Until, does not exclude for afterward, as when Christ says: I am with
you to the end of the world. And Paul, He shall reign till he has put down
all enemies. There is no denial in either place for afterward.

Object: Again, it may be objected, that Christ has brothers, as Math: 12, 47.

Aun. Some think they were Joseph's children by a former wife, I judge rather
that they were Christ's kindred, by the mothers side.

Though Mary was, and continued a virgin, yet she was no vowed virgin.

She was so a virgin as affianced, why was that will some body say?

Aun. I think, with purpose to have married, till God disposed otherwise, then
God turned it to special use.

1 That Joseph being of the line of David, of which Mary was, it might appear
by his genealogy, that Christ came of the line of David.

For trybes did not marry out of their trybes, save the Leuiticall only.

2 That Mary might be kept from danger of the Law.

3 That she might have an help and succor.

4 Some think it was (but vnwarrantably) to beguile the devil, that he should
not know that Christ was borne of a virgin.

5 To try the Jews faith, whether they would believe aright, seeing there was
thoughts, as though Joseph had been his father.

Her proper name is Mary, the same that Miriam.

The things we profess hereby are,

1 That we disavow any teaching that denies the virginity of Mary.

2 That I am willing to bear any slanders of the Jews in this behalf.

3 That God looks on the low degree of his handmaid.

4 That the promise made touching the seed of David, is performed.

5 That as Christ was borne of the virgin, so he should be fashioned in me.

6 That I contemn all worldly pomp, since my Savior was borne so meanly.

Thus far of the occasion or entrance into the estates, now follows the
distinction.

This is either of abasement. advancement.


Mark the order, first is the abasement, 1, Pet. 1, 11, Luk, 24, 26.

So is it with the members.

This estate of abasement, is, whereby Christ is brought very low, even in the
eyes of the world.

And is set down in this creed summarily. in branches.


Summarily in this, Suffered under Pontius Pylat.

The witnesses of scripture for this whole are, Act: 4, 27. 1, Tim: 6, 13.

In parts are, and first for suffering.

This was foretold. 1, Pet. 1, 11.

Prophesied, Esa, 53, the whole chapter.

Fulfilled, as may appear in the story of the Gospel.

Was meet it should be so, Math: 16, 21, Mar. 8, 31. Mar: 9, 12, Luk, 24, 26.

So says Peter, 3, 18, Act: 17, 3.

Yea, it is very behoouefull, so Heb. 2, 18.

So as indeed all should take knowledge of, Act. 26, 23.

And for Under Pontius Pylat, read Psalm: 2.

The people of the Jews requested it might be so.

We may see it applied and fulfilled.

Yea, profane stories are not mute in this.

The meaning will appear, by knowing the branches, the first the thing,
suffered, the other, the time, under Pontius Pylat.

For the better understanding of suffered, 4 points are to be opened.

The first, who suffered, that is, the son of God, not the Father, not Simon
of Cyrene, etc.

Quest. How could the Son suffer being God?

Aun. According to his manhood, that only suffers.

The second is, what it is to suffer. To suffer in this place, is to have
feeling, and that not of things pleasing to nature, but displeasing. So is
Christ said to suffer, and to be as a man of sorrows.

The things he suffered, are many, Math. 16, 21. Mar. 8, 31.

And these are such as from his conception till his rising, though such
especially meant, as were in Pilats times.

These are as weariness, hunger, thirst: but especially shame, grief, fear,
tentations.

Quest. Did Christ do nothing?

Aun. Yes, he performed the whole law of God, and that to teach us, that it
ought to be performed.

2 To add his merit.

3 That it might be imputed unto us.

4 That we might have a perfect pattern to follow.

Quest. Why are not his doings mentioned here.

Aun. For shortness sake, and for that they are implied.

The third thing is, for whom he suffered. They are not the devils, not every
particular of mankind, but for the elect.

The fourth is wherefore he suffered. That was, to bring us into the favor of
God.

Thus far the first branch, the latter follows, Under Pontius Pilat.

They were wont to note their time by their officers, as Consuls etc, so is it
here. Luke 3.1.

This officer is noted by his two names, proper. of the place of his birth.


Proper name is Pilate.

Pylat was Lieuetenant under Tiberius, over Iudaea, and succeeded Valerius
Cratus, some eight years before Christ died on the cross.

He is called Pontius, of an Island called Pontia, lying near Italy where he
was borne.

Quest. Did Christ suffer but in his time?

Answer. Yes: but then was the greatest, even death it self.

We profess to disavow in this Creed, all false doctrine, touching Christ's
sufferings.

2 That for reconciliation to God, we trust only to Christ's sufferings.

3 That yet we look for imputation of righteousness, by Christ's obedience to
the Law.

4 That seeing Christ suffered for me, when I am called thereto, I must suffer
for him. And not think my self less in the favor of God, for sufferings.

5 To run to Christ for comfort. Heb. 2, 18.

6 If I suffer with Christ, I shall reign with him.

7 That sithence there is mention made, even of the time, I should not neglect
the things which seem smaller, being set down in scriptures.

Now follow the sufferings in particular.

Quest: Is his crucifying the first? Aun. No: such a short sum as this Creed
is, cannot reckon up all.

Quest: Why are these named? Aun. For that they are most notorious and odious,
especially that one, who should be a Savior, should suffer so base things as
these.

The first is, Crucified.

First, consider the grounds of scripture.

1 This was prefigured, Number, 21, 8, expounded to that end by Christ. Ioh. 3, 14.

2 This was prefigured by the laying of the sacrifices upon the wood.

3 Presignified by Christ, Ioh: 12, 32, 33.

4 And is said to be needful, Ioh. 3, 14, 15.

5 Foretold immediately before it should be, Math: 26, 2.

6 Desired of the people, Math. 27, 22, 23.

7 So ordered by Pylat, Math, 27, 26.

8 He was led by the people to that end, Math. 27, 31.

9 He was crucified, Math: 27, 35. as Peter tells them. Act. 2, 23.

10 He was sought for after he was crucified. Math. 28, 5.

11 The Apostles so preached, 1, Cor: 1, 23.

12 See Paul's estimation hereof, 1, Cor. 2, 2. Gal. 6, 14.

13 The Jews to this day call Christ, Talvi.

The meaning will appear by the word and signification.

The word Crucified, that is fastened to the cross.

The cross was a kind of punishment which the Jews learned of the Romans,
for to execute traitors against the Prince.

The Jewish common punishments were beheadding, strangling, stoning, burning.

This the Jews desired that Christ might suffer, to flatter with Pilate and
the Romans, and to bear the world in hand they counted him a troubler of the
state.

The form of this cross was like a great Roman T, save in the midst was a
little foot place, whereto the feet standing were nailed.

Fastened, betokens that his hands were tied or nailed, and so his feet,
there to continue till he died, as such as are hanged alive in chains. For
that was their order.

The signification implies that Christ suffered this punishment with the
appurtenances. Whereof look Deuteronomy. 21, 23 Gal: 3.13.

A party thus hanged was accursed.

Quest. What is meant by accursed.

Aun. By accursed is properly meant, that a party is under the anger and wrath
of God.

2 That all things proceeding from this wrath of God, may fall upon such a
party. Look Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26.

3 That these may fall presently, and continue perpetually.

Quest. How was Christ made a curse? An: God the Father imputing it to him:
himself taking it upon him.

Quest. If Christ were accursed, why did he not so continue?

Aun. His merits were such as the curse could find no continuance upon him.

Besides, his godhead overcame it. As a paile full of water may quench a little
fire, but a great fire will get the mastery of it. And the things which would
have held other men, Sampson overcame: so the curse that would have ouercom us.
Christ overcame.

This crucifying or being crucified, was so accursed as that,

1 It procured taking away sins and reconciliation. Look Heb. 9.28: look
Ephesians: 2.16. Col: 1.20.

2 By it Christ triumphed over all spiritual enemies. Col: 2.15.

The things we do profess are,

1 Disavowing of all corrupt doctrine touching the cross.

1 As that the cross whereupon Christ hung, is to be adored for the touching
of his body.

For first it is fabulous which is reported, touching the finding of the cross.

Secondly, such adoration is forbidden in the second commandment.

Thirdly, Ezechiah brake the brazen serpent, when it was applied to like abuse.

Fourthly, why might not Judas lips and the tormentors whips, etc, alike be
adored.

Fifthly, one might as well reverence the gallows, whereon his friend were
executed.

Sixthly, such like things do the Turks, religiously using a piece of the Arc
of Noah.

2 That the likeness of the Cross is to be worshipped. For if not the Cross,
much less the likeness.

Object. Math. 24, 30. Mention is made of the sign of the Son of man, to
wit, the Cross.

An. It is meant of Christ himself, as Act. 1, 11. Reu. 1, 7.

3 The sign of the Cross is venerable. Much more then, the Cross: but the
contrary was showed before. Secondly, if the sign should be holy, it should be
for likeness to the true Cross, but that has it none. The likeness of the true
Cross is T. the sign is. or. or such like.

Object: But some Churches use the sign of the Cross.

Aun. As an outward or civil thing, for order, not for holiness. For neither a
baptized party having the Cross, is thought to have more holiness, neither one
wanting it, is thought for that to have the less.

2 Learn what is the true crucifix. Christ preached, crucified. Gal: 3, 1.

3 That we by nature are accursed, for whom Christ must be crucified.

4 That by Christ's being crucified, we are freed from the curse.

5 That we are delivered, from captivity to hell, sin, and satan, Christ
having triumphed over them all.

6 That with Christ we must be willing to bear our Cross. Math. 16, 16.

7 That we must love Christ crucified. 1, Cor. 2, 2. Gal. 6, 14.

8 Not to be ashamed of the scandal of the Cross.

9 To be crucified with Christ, Gal. 2, 1, Gal. 6, 14.

10 To advance the Cross of Christ, 1, Cor. 1, 17.

11 That if we be crucified with Christ, we shall be glorified with him.

12 This article should keep us from relying on men to much. 1, Cor. 1, 13.

The second particular is dead. For the which are scriptures, Gen: 3, 15. Thou
shall bruise his heel.

2 Prefigured in all the bloody sacrifices, as is showed, Heb. 9, 12.1, Cor. 5,
7, Ioh. 19, 36, 1, Pet. 1, 19.

3 Foretold by Esaias, 53, 7. Dan. 9, 26.

4 Christ himself darkly fore-telleth it, Ioh. 12, 24, 33, and Ioh: 18, 32,
and Mar. 10, 33, 34.

5 Even Caiphas against his will prophesied. Ioh. 11, 49.

6 The Jews went about it, Ioh: 7, 19, 25:

7 They sought for false witness to this purpose. Mar: 14, 55.

8 They put Christ to death, as Peter tells them, Act: 3, 15.

9 He was dead. Ioh: 19, 33.

10 So the Apostles declare, 1, Cor: 15, 3.

11 And Christ himself as past, Revel. 2, 8.

12 Paul shows the end, Romans 4, 25. And more, Heb. 2, 14.

13 The persons for whom are not left out. 2, Cor: 5, 14. Yet so as Paul
restrains them, Rom: 5, 6, 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5, 10.

The meaning hereof will appear, if we know,

First, what it is to die.

To die properly in a reasonable creature, is to have the soul severed from
the body. So was it with Christ.

Object: Did not this untie the personal union?

Aun. No: For though the body and soul were severed from between themselves,
both were joined to the godhead, so as the body was preserved from corruption,
the soul was in happiness.

Quest. How could the Prince of life die? Aun. According to his body, and in
his body.

Secondly, if we know and consider the sort of Christ's death.

Death may be said to be natural. violent.


Natural the cause whereof breeds in ones self, this we call ones fair
death.

Violent is when the cause is without one, as by sword, fire, strangling etc.

Christ's death was violent, foretold by Esaias 53.7, by Christ, Math. 16.21, and
Math: 17.23. and Math: 21.38: so endeavored the Jews, Ioh. 7, 25, so did they.
1, These. 2, 15.

Quest. But why violent? Aun. Christ had nothing in himself to cause him to
die. 2 It was meet that so things prefigured in sacrifices might be fulfilled.

Yet so for all that was it violent, as voluntary, Ioh: 10, 18. Therefore is
it, that Christ crying aloud, gave up the Ghost.

Thirdly, if we know, whether Christ died as we were dead, or should die.

Death is first. second.


Or, death is worldly. spiritual. everlasting.


Worldly, is the seuering of soul from body.

Spiritual, is the seuering of soul and body from saving grace.

Everlasting, is the seuering of soul and body from everlasting glory.

Christ (I take it) died only the first death, and overcame the two other:
Procuring by his death, that worldly death becomes no cross to us.

Delivering us, from spiritual death.

Causing that everlasting death shall never approach to us.

How should the fountain of grace and glory be deprived of either?

The things which the scripture teaches to profess, are,

1 That if one died, then were all dead. 2, Cor. 5, 14.

That is, 1 that every one must naturally die. Heb. 9, 27.

Object. Henoch, and Elias died not.

An. A privilege takes not away a law. Their translating was a kind of death.

2 Every of us were dead spiritually, Ephesians, 2, 1, Colo, 2, 13, not the virgin
Mary excepted.

3 That all had deserved everlasting death, Ephe, 2, 3.

2 To take heed of sin, sithence the stipend thereof is death, insomuch as
Christ putting our person upon him, could not escape death, Rom, 6, 23.

3 To be persuaded of the love of God to us, Rom, 5, 8.

4 That all, and every of our sins are satisfied for, Rom, 4, 25, Heb, 9, 12,
Gala, 2, 21. Insomuch as no punishment shall be inflicted, Rom, 8, 33, 34.

5 That I am freed from obedience to the law in the rigor thereof, Rom, 6, 7.
Insomuch as men's traditions shall not bind me, Colo, 2, 20, 21.

6 That even the curse of death is taken away, hence are places of burial
called sleeping places, and death sleep.

Ob: All die. An: The sting of death is sin, 1, Corin, 15, 56, which being
taken out, it shall not hurt us: so to the godly is death the entrance to
happiness.

7 That I should die to sin, Rom, 6, 3, Colo, 3, 3, 5.

8 We must take heed of scandalising our brethren, Rom, 14, 15, 1, Cor, 8, 11.
A scandal is occasion of sin.

Nay we must do all the good we can to our brethren. John, 1, 3, 16.

9 The more our outward man perrisheth, the more should our inner man be
renewed, 2, Cor, 4, 10, 16.

10 To be persuaded, that if we die, we die to the Lord. Rom, 14, 8. That is,
should die in the Lord, that is, pleasing him by faith in Christ, and in good
conscience.

As also should know, that even in death God cares for us. His own Son
died, yet did he not neglect him.

The third particular is Buried. Scriptures for which are Esaias, 53, 9.

2 A type thereof was in Jonas, Math, 12, 39, 40. 3 It was presignified by the
woman. Mar, 14, 3, Math, 26, 12.

4 The story whereof we may see John 19 in the latter end.

5 Yea this was so clear, as that there was an order of knighthood of the
Sepulcher, so as at this day the Turk makes a great commodity, for letting
trauailers to go in and see the Sepulcher.

The meaning is evident, that Christ's body was bestowed apart from humane
society, as other dead bodies were wont to be served.

And this was not only, 1 To witness that he was truly dead, but that the
victory might be the greater in Christ's resurrection. 2 That he might be
abased to the lowest. 3 And to fulfill the type in Jonas.

The things the scripture teaches under this article which we profess are,

1 A sure confirmation of Christ's death, in that he was buried.

2 That all belieuers are buried with Christ by Baptism, as Rom, 6, 4. Col, 2,
12. that is, as burial declares many things usually of bodies buried, the
like should be in our sins.

Christ's body indeed saw no corruption, but was powerfully preserved, other
bodies though do feel some corruption being buried. For,

1 They are for ever removed from humane society in this world, so should our
sins be abandoned from us.

2 They are wont to grow more and more loathsome, the like should be of our own
sins in our eyes.

3 By little and little they spend and consume away: so should our sins.

4 They wax out of memory, and are quite forgotten: so must our sins, as
that we have no liking remembrance of them.

3 To teach us that we should not much respect burial in our selves, or
neglect it for our friends in comely sort.

The fourth and last particular for abasement is Descended into hell, whereof
before I speak as of the other, I think good to admonish to prevent
misinterpreting, and misreporting.

1 Whereas all learned men are not of one mind touching the meaning of this
article, I profess that my self do hold, and wish my hearers to hold in this
point, as the church of England holds and belieueth, and that I, if I seem
to any in speaking of this article to err, will submit my self to the
judgment of them, who can and ought to judge, and that very willingly upon
reason out of the scriptures will change my mind, and mind not to cast a snare
upon any, but wish them to try that which I speak.

2 I think that the not knowing of the true and proper meaning of this
article, shall not hinder ones salvation, who belieueth the whole scriptures,
and the doctrine thereof, and denies not the words of this article, but
willingly submits himself to be instructed in the truth.

They therefore who agree in other matters of faith necessary to salvation,
and differing in this break charity, are too blame.

As likewise such as charge men to deny their Creed, if they hold not the same
meaning of this article with them, though they hold the words.

3 I judge that our Church of England, has not synodichally by public
authority set down, what should be taken to be the proper meaning of this
article.

Private men have their private opinions, good they may be, but not to bind the
whole church.

The reasons to induce me thus to think, are these.

1 Our book of articles agreed upon 1562, sets down only the words of the
article, and of purpose (as it seems) leaves out somewhat, that was in that
article in King Edwards time.

2 A very learned, and reverend Bishop of this land, writes that he was forced
to promise, that he would openly deliver, which he thought was the likeliest
and safest sense, as well of this article. etc. Which he would never have
written, if he had thought our whole Church had agreed in one meaning. Neither
indeed, the matter being ouer-ruled by the word, ought he.

There is a saying when a law is made, he who will be wiser then the law, is a
fool.

The same learned man says, that he has not so full and fair warrant (for
the meaning of this article) as he had for the redemption of man by the blood
of Christ. And yet what warrant he has for this, learned men may examine.
Besides he adds, that he was advised, and requested by men of greater place
then he will name, to put the effect of that which he had delivered in writing.

That the learned might judge of the doctrine. Whereby it appears that this
learned Bishop, and the other of greater place then he will name, meant that
learned men should judge, whether he has thoroughly written of these matters,
and trying, they might keep that which is good.

Object: There is a Catechism set out by public authority expounding this
article.

Aun. I know not whether the Catechism be tolerated to be taught young
children, or enjoined to all, as the doctrine of our Church. Besides I allow of
the meaning in that Catechism, as Doctor Whitaker has done it into Greek.

4 Though Ruffinus write, that this article is not in the Creed of the Roman
Church, nor is in the Churches of the East, and though Augustine, Tom. 9, in
his exposition upon the Creed to the Catechized, leave it out, and it be not
in the Nicene Creed, and Erasmus write, that he thinks it was put into the
Creed about the time of Thomas Aquinas: yet I hold it is not to be left out,
for that other ancient Fathers have mention of it, as I take it, Ignatius,
Epiphanius, Athanasius, etc.

5 Many things by some being written about this article, I mean only for
edifying of the simple, to speak as plainly as I can of it, and not to go out
into by discourses.

6 I think it not good to note any man's person, but being by an ordinary
course of preaching brought to speak hereof, to be faithful as God has
given to show the meaning hereof, and to prepare for what can come against.

The meaning is not all a-like to all men.

Opinions touching the meaning of it, are manifestly false. probably true.


Manifestly false are two, the first of such who think that Christ's human
soul after the separation from the body, went down to the hell of the damned,
to suffer the pains of hell. Against these disputes Hilarious 16. de
Trinitate.

The second is of the Papists, who think that he went down to Limbus patrum,
(the upper Region, or suburbs of hell) to take up to heaven the souls of the
godly, which they imagined to rest there till Christ's resurrection.

Both these are so gross, that they need not to be confuted.

Probably true, are such as have some probability of truth, some more, some
less.

The first opinion is, that Christ in his human soul after the parting of it
from the body, went to hell, properly so called of the damned, and there did
triumph.

Others there are which seem to me to have more probability of truth:

Of these some be only true, others true, fit, and proper.

Only true, as that which interprets this article, by buried.

As also that which holds that Christ's sufferings on the Cross, and in his
agony are signified here.

True, and fit, and proper, as I take it (yet to be examined by the word of
God, and doctrine taught in the Church of England) is that opinion which
holds the meaning to be that Christ was among the dead in greatest abasement.

Christ's being among the dead, cannot by any that understand Eis adou be
denied.

This abasement is signified, Esa, 53, when it is said, he was oppressed, and
in Dan. 9, 26. In so much as victory is ascribed to Ades. 1. Cor. 15, 55.

We take not to tell what Christ did, which the Scripture makes not mention of.

This opinion has distinction of matter from the former articles, as being a
degree lower, has order as being in time after, has propriety of words, as
no learned man can deny.

The things the word of God teaches us to profess from hence are,

1 The wretchedness of sin to make reconciliation, wherefore Christ was so
abased.

2 The love of God the Father, and Christ to us, that for our sakes he was
humbled so low.

3 Not to despair how low so ever we be brought, considering our Savior
Christ in this article.

Hitherto Christ's former estate.

Hitherto Christ's abasement, his advancement follows, which is noted, Luk,
24, 46, that so it ought to be.

This is whereby Christ is lifted above all creatures.

Quest. Can the Godhead receive glory? Aun. No: not of addition, but of
manifestation.

His human nature was freed from all weaknesses.

His soul from ignorance, and grief.

His body was immortal, nimble, and glorious, etc.

This advancement is in four degrees. The first is, the third day he arose
from the dead.

Scriptures for the which are,

1 Prophecy, Psalm. 16, 10.

2 Type in Jonas, Math. 12, 40.

3 Foretelling by Christ darkly, John, 2, 19, 20, 21, 22, and Math: 17, 9.

4 Christ manifestly speaks of it, Mark, 8, 31, 32.

5 The event does confirm in all the Evangelists.

6 Yea, an Angel witnesses it, Mark, 16, 6.

7 Christ himself shows it was requisite. Luk, 24, 46.

8 Peter treats at large of it, Act, 2.

9 So does Paul, 1, Cor. 15, 14, 17.

10 In so much as Mathias was chosen a witness thereof. Acts, 1, 22.

11 To this gave the Apostles witness. Acts, 4, 33.

12 The Jews themselves could not deny it. Math. 28, 11, 12, 13.

13 Justin Martyr charge Tryphon with the same.

And this article is the more to be held, for that Pagans may believe Christ to
be dead, only Christians believe he rose.

Object: Thomas doubted.

Aun. That was that we should not doubt, as well observes Leo.

The meaning follows.

But first the words of the Creed, and Math. 12.40, must be reconciled.

In Matthew the words are used by Synecdoche as Augustine observes. And three
implies, not three full, but three beginning.

Sure it is that Christ was not three nights in the grave.

There is therefore a Synecdoche.

In the words of the Creed, is the time, the thing.

Time, the third day. Thing, arose from the dead.

Day, to speak properly, is 24 hours space: here it is taken for part
thereof.

The third day is from the burial.

He was buried on that we call Friday, before the Sun setting, and rose on
Sunday morning, at, or before the Sun rising.

The Jews counted their day from evening to evening, so as the light on the
day we call Friday, was part of their former day, so as Christ was one whole
day in the grave, and part of two.

The day Christ rose on, was the first day of creation of the world, now
called, Revel. 1, 10. the Lords day, not to be changed from religious uses.

Rose, that is, his body rose, the Godhead could not, the soul did not.

From the dead, that is, out of the grave.

So as that the body arose, that is, was quickened by the Godhead, and that to
fulfill the prophesies touching this, as also to verify the euerlastingnes of
his kingdom, and to show himself a victorious tryumpher.

In this article the Scripture teaches,

1 That Christ is God, Rom, 1, 4.

2 That we are justified from our sins, Rom, 4, 25, Cor, 1, 15, 17, Rom, 8,
34, Cor, 1, 15, 55.

3 That we must rise from sin to newness of life, Rom, 6, 4, Phil, 3, 10.

4 That we should set our affections on things aloft, Colo: 3, 1.

5 Our head being risen, that we should rise. Christ is the first fruits.

The second degree is, He ascended into heaven.

1 For this are scriptures, Psalm, 68, 18.

2 A forerunning example in Elias, 2, Kings, 2, 11.

3 Signified by Christ aloof of, John, 6, 62, more plainly, John, 14, 19, and
John, 16, 16.

4 In so much as John, 16, 7, Christ witnesses it to be very expedient, for
that he goes before to prepare a place. John, 14, 2.

5 This as the time drew nearer, Christ himself spoke more plainly of, as
John, 20, 17.

6 The fulfilling thereof we may read, Mark, 16, 19, Luk, 24, 51.

7 So as the manner is not left out, Acts 1, 9.

8 The same does Peter preach, Act, 2.33, 34. And Paul writing stand upon it,
Ephesians. 4, 9, 10. Noting it as a chief part of the mystery of godliness. 1, Tim.
3, 16.

9 Some take upon the^ to note the very particular place, as having some mark
at this time, so evident is it.

The meaning may appear out of the words, which implie a moving to a place.

The moving in the word ascended: the place heaven.

For better knowing of ascended, mark the signification of the word, what
ascended, by what means, and to what end.

Ascended, signifies lifted, or mounted up on high. So as whereas Christ
bodily before on the earth, he does no more so now.

Therefore is it said he was carried up, Luke 24, 51, as Acts 1, 9, and
therefore is, Tim, 1, 3, 16, glory added.

The Godhead did not, nor could ascend being every where.

The manhood only ascended, whereby is implied an absence thereof.

Ob: Christ says, I am with you to the end of the world.

An. To all creatures by his divine essence, power, and providence, to his
children by mystical headship, and gifts of the holy Ghost, not bodily.

The Godhead carried up the manhood.

He ascended, 1 To show Angels and powers subject to him, 1, Pet, 3, 22.

2 To give gifts to his Church, Ephe, 4, 16, John, 16, 7.

3 To declare he had led captivity captive.

4 To find eternal redemption, Heb, 9, 12.

5 To prepare a place for us, John, 14, 2. Therefore is he called our
forerunner. Heb, 6, 20.

Heaven is taken as before in the article Maker of heaven and earth. Here it
signifies the third or happy heaven, otherwise by Paul, called Paradise.

The scripture by this article teaches us,

1 To ouerturne vbiquitie, transubstantiation, consubstantiation.

2 To be persuaded that God will never leave his Church unfurnished of
necessary gifts.

3 That all enemies are ouercommen.

Ob: They rage yet. An: For exercise, not to overcome the godly.

4 To be persuaded, that being once redeemed, we shall always so continue.

5 If we want comfort, to stay our selves upon Christ, ascending to send the
Comforter.

6 That we must be persuaded we shall one day in bodies be in heaven. John 14,
2.

Gods childrens souls after death were in heaven, Christ's body (except Elias
etc) was the first.

Ob: It seemed that before Christ ascended, heaven was not opened to the
children of God, Heb, 9, 8.

An: The doctrine before was not so clearly opened as afterward, not otherwise.

The third degree is, and sits at the right hand of God the father Almighty.
For which are scriptures.

1 Prophesying it, Psalm, 110, which Christ shows to be meant of the Christ,
Math, 22, 44. And Christ verifieth of, and applies to himself, Math, 26, 64.
The which likewise Peter does, Acts, 2, 34, for his sermon is of Christ. And
Heb, 1, 13.

2 Telling the actual fulfilling of it. Mark, 16, 19.

Insomuch as Stephen saw him there, Acts, 7, 56, and to the Heb, 1, 3, it is
set down as a thing noted peculiarly in Christ, and belonging to him, even
above Angels.

Insomuch likewise, as by this, the excellent greatness of the power of God is
declared, Ephe, 1, 20, Acts, 2, 33.

Great comfort comes to Gods Church, and children, hereby, Rom, 8, 34.

As likewise great use for instruction, 1. To teach us the abolishing of the
Jewish service, Heb, 8, 1.

2 Continuance in the favor of God, for Gods people. Heb: 10, 12.

3 An help to mortify sin. Heb: 12, 2.

4 As also to help forward quickening to all duties of godliness.

5 Besides the excellency of Christ above all creatures Pet: 1, 3, 22.

The meaning will best appear by the words severally. jointly.


The words severally note thing sitting. place, at the right hand, etc.


Sitting, to speak properly (carrying a dignity with it above standing)
signifies a known position of the body. Yet here I take, it is not properly
and strictly so to be understood. For Rom, 8, 34, he is said to be at the right
hand, so 1, Pet, 3, 22.

And Stephen saw him standing, Acts, 7, 55, 56.

So as I take it, sitting is put for being present, and there abiding.

Now this is not alone: for first it is with continuance, Acts, 3, 22, Heb,
10, 12, so as well is it in the article sitting, not that he is tied, or
violently held there, but that he pleases there in manhood to continue.

Ob: He appeared to Saul by the way, or in the way, Acts, 9, 5.

An: It does not hinder, but that he was in heaven still, for Stephen saw him
there. Acts, 7, 55.

Secondly with doing somewhat. For he is not in heaven idle: but 1 makes
intercession, Rom, 8, 34, Heb, 10, 12.

Intercession, is making entreaty in his Churches behalf* not by prostrating
his body: but

1 For that he appears in heaven with man's nature, and his own deserts, for
the Church. Heb, 9, 24.

2 The blood of his sprinkling abiding for ever efficacious. Heb, 12, 24.

3 For that Christ wills that his satisfaction should be imputed to all whom
the Father has given unto him.

4 And Christ causes that his apply Christ's merits to themselves.

Now Christ so makes intercession, as alone.

Ob: The Spirit is said to make requests, Rom, 8, 26.

An: Intercession noted in Christ, is by satisfaction in humane nature. So does
not the Spirit: that only stirs us up to pray unto God. And that is Paul's
meaning, Rom, 8, 26.

Que. Makes Christ intercession in one or both natures?

An. In his whole person.

Ob: Then Christ being God, should make intercession to God, that is to
himself.

Aun: Christ makes intercession to the person of God the Father, not the
essence: in the Father, the other persons are pleased.

2 He gathers and governs the Church, ruling by his Spirit his children,
keeping down by his power the enemies.

The place is at the right hand of God the Father almighty. What GOD the
Father almighty means and teaches, look before. Right hand is used in
comparison.

Right and left hand are taken from bodily things: so as a spirit has not
properly right hand or left.

Right hand, arm, eyes, are said to be in GOD, but not properly. Understand
not right hand in God properly (says S. Basil) least thou think there be in
him a left also. Skaion.

Such parts are said to be in God, when thereby is noted to be in God the
doing of the things, whereto those parts in men serve, as arm for strength,
eye for knowledge.

Right hand among men is used diversely.

Cyrus set those whom he loved best at his left hand next his heart.

Among the Numidians the middle place was honorable.

In Scripture and with us, the right and being at it notes honor, as of
Solomon toward Bathsheba. 1. King, 2, 19.

The sons of Zebede so desired, so is it Psalm, 45, 9.

So as this in Christ does signify partaking manifested glory, look. Act, 7,
55.

For as a Prince under the chair of estate, placing one at his right hand,
notes the great glory wherein he would have the party appear, so is it here.

Indeed the Godhead was always glorious, but it hid it self for a while:
here then is the bewraying of it.

This must then be remembered to be after his ascension, and not to the
destroying of the humane nature.

Now God the Father almighty is named (I take it) to note the kind of glory,
as not worldly, but heavenly, as is of him who is Father, and almighty, and
not to be looked for outwardly, as of or in bodily things of this lower world.

The words jointly may easily be understood, as meaning that he who before was
so base, as to descend into hell, is now in the greatest glory in heaven.

Que. According to which nature sits Christ at Gods right hand.

Aun. According to both, and therefore is it said of Christ the person. For
although the Godhead were always in infinite glory, yet did it for a time
after the incarnation (as it were) hide it self, but not for ever, but after
the rising again from dead, did make it self known to be in glory, even in
the humane nature.

According to the divine nature he sits at Gods right hand, as manifesting
the human: and lightening the human nature, as it were, with beams of the
Godhead.

According to the human, in as much as the human nature by habitual gifts,
as wisdom, power, majesty is above all creatures, so as Christ even in the
human nature, is Lord of all creatures, and is therein to be adored.

Quest. Does not this sitting at the right hand imply some inferiority?

Aun. Christ in respect of his office of mediator, and of the human nature,
is inferior to the Father, according to the divine Essence he is equal.

Some from this article, as much as in them lies, would overthrow the human
nature of Christ, at least hold that which overthrows it.

For thus they reason. The right hand of God is every where, Christ is at the
right hand of God, therefore Christ is every where.

This reason though it might safely be granted, when as that which is of one
nature is given to the whole person, after which manner being on earth, he was
said to be in heaven, John, 3, 13, according to his Godhead, for that whole
Christ is every where, though not the whole of Christ, totus Christus, though
not totum Christi: yet because their meaning is to prove it of the human
nature, therefore they frame it thus.

The right hand of God is every where.

The human nature of Christ, is at the right hand of God: Therefore, etc.

The human nature of Christ is every where, in so much as Iacobus Audred
fears not to say it is in a dunghill. etc.

Aun. I will show the slightnes of this reason, by examples to the common people.

This wheel is five or fix yards about, this nail is in this wheel,
therefore this nail is five or six yards about.

The Thames is below Greenwitch, and above Kingstone.

London stands upon the Thames.

Therefore London stands below Greenwitch, and above Kingston.

The air is over all the earth.

I am in the air, therefore over all the earth.

Suffolk is from Newmarket to Ipswitch.

Bury is in Suffolk, therefore Bury is from Newmarket to Ipswitch.

The right hand of God is from eternity. Therefore the body of Christ Sadeel.

Secondly, I take exception against the form of the reason, for it should be
thus.

The right hand of God is every where.

The body of Christ is at the right hand of God.

Therefore the body of Christ is at that which is every where.

Thirdly, I say, here is no cause for cause. For Christ's being at the right
hand of God, causes not the body to be every where. That would infinitenes of
Essence do, and should do.

Fourthly, I examine the propositions, and first the first, the right hand of
God is every where. If right hand be taken for Gods power, and Essence, is it
true, if it signify fully manifested glory (as I take it, it does in this
article) it is not true, for it is most fully manifested in the heavens. Even
from the first conception was the human nature joined to the Godhead, but not
in the sense of this article, said to be at the right hand of God the Father,
the person not barelie the human nature.

The Scripture by this article teaches us,

1 In no sort to destroy the body of Christ, in holding that he being at Gods
right hand, has his body every where. For it is in heaven, Act, 3, 21.

2 That Christ is above Angels, and all creatures. 1, Pet. 3, 22.

3 To be assured that there can be no condemnation to us, who are in Christ.
Romans 8, 34.

4 That we shall be sure to persevere in grace, we have an advocate with the
Father for us, 1, John, 2, 1.

5 That we must shake off all sin. Heb. 12, 2. It is absurd that Christ
should make intercession to have us kept from sin, and the punishment
thereof, and our selves to delight therein.

6 We must seek the things which are aloft, where Christ sits at the right
hand, etc. Col. 3, 1.

7 That we be persuaded we sit there with Christ, in title now, and shall
afterward in full possession. Ephesians. 2, 6.

8 Not to doubt of Christ's gathering, and governing his Church.

The fourth, last, and highest degree, is, from thence he shall, etc.

Scriptures for the which are, not only showing it likely to be in punishing
Adam, the world by the flood, Sodom and Gomorrha, but express and lively
places besides, as Dan. 7, 8, 9, 10.

So as Christ speaks more plainly. John, 5.22, 27. Which one day shall be
executed, Math. 19, 28. as is more clearly delivered. Act, 17, 31.

So as the manner is set down, Apoc, 20, 11, 12. Math, 25.

Is commanded to be preached, Acts, 10, 42. Whereof Paul makes use. Rom, 14,
10, and 2, Cor, 5, 10.

In so much as not only Acts 24, 26, but even 2, Tim, 4, 1.

And it appears, Heb, 6, 2, to have been a point of Catechism. Howsoever
many scoffed at it. 2, Pet, 3, 4, 5.

Origin thinks that the Priest had bells in the lower part of his robe, to put
in mind of the end of the world.

It is known what S. Ierom said of himself, whether I eat or drink, or
whatsoever I do, me thinks I hear the trumpet sounding, and a voice
saying, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

The meaning will appear out of the words, which offer three several
considerations, the place, the thing, the persons.

The place from whence. This implies the most high and glorious heaven.

Quest. But why from heaven? An. Christ is now there, and in heaven it is not
meet that wicked men and spirits should be, though it were to receive their
judgment.

Que: Of whom is this meant? An. Of Christ, who according to his manhood can
descend.

Quest. Whether shall he come? Aun. some think into the valley of Iehoshaphat,
according to Joel, 3, 2.

But there is but allusion, and Joel speaks not there of the latter and
general, but of a nearer, and particular judgment.

Others think to the earth, there to judge. Some good men have thought thus.

I love not to strive with any about matters little needful, yet not speaking
to bind any man's conscience, I think, not to the earth.

1 For that I remember no clear place of scripture so saying.

2 As also it may be doubted, whether the earth be large enough to receive at
once all men who have been upon it.

3 And lastly, for that the scripture seems to say, that it shall be in the
air, 1, These. 4, 17.

And in a glorious throne, Math, 5, 31. See also Revel: 20, 11.

Which is most likely so to be, for that then satan, who has hitherto usurped
the princedome of the air, shall then thence be cast down.

The thing is coming to judge. Where is the mean, and the end.

The mean, coming.

There are chiefly noted in scriptures two commings of Christ, 1 In the flesh.
2 In glory. This is meant.

This latter is expedient not only for manifesting the glory of Christ's
Godhead, but clearing the justice of God.

Sure, it shall be, whatsoever mockers do think or say.

The time is not set down.

It shall be most sudden.

It shall be in wonderful glory, able to amase any creature. In which it is
called the evil and terrible day. Amos, 6, 3.

For if the time of grace be so, Mala, 4, much more this.

And the rather, for that Gods presence shall then appear, who though he come
in favor, yet strikes great terror, as to Elias.

It was commonly thought, if one saw God, that he should die, Gene, 16, 13,
Gene, 32, 30, and Judge, 13, 23.

But when he shall come in justice, what terrors must there needs be?

Think but of trowanting scholars, or slothful servants, looking for a
severe Master, or of guilty prisoners for an upright Judge, and then tell me
how great men's fear may be of God.

For that none but have some relics of sins, God being infinitely just.

Now this must needs be increased, by the thinking how God has cast the Angels
into hell, and others, but also, in that the event of this judgment shall be
for ever.

One shall be personally called out, his own thoughts his accusers: his
conscience witness against him, fear his executioner.

Now, when one shall see the brightness of Gods majesty on the one part, and
the ugliness of loathsome devils on the other side, how may not this trouble,
as Cyrill well observes.

Not to appear here is impossible, to appear may seem to be intolerable.

For whatsoever may trouble, will appear. If it were but fear to the mind it
were much. It will be sights to the eyes, hearing to the ears, noisome sents
of brimstone to the smell; finally, it shall afflict the whole man.

Besides, the trouble that will arise unto us at others troubles increases,
when we shall hear the horrible scrichings of others, see their miserable
shifts in perplexity, this cannot but astonish.

When all this shall be on a sudden, how much more will it amaze?

Never were we in any terrible tempest of thunder and lightning?

Look to the Israelites, Exodus, 19, 16, Habac, 3, 2.

Think of the false terror at Oxford, at London, what will true do?

Especially when Christ himself, in whom all our comfort is, is. Reave, 19, 12.
And the manner as is Luke 21.

The end is to judge. This is sometimes put for governing in general, here it
signifies two works of judgment, 1 Laying open all things: 2 Giving sentence
upon all things.

The laying open, is whereby all things may be perceived, not only of God, but
even of our selves, as likewise (I take it) to others by our own confession.

This laying open of all things, is by the book of conscience, Apoc, 20, 11,
12.

And here every secret thing whatsoever shall be discovered. Ecclesias. 12, 14.

The sentence giving, is whereby to every one shall be awarded whereto he may
and must stand.

The proceeding shall be according to the deeds: to teach what faith to trust
unto, namely, that which works by love. This sentence, shall never be
reuersed. Look Math, 25, 46.

The persons to be judged, quick, and dead, that is, all, and every one. Though
now their bodies are consumed,

1 The Scripture by this article teaches us to be settled against all Atheists,
and scoffers, in full persuasion of this article. 2, Pet. 3.

2 That since the Judge shall come from heaven, we may before send thither our
hearts to meet him, and in the mean while thence to look for him. Phil. 3, 20.

3 Sithence Christ Jesus shall be Judge, believers should have great comfort,
so as they might wish for that day, and unbelievers cannot choose but be
affrighted, in that he comes to judge, in whom they will not believe.

4 And seeing one, that is, he shall judge us all, we must not judge or
condemn one another, 1 Except we have a calling thereto, 2 Not rashly, 3 Not
to determine peremptorily of their small estate.

5 The suddainnes should make us presently to be ready, and not put off from
day to day.

6 Of the gloriousnes and terriblenes must we make use. 1 To our selves, not
quite to be out of hope, but rather of good courage in Christ.

As also to labor to be found in peace. 2, Pet. 3, 14. So may we be, if we be
in Christ, and have truly turned to God. 2, Pet. 3, 14.

If we keep a good conscience, Act, 24, 16. Psalm. 125.

If we be often thinking of this day, and preparing against it.

2 Toward others must we make use, as Paul, Act, 24, 26, but especially, 2,
Cor. 5, 11.

7 For that all things shall be laid open, we must take heed of secret
sins, Ecclesi: 12, 14. Ephesians: 5, 12, 13, and even of small.

As also to make much of a good conscience.

8 And seeing the sentence shall be according to works, labor for working
faith.

9 The sentence not being to be reuersed, should make us careful, that in
death we might be cleared. For as death finds, so shall judgment.

Thus far of the second person, now follows of the third.

Quest. Is not that which is before, being believed, sufficient to salvation,
especially seeing that the Scripture oftwhere says, that believing in Christ
we shall be saved.

Aun. The former is not enough, this mystery of the Trinity revealed must be
believed. And where it is said believing in Christ suffiseth, that is not meant
to bar other doctrines, but to show that believing in Christ is most
necessary, which indeed is never without believing in Father, and holy Ghost,
for that none can say that Jesus is Christ, but by the holy Ghost.

Object: Some are said, Act, 19. not to have heard whether there be an holy
Ghost.

Aun. That is understood of the gifts of the holy Ghost.

Zonaras writes in his 3, Tome, that this article was not put into this
Creed, till the time of Macedonius the heretic.

This heritique denied about the year of Christ 364, the Godhead of the holy
Ghost, against whom the first Constantinopolitane counsel was gathered, and
condemned him.

It may be doubted whether Zonaras write true, for that it is in the Nicaene
Creed, and in that of Athanasius. Sure it is that the Scripture teaches it,
and till more question was made of it, it was not so clear as others.

Whereupon Gregory Nazianzen in an Epistle, writes to Basil thus, Teach us
how far we should in disputing about the Divinity of the holy Ghost, and
what words we should use, and how warily we are to behave our selves.

Erasmus was blamed by some for his boldness this way, in saying that the
Scripture did not call the holy Ghost God.

But if it were as Zonaras writes, surely these words of the Creed were not
joined together by the Apostles, though the doctrine be Apostolical.

Que. Does not the placing of this article put some inequality between the
persons?

Aun. No: it is only for orders sake, besides, seeing the personal being of
the holy Ghost, is of the Father, and Son, and the full manifestation thereof
after Father and Son, therefore is it named after.

The grounds of Scripture for it are, Genesis 1, 2. Where the holy Ghost is said
to do like an Hen, to cherish and warm the creatures, and as it were to put
life into them as to Chickens, which no creature can do.

2 The form of Baptism does manifestly prove this, Math. 28, 25, we are not
baptized into that, but wherein we believe.

3 That prayer, 2, Cor. 13, 13. does manifestly prove the same.

4 Ad Revel: 1, 4. and Act, 5, 3, 4.

5 The contempt of the holy Ghost, is noted for a grievous sin. Heb, 10, 29.

6 The sin against the holy Ghost unpardonable.

7 Justin Martyr thinks the doctrine of the holy Ghost so clear, as that he
thinks that Plato knew it.

The meaning will appear from the words known, wherein is repeated the
profession, and that wherein the profession is to believe.

The profession, and the meaning of it, look at the first. It is here
repeated, for the long setting down of the doctrine touching Christ, as to
imply that it is to be repeated to every article particulerly.

That in which the profession says I do believe, is the holy Ghost.

Ghost is an old English word, and is the same with spirit: so ghostly Father,
counsel for spiritual.

A spirit is a substance not having body. And is creating. created.


Creating is here meant, this is God, and infinite.

Used of God, it sometimes signifies essentially. personally.


Essentially, John, 4, 24. God is a spirit.

Personally in this place, and else where.

Que. Why is the third person in special called spirit?

Aun. Not only for that it has the common nature of God, but for that the
being of it, is as inspired or breathed, this in another word is called
proceeding.

Proceeding is whereby the holy Ghost partaketh the whole divine Essence of God
the Father, and God the Son.

Holy, is free from sin. And is either made holy, making holy.


This holy Ghost is not only holy, but makes holy.

Que. Does not the Father and Son make holy?

Aun. Yes: John, 17, 17, 19, but by the holy Ghost.

The contents of this article answers to this question. What beleeuest thou
of the holy Ghost? I believe in the holy Ghost.

The things which the Scripture teaches to believe, touching the holy Ghost,
are either of himself, or of his works.

Of himself it teaches to believe three points.

1 That the holy Ghost is God. This may appear for that he is called Iehoua,
compare Esa 6, 9, with Act, 28, 25. And Ier. 31, 31, with the covenant in
Baptism.

He is called God, 1, Cor. 3, 16. 1, Cor. 6, 19, 20. 1, Cor. 12, 6, 11.

He is every where. Psalm: 139, 7.

He knows all things, John, 14, 26.

He is almighty. Math. 12, 28.

He creates and governs all things, Gene. 1, 2. Psalm, 104, 3.

He is adored.

2 That the holy Ghost is a distinct person from the Father. This may appear,
Math. 3, 16, Math. 28, 23. 2, Cor 13, 13.

3. That the holy Ghost is of the same substance, and dignity with God the
Father.

Thus far the things which the Scripture teaches to believe, of the holy
Ghost himself, now follow those which are touching his works, and herein that
I believe I ought 1 to have some works, 2 to discern them.

That I ought to have some works it appears, for that I cannot call the Lord
Jesus without the spirit, and if I have not the spirit of Christ, I am none of
Christ's.

These works can never wholely be left.

The works I ought to have in me (being of years of discretion, and having
means) are to salvation.

1 Saving knowledge of the will of God.

2 Believing the promises of God in Jesus.

3 Regeneration or sanctification to obedience of the whole Law, and word of
God.

4 Leading into all truth. 5 Spiritual grows, and increase.

Discern, we are commanded to try the spirits, 1, Ioh. 4, 1.

Discerning teaches first,

1 Whence these graces come, by means of the word.

Athanasius says, Wheresoever the spirit is, he is by the word of Sacraments,
prayer, company, conference.

2 How they are discerned from counterfeit. That we shall find, for that the
spirit saving draws all to the word. 2 Drives to Christ, stirs up to
sanctification, not only restrains.

3 How they are to be cherished, namely by the same means they were bred.

Hitherto has been the doctrine to be believed concerning God: now follows
that which is concerning the Church, to the end of the Creed.

Well says S. Augustine, the right order of confession did require, that after
the Trinity, should be joined the Church, as an house for the dweller, Gods
Temple for himself, the City for the first founder.

Now all that is said, and to be held of the Church, is as it is in it self,
or in the gifts bestowed upon it.

In it self the Church is holy, Catholic.

But first must the reading be cleared.

There is a word to be repeated, the verb, I believe. Of this we shall here
need to repeat nothing.

Quest. It may be enquired, whether the word in, be not also to be repeated.

Aun. No: the best coppies have it not, in so much as the Catechism of the
counsel of Trent refuses it. 2 The Church is a creature and may not be
trusted in. 3 Whomsoever we trust in, we may pray unto, so must we not to the
Church.

Obict: The people are said to have believed in Moses. Aun. Improperly.

They believed that word which Moses delivered them from God, the word was Gods
word.

Only that which we are said to believe, must be considered, that is the
Church with the marks thereof.

Now according to the course to be held, let us consider some Scriptures,
whereupon this doctrine touching the Church rests.

And indeed for the proving of this article, most of the Scriptures serve as
likewise the chiefest works of God.

God had his Church (in counsel) from before the creation of the world. Ephesians:
1, 4.

This is the seed of the woman. Genesis 3, 15.

Christ without this Church is as it were maimed, it being his body, he the
head, Ephe. 1, 22. Ephe. 5, 23.

Otherwise cannot the covenant of God be, which is made to the Church.

And to omit further proof, experience does manifestly show that there is such
a thing.

Besides, that the Church is holy, it is as clear as the former, Ephe: 5, 2,
27.

The Saints have washed their garments in the blood of the Lamb, God does so
command.

Without holiness none shall see God, Heb. 12, 14.

It is also Catholic, Apoca: 5, 9, 10. Heb. 12, 22. Ephesians. 3, 15.

The meaning hereof will arise from the right knowledge of the words, and those
1 severally, 2 jointly.

Church every way is not taken alike. In common speech the common people take
it for a building for holy uses, so is it the same with temple. It is not so to
be understood here.

Sometimes it is taken more generally, and ciuilly, for any assembly, as Acts,
19, 39, 40, so must it not be taken here.

Lastly, it is taken specially, and in the scriptures for the whole company of
men and Angels, predestinate, chosen, called, justified, sanctified, and in
their time to be glorified, Angels from the first, men after death.

It has the name in Greek and Latin of calling out, and seuering from
others, being indeed Gods chosen, and select company.

The name in English (I take it) is of the Greek Kyriake, as belonging to the
Lord, for so it does.

For better understanding hereof, consider the distinctions of the Church, and
some properties.

The distinctions are in words, not of the scripture, but of learned writers.

1 As into general. The whole company. particular. A part.


The general is meant in the Creed.

2 Again the whole has parts. So is the Church militant. triumphant.


Militant is that which is warring in this life against the flesh, the devil,
and the world.

Triumphant is in glory in heaven. Both together here are meant.

3 The Church is 1 visible, that may be seen to be a Church. 2 Invisible, that
is not apparent to outward sense to be a Church.

The whole Church together in this life, is invisible.

Particular Church is sometimes visible. invisible.


The visible particular Church has hypocrites admixed.

The Creed speaks of the whole Church together, and so invisible in this
life.

Properties of the Church, besides these named in the Creed.

1 It is but one.

2 It has but one head Christ.

3 Out of it is no salvation.

4 It shall never decay, Math. 16, 18.

5 It is never severed from Christ.

The marks in the Creed, are holy. Catholic.


Holy, is free from sin, reigning, and condemning.

One may be holy imperfectly. perfectly.


Imperfectly, by sanctification in this life.

Perfectly by imputation in this life. sanctification in the life to come.
It is meant every way here.

Catholic is a Greek word, and is used in Writers two ways, improperly.
properly.


Improperly, and so it signifies as much as orthodoxall. In which sense
sometimes the Fathers use it. So might Rome in former time have been
Catholic, so is England, Scotland, etc. Catholic now.

Where mark a cosonage of the Papists, who would make the world believe, that
Catholic and Roman Church is all one, and for that Rome was sometimes in
this sense Catholic, it should be every way now.

As well might they judge the Catholic King, to be King of all the world,

Properly it signifies as much as universal, not tied to one people in one
Country, of one time, of one condition, etc. So is it to be taken here.

The Nicene Creed adds Apostolic, that is holding the Apostles doctrine.
This the Romanists wrongfully appropriat to themselves.

Jointly the words together carry this sense, that every one who professes
this Creed,

1 Believes that there is such a company, as is specified before.

2 That himself is of the same company, Heb. 3, 1.1, Cor. 12, 13, Heb. 12, 22,
23.

The things which we are to believe concerning the church, are whatsoever the
word of God teaches, which though we cannot reckon up all in this short manner
of teaching, in short time, and in right order, yet in the most necessary we
will endeavor.

1 To judge and think very highly of the Church, even next God, not only for
the place it has in the Creed, and order after the holy Ghost, but for the
titles it has, house of God, pillar and firmenes of truth, body of Christ,
spouse or wife of Christ. Christ himself. 1, Cor. 12, 12.

Yet here we must take heed that we think not too highly of the Church. As to
judge,

First, that it is above the scriptures, as the Papists in words teach, at
least some of them, and all, that the authority of the scriptures to us ward,
hangs upon the Church, and can no otherwise be known.

The Church is founded upon the scriptures, and Christ, not Christ upon the
Church.

The authority of the scriptures is from themselves, or God in them, as the
authority of a Princes deed is from the Prince himself, not from any other
witness. So does light cause it self to be seen, as the evidence of
scriptures show themselves to be scriptures.

Que. Does the Church nothing to the scriptures?

Aun. Yes: 1 It keeps the Roles and Records of the scripture.

2 It discerns canonical from Apocriphall, it makes none canonical.

3 It publishes the scriptures like a Crier.

4 It expounds, and opens the scriptures.

Secondly, to hold that the Church cannot err.

For better understanding whereof, we must know that some part of the Church
is in heaven, and that indeed can not err: the other is on earth, of this do
we speak here, this can and does err, being a visible company, wherein are
mixed bad with good.

Yea, it may err iudicially, as the false Prophets to Achab, the Scribes and
Pharisees against Christ.

So as that it is no good saying, this says the Church, therefore it is to be
believed.

Thirdly, to hold that the safest way from all error, is, to hold to the Church.

True it is indeed, it is safe being in the Church visible, whereof this is
said: but the safest is to hold to Christ, and the scriptures.

2 Never to doubt, but that there is, and shall be a Church for ever. So as
that it is not possible it should all, always be feene, for some part are
unborn, some are in heaven, and very few sometimes have been on earth, and
could not be known to be of the Church.

3 Thoroughly to take knowledge of the nature of the Church, which we believe,
and is not only a company professing Christian faith, having the same
Sacraments, and lawful pastors, under one head the Pope: but as we heard
before, predestinate to glory, in time called, justified, sanctified, and
glorified.

4 That Christ is the only head of this Church.

5 To know the proper marks of a true visible Church. These are the word,
sacraments, prayer, good life.

When I say the word, I mean the pure text, in the pure sense of it, and the
sacraments in lawful administration.

Que. Whether then is the Church of Rome a true visible Church?

Aun. No: For though it keep a coppie of the Bible text, yet it is with great
corruption, neither in the true and proper exposition. For their body of
doctrine, which they would fetch from the scriptures, ouer-turneth the
foundation, in their idolatry of the mass, worshipping saints, creatures,
their justification by works, etc.

Object. They have baptism, Aun. They should have it with the word, so have
they it not. 2 They have Baptism, as a thief might steal away the great
seal, and without authority set it to writing, no otherwise.

6 That we should join in communion with a true visible Church (a true visible
Church I call, that has the marks as before, holding the foundation of
salvation, as before) and must not sever our selves there from. Indeed we must
not consent to sin, or descent in love.

7 That we must labor to be true members of this Church, which here we
believe.

So shall we do, by giving all diligence to make our calling and choosing
sure. Calling implies setting in saving knowledge, faith, and obedience.

8 That the Church is not appropriated to any people, place, time: So as the
Romanists do fondly, who would have us believe the Catholic Roman Church.
As if one should say the French Paris or English London church, whereas besides
the Roman, is no particular Church.

9 That all who profess themselves of the Church, must be holy, and grow in
holiness.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION upon the 119 Psalm.
THE 119 Psalm is most heavenly, and deserves in special sort to be well
known, remembered, and found by experience in every of our hearts.

It has so many parts or staves (the most learned call them Octonaries, for
that they have eight lines or verses in them) as there be letters in the Hebrew
Alphabet, every verse of every staff beginning with the same.

Whereby is declared unto us, 1 The diligence of the penner, that with very
careful meditation it was framed. 2 The worth of the Psalm in that the spirit
fretteth, and enameleth it with these Characters. 3 And desire that the Reader
should remember it, being thus in order of elements set down. The same course
is in other places of Scripture, Psalm. 25, Psalm. 34, Psalm. 37. Psalm. 111, Psalm.
112. The Proverb. 31, Lamentations of Jeremy, for the same ends.

This Psalm contains truth, and doctrines of diverse sorts: the which to
range in their orders, and fitly to sunder, is somewhat hard, and not very
necessary.

It is altogether (as a man may term it) a crystal (not flattering glass)
of all true godliness, or a touchstone of all sincere hearted worshippers of God,
and lively anatomy of laying open of a good soul. Whereto the more one can
find himself like, the more mercy has he found of God, and owes him the more
praise.

The first staff or octonarie, sets out unto us a good (...) godly man or
woman: and that 1 at large, as may be said. 2 In more special sort.

The more at large, or in general setting forth of a good and godly person, is
in the three first verses: and that after two sorts. 1 From the duties of this
party, 2 From the commendation of his estate.

The duties are six, two and two linked together in every verse.

The commendation: that such parties are blessed.

But before we can as we should with profit consider of this, or other such
places of scriptures, where morrall duties are commended or commanded,
somewhat before hand must be known.

First, that though no word be spoken of Christ, it must always be understood,
that he is the full, and only cause of every of our saluations.

2 That these and such like duties are then commended in any party, when the
party is first in Christ, that is, for Christ's sake has pardon of his sins,
and imputation of accounting of true righteousness, otherwise not.

3 They must come from faith working them for conscience to Godward, for the
deed done only never pleases God.

4 In this and such like places, are not the causes why one is happy (so is he
only for Christ) but the signs which show that he is happy.

5 They must not be understood in the rigor and strictnes of the morrall law,
but for the continual desire, purpose, and endeavor to do them, and
sorrowing when we cannot do them, and if we fail, to ask pardon, and set a
fresh upon them, always laboring to prove better and better.

6 That all defects and blemishes, for Christ's sake, are, and shall be
pardoned.

Now come we to the duties which in nature be first,

The first duty, is upright in the way.

Way is taken diversely: here improperly, as it is very often in the scriptures.
For,

1 A warrantable kind or estate of life, common calling of Christian.
particular calling.


2 For warrantable carriage in, or usage of that kind of life.

Whereupon we may perceive: that,

1 The scripture would have none invent courses of life, they must take them as
their way left of God.

2 As in the way one may meet with many inconveniences, against which he
prepares, so shall he in his life, so as none should ever hope always to be
secure.

3 If in way he go not forward, he is never the better, so if we do not
increase in goodness, we loyter in our life.

4 Our Country and home is in heaven: let us not set down our staves here.

1 This way is such, as that it is one, pointed out by the scriptures, walked
in by direction of them, bringing to one home. So says Ier. 32, 39.

Wherefore he blames them who go about to change their ways, Ier. 2.36.
look Psalm. 125, 5.

Every one shall not be saved, walking in his particular way, what so ever it
be, as the Turks think, and Atheists would have it.

He must enquire of the old way, Ier: 6, 16. and know that that is the way, and
walk in it. Esa, 30, 21.

2 This way is such as every one must walk in it.

Well therefore have the translatours set down the word their; which is not in
the Hebrew, to open the meaning of the holy Ghost.

1 No man must be inordinate, or out of a calling.

2 Not so busy to censure others, as first to look to him self.

Upright, the Hebrew word is Temime.

The word Tam, whereof it comes, does signify properly. improperly.


It signifies properly, when it is put for a thing perfect in the kind of it,
so as it wants nothing: so is the law of God said to be, Psalm, 19, 18, and so
Thummim in Aarons breast representing Christ's full holiness.

It signifies improperly, when it is put for a thing where somewhat is
wanting, though it come very near, or endeavors to come near to full
perfection: as often is seen in many places of the scriptures. So was Noah,
Job, Tam, or perfect, though they wanted somewhat.

So is it taken in this place. For the most upright in the world (Christ only
excepted) have not had all.

So as that the supposed perfection of Pelagian or Roman Catholic, cannot
warrant it self.

Now this which signifies somewhat improperly, is likewise taken two ways: 1
for sincerity. 2 Vnblameablenes.

For sincerity, as 1, Kings, 9, 4.

And is quite contrary to hypocrisy.

Hypocrisy is most natural, displeasing God, hard to discry in a man's own
self, and will creep into every good duty toward God or man. And yet for all
that, men must not be hypocrites, but sincere. Which the better to know,
consider what is sincerity, how necessary, how to be tried, how to be kept.

Sincerity or vprightnes in this place first meant, is conformity of the whole
man, with sound and full information to everlasting life.

This information is in the truth of God, well understood and believed.

The whole man is soul and body, thoughts, will, and practices at all times.

Conformity is fashioning all things according to sound truth.

A sincere man is like a crystal glass, with a light in the midst, which
appears through every part thereof: so as that truth within, breaks out in
every parcel.

Sincere men therefore, 1 are in every thing alike.

2 Shine from the heart within. 3 Cannot possibly lie hid.

It is so necessary, as nothing without it can please God.

What the fruits of it be, look Proverb. 2, 7, 21, Prouer. 10, 9, Proverb.
11, 3, 6, 20, Prouer. 28, 6, 10, 18, Pro. 2, 9, 10.2, Cor. 1, 12.

A man may try whether it be in himself.

1 If he account of things according to their nature, of great, greatly.
Hypocrites will strain Gnats, and swallow Cammels, will be curious in
ceremonies, and omit greater things: sincerity will in their place regard both.
Therefore serves the true light in the heart.

2 If he be most severe toward himself. Hypocrites are most hard to others:
look John, 8, 3. Math. 7, 3. the sincerest are most favorable, as being
privy to the in bred corruption. So was Job toward his children, tollerating
their banqueting, though himself were not with them. Joseph toward Mary with
child, etc.

3 If he be more careful to please God then all the world beside: Hypocrites
do all things to be seen of men, make more of the reputation of the world,
then the witness of their own conscience.

4 If he be willing to bear aduertisements, admonitions, reprehensions. A
sincere party means well from his heart, and therefore can be content to be
called upon: the hypocrite is unsound at the heart, and cannot abide to be
gaged, he is touched on the gall, so did the Jews to Stephen. Act, 7, 54.

5 It is impossible to be smothered, it will break open, and cannot lie hid:
hypocrites are couchant, and can have a fair glove on a foul hand.

This is kept and preserved, 1 by the sincere milk of the word, 1, Pet. 1, 2.
and continual desire to be informed in the sound truth.

2 The more one endeavors to search and sound him self, the better shall he
preserve his sincerity. Standing waters corrupt.

3 Often setting of a man's self in the presence of God, and before his
judgment seat.

Thus much of the first acception, the other follows, which is
vnblameablenes: not that the servant of God shall not sometimes be charged with
somewhat amiss, or shall not in a slip be ouer-taken: but,

Vnblameablenes is such vprightnes, whereby a man's life cannot be noted with
any reigning sin after his effectual calling: so was Samuel, Job, Paul, and
some others, as Elizabeth and Zachary. Luk, 1.

Now both these, sincerity, and vnblameablenes, must be in one party, and in
all the life. But some may say, that is impossible: for answer heereto, look
the fifth and sixth general remembrance, in the beginning of this Psalm.

Now by this before, we learn, that,

1 Vprightnes of sincerity, and vnblameablenes, as it is most necessary, so
should it be with the first, or else all will be unsound, neither would the
Prophet have set it first.

2 And that we must judge of our selves, and others, by vprightnes in the way,
that is vocation of a Christian, or any other more especial: the world does
otherwise, they commend for things that are not of a man's calling.

Thus much of the first duty, the commendation follows.

Blessed, that is, such parties are happy, or happinesses, that is, many
blessings belong to such, or it is, and shall be happily to such, for so many
ways may the word be taken.

The Prophets meaning is, that such parties are in an estate most to be liked,
and longed for: as the world count happy those in whose steedes they could wish
themselves.

I think it not the fittest here to dispute of blessedness, what it should be,
or what good things it contains in it, that is not the Prophets meaning.
Whosoever would know this, for the cause of blessedness, let them look Psalm.
32, 2, Romans 4, 7, and for the fruits the beginning of the 26 of Leuit. and 28
of Deutrono.

This blessedness which is here named, has two degrees in this life. the life
to come.


Blessedness in this life, may be called blessedness of grace.

Blessedness in the life to come, of glory: of these have one, and be sure of
both.

Here though, is principally meant blessedness of grace, whereto a man may
reach in this life, as also Mat. 5, 2, 3, etc. Math. 13, 16, Pro. 28, 14,

That upright men are happy, it is most certain, no vprightnes, but by the
spirit of sanctification, no sanctification without justification, no
justification without forgiveness of sins, wherein is blessedness. Psalm. 32.2.
Romans 4.7. God is upright men's shield, Proverb, 2, 7. The Lord delights in
them. Prouer. 11, 20. What can be more. And if hypocrites be so cursed, as
indeed they are, sincere cannot choose but be most happy. Was it not this,
that made God favor Noah, Job, etc. Wherefore,

1 They greatly err, who think the godly of all men most miserable.

2 All happy men are in a sure estate, that cannot be lost. Happiness of grace
is surer then of nature. That was in our own keeping, and was lost. This is in
Gods favor, which is unchangeable, and cannot miscarie.

So as that all upright men may have sound consolation, that they never shall
fail.

3 Upright men may have many afflictions, as indeed they have, as Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, David, Abel, etc. yet are they blessed.

So as that no outward or inward afflictions, of what kind so ever, can hinder
an upright man's happiness. Nay they shall further it. Math. 5, 10.

Wherefore judge no man by his afflictions to be out of the favor of God, else
might Lazarus have been thought amiss of.

4 If upright persons are happy, then hypocrites and notorious sinners are
wretched, and yet enjoy they much outward prosperity.

Outward good things therefore, do not always show that a man is happy.

5 And seeing that upright men are happy, who would not labor to be upright,
though it cost him (as it will great) never so much endeavor?

Hitherto has been the first duty and commendation of it, now follows the
second, which is, Walking in the law of Iehoua, set out by the parties in who^
it is, who are said to walk.

In this duty are two things to be considered, 1 The practice of walking. 2 The
form or rule, in the law of Iehoua.

To walk, is a borrowed word, as that before of the way: and signifies the
ordering of life, and has in it two things. 1 That as in a way there are many
steps to be set, so are there sundry particulars in life.

2 That as in the way, every step must be ordered, so must every particular of
life be.

Of the particulars which are in life, there is 1 the beginning or head of the
way, the heart. 2 Passages on from the heart.

The heart is to be understood the soul, that is mind and will, from whence as
from the heart of the body natural life comes, so the beginning of godly life
must proceed.

The soul therefore must as the first step, be set in the law of God, out of
which if it stand, all other things run riot.

This is the more to be thought of, for that the heart by nature is turned from
God. 2 It is very hard to recall it, and fix it. 3 And being once set, will
easily draw the whole man.

Passages from this fountain and head, are 1 Kinds of life. 2 Duties of life.

Kinds of life, are particular callings. Every one must be warrantable by the
word of God.

Duties of life are the practices and works of ones calling, general, or
special. Of which sort are,

1 Thoughts. A motion without consent.

2 Affections, motions with some kind of feeling, as joy, hope, fear, love,
hatred, etc.

3 Actions, wherein besides some inward conceit, somewhat is performed, and
these are of sundry sorts.

1 Natural: such as are for the necessity of life, as eating, drinking,
sleeping, etc.

2 Domestical, such as are belonging to the family, as of husband, wife,
father, children, master, servant.

3 Political, any way belonging to public governing, as Prince, Magistrate,
Subject, etc.

4 Religious, which any way belong to the worship of God.

5 Ludicrous, which are of recreation, and disport.

In every of these, every step (as it were) is carefully to be ordered: neither
is it sufficient to have a general good meaning to please God, unless we
endeavor in every particular so to do.

Solomon commands us to look to our feet, Eccle. 4, 17, and Paul charge
we should walk circumspectly, look Psalm. 119, 105, Psalm. 139, 2, 3.

Hereby it appears, 1 that they do not their duty, who only carry a
general purpose to do well, unless they endeavor the same in particular.

2 That none can be too careful of his walking, and leading his life, so as it
is a false charge to count any too precise.

3 And that if every particular should be looked unto, a man had need of great
knowledge and wisdom out of the scriptures.

Thus much of the practice of walking, now follows the form or rule, whereto
this walking is to be framed, in the law of Jehovah, which so is to be
understood, as that it must be alone: so Psalm 1, 2. and Psalm, 119, 97, for
indeed there is none who can prescribe a sufficient rule but only God, whose
wisdom and justice is above all creatures.

Here therefore is thrust out, 1 nature which (the Stoics say) if we follow as
a guide, we shall never do amiss. Nature is corrupt.

The best life in this kind, is but civil, which indeed now a days in the
world does carry the greatest show, where only appearance prevails.

It is a most dangerous course, not for that it is not necessary, but for that
most commonly it abandoneth all power of true godliness.

2 And seeks only the report for honesty among men.

It differs from true Christian life, because that civil life hangs upon
the reputation of men, which if it obtain, it is content, Christian life is
ordered by faith, that is knowledge of the word, and application of Christ.

2 Civil life respects men most, Christian life endeavors to please God.

3 Civil life is not very careful of religious duties, Christian life is in
public, and private, the other not much.

4 Civil life makes no great conscience of smaller sins, as in swearing
less oaths, idleness, gaming. Christian life does.

5 Civil life never takes any care to resist the sins of the time,
Christian does.

2 Here is removed every man's own particular course, which he sets to
himself, and pleases himself in. Iere. 44, 17.

3 Other folks example is not a sufficient rule.

The sufficient rule is, the law of Iehoua, for the kind, it is a law, for the
Author, it is of Iehoua.

The law is here, the word of God, and is taken particularly for the 10
Commandments, or five books of Moses. Generally, for the whole Bible.

It is taken generally in this place, as else where, 1, Psalm. 2. Psalm, 19, 7,
heere-vpon sin is counted transgression of the law, that is, breach of the
word of God written.

Now this name of law is to be understood, as of the whole body of the
scriptures, so of every particular branch thereof, in so much as even
particular examples many times have the force of general doctrine. Mark then
that,

1 The Papists err who teach that some parts of the word of God are but
counfailes, which a man may follow if he will, and that all are not laws,
whereto one is bound.

2 That as subjects are bound to take knowledge of the laws of the Land, so
are they of the word of God.

3 And seeing that men will look to the laws of the Land, why should they not
much more to this?

4 So read, hear, and think of the word of God, as of the law of thy life.

5 That as every law broken has some penalty or other, so has the law of God.

Now follows the Author, Iehoua, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, know one
well, know all well, know not all, know none.

Whereupon it follows, that the Jews or Turks laws which they boast of,
neither of the^ acknowledging Christ, and the holy Ghost, is not to be counted
the law of God. For the word of God wrongly understood, is not the word of God.

Nor surely the Papists doctrine, misunderstanding many fundamental grounds
touching Christ: so as that none that is not orthodoxicall, cannot properly be
said to have this.

This law is said to be Iehoua, etc. because,

1 He makes it. 2 He can best judge of the breaking or keeping of it. 3 He
only can dispense against it.

We gather then, 1 that no exception can be taken against this law, for
wisdom, justice, equity.

2 That being Gods, it must be spiritually understood.

3 That we remember God takes knowledge of every step that is awry.

4 That we must approve all our obedience to him, and do all for his sake.

5 And that it being said that they walk in his law, the meaning is, that
always and in every place they so do.

Now with this second duty should be repeated the word blessed, as indeed with
every other of the four which follow, but it may suffice to have opened it
once for all. Thus much of the two duties in the first verse.

The second verse follows, two duties. the commendation as before.


The two duties are, 1 Keeping his, that is, Iehouahs testimonies. 2 Seeking
him, that is, Jehovah with their whole heart.

In the former of these two, which is the third general duty, are 1 object,
or thing where about the endeavor is. His testimonies. 2 Act, the endeavor or
practice about this thing. Keeping.

Testimony, for matter and meaning, is the same with law, in the verse going
before, to wit, the written word of God: so is it likewise taken, Psalm. 197,
and else where.

Now yet for the use of this name testimonies here, for better understanding
of it, it seems that testimony or witness, is a word which cannot well be
understood, without reference or respect to some other. Whereupon as the
things are diverse, which may be respected, so may the particular sense of this
word be.

It is used in respect 1 of man to man. 2 Of man to God. And that severally or
jointly, when GOD witnesses to man, or man to God, or both to each other.

Here I judge it to be, to be understood between God and man jointly, and
mutually, whereby God witnesses to man, and man to God. Now this arises from
the compact or covenant, which is between God, and his people.

For so do God and man covenant. Look Ier: 31, 31. God promising to take the
people for his, that is to favor them every way for things of this life, and
of that which is to come: the people promising again, to acknowledge and
worship God according to his will.

This covenant he likewise makes with particular men, Genesis 17, 7, 10, so is
God called the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Heere-vpon is that of the Ark
of the testimony, Exodus 30, 6, and Psalm. 122, 4, as a witness of this covenant,
and for that the tables of the covenant, or witnesses of this covenant, were in
it, Heb. 9, 4. Act, 7, 44.

So that the written law of God is the witness or testimony of the will of God
toward us, and of our profession of our duty toward him. So when God had
published his law, the people professed whatsoever the Lord commanded, that
would they do. Deuteronomy. 5, 27.

Whereupon we are to take the proclamation of the law, Exodus 20, not so much
for the very covenant of salvation, (which is but one founded on Christ) as for
the articles or heads of the conuention and agreement between God and man.
These things God requires, these things man will perform by himself, or
Christ.

Neither is this name of testimonies more to be understood of the whole body
of the law, then of every branch and clause of it, which witnesses the former.

So as that these testimonies are mutual, declaring on Gods part, not why he
is our God, but what he requires of us: and on ours, not why we are received
(for that is for Christ) but what we desire to do.

That God thus witnesses it is clear, Deuteronomy. 4, 45, these are the witnesses,
etc. where the Geneuans note, that is, the articles and points of the covenant:
so Deuteronomy. 6, 17, so Psalm. 19, 8.

That his people likewise do witness. Read Josh: 24, 22. Deuteronomy. 5, 27.

Sundry uses arise from hence, and first from the consideration of these
testimonies: 1 on Gods part to us ward. That,

1 Our chief care should be to be in league with God, which is to us the
fountain of all good things, and without the which we can neither look for,
and shall be sure to find no good thing.

2 So must we read, and hear the word, as the articles which God requires we
should subscribe unto: and therefore had need well to understand them.

3 It is a covenant of special account, where are so many witnesses and
articles, and so many good things offered therewith.

4 That God cannot but take knowledge of the violating of it, and grievously
punish it.

2 On our parts who are Gods people.

1 Every servant of God takes upon him to observe every clause of the Bible,
according to the will of God.

2 Every sinner witnesses against himself, he denies his own deed and
agreement: he had subscribed to the word of God, and by sinning now seems to
deny his own hand.

3 Whereupon it needs must follow, that their own conscience condemns them.

4 Though these witnesses for a time be not brought, yet certainly one day they
shall, when the books shall be opened.

Now follows the act or practice of keeping: wherein are sundry things.

1 Having the books of canonical scripture, in their best original, or
translated copies.

2 The true and proper understanding of them.

3 Keeping and defending them in their own meanings, against all false doctrine
whatsoever.

4 Holding them in present memory.

5 Some judgment, directing whereto every one is to be applied.

6 Continual practice of them in life.

This is the third duty, whereto join the word blessed as before.

The fourth duty follows. And seek him with their whole heart.

Wherein we are to consider the endeavor: is, seeking with the whole heart.
thing, where about the endeavor is, Iehoua.


First take knowledge of the thing, which is in the word him. That is, as
appears in the 1 ver: Iehoua.

Iehoua may be confidered as he is in himself. reuealeth himself to us.


As he is in himself, we can never find out (which is the end of seeking) and
though we could, yet would it help but little.

But as he shows himself to us, we may in some sort find, and must search.
Look Deuteronomy. 29, 29. Ier. 9, 24: so Exodus 34.

Now GOD reuealeth himself to be a Creator and preserver, Redeemer and
Savior.


God Creator, and preserver, every man in some sort knows without much
seeking: so learn we, Act, 17, 27. Romans 1, 20. Act, 14, 17.

So as that neither men nor devils are ignorant of him in part, who for all
that do not walk in his law. Titus. 1, 16.

Indeed it is necessary that thus we should know God, but it is not
sufficient.

Here the Prophet sets out a peculiar state, wherein is blessedness, a man
that knows the Creator may be wretched. David sets down a proper mark:
knowledge of the Creator is common.

So as that though to seek God the Creator be required, yet it will not
suffice.

Therefore are we in the second sense to understand Iehoua here, to wit, as he
has bewrayed himself toward us a Redeemer and Savior. Wherein indeed is
eternal life, which if we seek not, we shall not find heaven. Him did the
wise men seek, him Mary and others.

Now in seeking of God our Redeemer and Savior, sundry things are requisite.

1 The truth of salvation and doctrine of the will, God touching that: so Ier:
9, 23, 24.

This consists in the articles of Christian faith, the chiefest ground
whereof is Christ, and thorough knowledge of him, 1, Cor. 2, 2, Phil. 3, 8,
which truth, then may be in some sort to be in us: when we can,

1 Discern wholesome doctrine from unwholesome and unsound.

Wholesome is that which nourishes, and feeds to everlasting life: so is not
all truth. Christ's sheep therefore know his voice.

2 Have grounds and texts of Scripture, whereupon we build, whereto we can
have recourse, and not start from them.

2 Is his favor and reconciliation, or bringing into grace again with him.
Him therefore must we seek, reconciled, and pacified. Ier. 31, 34. Who being
angry, is most mighty, most just,

Whom none can pacify but Christ, who is our peace, and procures us full and
certain justification.

Which we seek: when we 1 apprehend Christ. 2 Apply Christ.

Of this it shall be good to consider the means. duties.


The means in us, is only faith, wrought and maintained by the holy spirit.

The duties are: 1 Entrance to the throane of grace, Heb. 4, 16. Romans 5, 2,
which is when being animated by the merit of Christ, we can come into the
presence of God, and pray unto him.

2 Patient and rejoicing mind, even in the cross, upon persuasion of the love
of God. Romans 5, 3.

3 Upon persuasion of Gods favor, to show favor to others.

3 Him must we seek to obey. Psalm, 24, 4, 5, 6. Without which all seeking is
loosing.

4 As to our storehouse of all good things when we want any, having always
recourse unto him. Deu. 4, 29. Psa. 27, 8.

5 And lastly, so must we seek him as to enjoy him, and cleave continually
unto him.

All and every of these respects in Iehoua, must we have, else shall not we
seek as we should.

So as that all idle questions are here to be removed, and worldly searching.
God known pacified, obeyed must be: which we are to find out.

Thus much for the thing to be sought, now follows the endeavor. Seeking with
the whole heart. Wherein is, 1 the action. 2 The adiunct.

The action is, seeking.

Seeking when it is true, is always with desire.

Desire always shows some absence, either of the thing, or some
circumstance, or quantity, or quality.

Of every or all of these, the liuelier the feeling is, the greater is the
desire.

Desire is always increased by opinion of necessity. excellency.


Both which in God, cannot but be most infinite: so as the desire should be
great. It always has,

1 Often and earnest practice of praying.

2 Diligence in the use of ordinary means: where much christian and godly
wisdom is necessary, to be able to know what means should serve, and to what
purposes.

3 Pains and constancy: such as is in seeking gold and precious stones.

4 Love of the thing gotten or found. 5 Care to keep it. 6 Loathnes to leese
it.

Thus much of the action, the adiunct or property follows. With the whole
heart.

Heart is here put, not for the fleshy part in the body, but by a metonimicall
synecdoch for the soul, and so after for the whole man, body, and soul, and
is only named, for that: 1 this first should be set about seeking: 2 and truly
set, will never give over till it find: 3 and will easily draw the whole man
after.

The Prophet therefore means, judgment of the soul, affections of the will,
and afterward endeavors of life.

Now these do show that 1 first the judgment and affections should be set on
God: else nothing will follow.

2 That this is truly as from the heart: 3 is earnest: 4 and with some feeling.

This heart must be whole, which is taken two ways straightly. largely.


Straightly, for sincerity against hypocrisy. I think not so much meant
here, as before in vprightnes.

Largely, in regard of more duties then one, even of the whole law of God. And
that after two sorts, 1 Legally. 2 Euangelically.

The legal acception of whole heart, is when it is taken according to the
sense, and intent of the whole morrall law of God, and then it signifies the
perfection of all duties in manner and form, both for the number and measure
of them. Which never any man performed but Adam before the fall, and Christ
since, neither indeed can any man. So that it is not to be understood here,
for the Prophet speaks of possibility, and practice, else could no such
parties be blessed.

The evangelical acception is, when it is so taken, as that by the doctrine of
the Gospel, and spirit of Christ, a party is so renewed, as that he can
perform it acceptably to God. Which is: when,

1 Christ's full performance is imputed to the party.

2 The parties heart is renewed to 1 desire, 2 purpose, 3 endeavor thus to do, 4
with continuance and increase. In which sense here are we to understand it. So
as none with these is to be discouraged, if he can rise after many foiles.

This may a man somewhat perceived in himself. If,

1 First in time and order generally for a man's whole life, and particularly
for every day he seek God, as we have showed before, and that most earnestly.

2 He seek God for himself, and other things for God, never caring for any
things more then they help to God, or are with, or assure Gods favor unto us.

3 He had rather leese all, yea his own life then the favor of God.

This he may be little and little see in loss of favor, pleasure, honor,
profit, reputation, etc.

4 From the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks, the feet go, the eyes
look, the ears hear: principally respecting God, his will and favor in
every thing.

Thus much for the fourth duty, the fifth and sixth follow in the third verse.
Surely they do none iniquity, they walk in his ways.

Wherein we may sunder the duties. certainty, in the word surely.


The duties are fifth, not doing iniquity. sixth, walking in his ways.


not, no praise is it. Therefore if David had forborne when he might have sent
his Minions for Bathsheba, and had her in his secret chamber, he had done well.
Cain is not to be commended for withholding his hands from Abel, in presence
of his Father, when that after he slew him in the field. The Patriarchs if
they had not sold Joseph, when they had him in their hands, and Ziba not
accused Mephibosheth, when he could not speak in his own defense, had well done.

3 Others, a man may commit though none know: the forbearing of these is not
doing iniquity. Therefore did Gehezai, Cain, Achan, David, Ananias, and
Saphira, commit iniquity though it was in secret. No, though it were possible
to commit iniquity, and God not know, yet for the filthiness of it, must it be
avoided.

Now follow some other kinds of iniquity: against men. God and his law.


Both these because all agree they should be shunned, we shall not need to
speak of.

1 Some iniquity there is, which in more sort special may counted ones own,
whereto his natural disposition enclineth, custom carries, kind of life
draws: so have ages, steps, callings, sundry iniquities, which they are more
in danger of, then others: these must be forborne. Psalm. 18, 24. small praise
is it for old men not to offend in young men's sins, etc. they must forbear
their own.

But sure it is a very hard thing, here not to be deceived. Nature flattereth
it self, and blinds, custom hardens. Somewhat may we find out our selves.

1 If we search, and always suspect our selves.

2 If we are careful to have faithful aduertisers of us, and will believe
them. Sooner shall another epsy our faults, then our selves.

3 Neglect not to mark even the speeches of enemies, for though they commonly
never say all truth, yet they will have some occasion or beginning from our
selves: which is good to mark.

4 Where a man most likes, take heed he be not there most deceived.

2 Again others there are, which may be termed the sins of the time and
place, of the fashion of the Country or world. Romans 12, 2, Ephe. 2, 2.

For this cause are Lot, Noah, Enoch, and infinite others, for that they were
not carried away with the multitude, renowned.

Paul seems to set down the sins of this age of the world. 2, Tim: 3, 2,
3. So to live in the Court forbearing, Court sins is the duty, the like might
be said of infinite others.

3 Besides, some are judged less then others, as swearing by faith and truth,
playing at cards and tables, drinking, etc. and yet all iniquity, even these
must be shunned. Therefore must we walk circumspectly, Ep. 5, 15, look 1, Cor.
5, 6.

The least wound in the heart and brain is deadly, small leakes in ships, or
breaches in walls neglected, leese Cities and ships, so is it for small
sins, to the loss of the soul: yea, indifferent and warrantable things, if
they be with scandal (that is with hinderance of others in they way to
everlasting life) are grievous sins.

Of this kind is it to do a little evil, that a greater good may follow upon
it. This is iniquity to be hated.

Other kinds of iniquity might have been named, but these sufficiently show,
that we all commit some one or other kind of iniquity, whereby we are
wretched, and had need to seek to Christ.

Hitherto of the object, the action or practice denied, is not doing.

Doing does signify, any way of committing, or consenting to sin, in our
selves or others: which may be nine ways, according to the verses.

Commander, consenter, aduiser, and soother.

Abbettor, partaker, concealer, not hinderer.

Not wraying full known sins, these all each with other.

Do sin and iniquity what ever men censure.

Thus much of the fifth duty, now follows the certainty and surenes of it,
surely. This is most assured, for that the sons of God cannot commit sin.
Gods seed remains in them.

And this the spirit sets down, not for that this truth can be doubted of
in it self.

1 But for that the wicked are wont to censure the godly, and think most
hardly of them for their slips, Gods spirit faith otherwise, what ever wicked
men judge, these do not commit iniquity.

2 Again, for that the godly are much grieved with themselves, and discouraged
at their slips, whereas they are to be comforted, that God does count this
iniquity.

Now then from all this of not committing, and doing of iniquity.

1 Learn we all what a great profession a Christian makes, to forbear all
kinds and respects of sin.

2 Let us discourage our selves what we can, from committing of iniquity.

That may we do if we consider: 1 It displeases God, our so good a Father. 2
It was that which crucified Christ, our sins, more then the hands of the
Jews: 3 It daunteth, and rebateth, greeueth, and almost puts out all graces
of the spirit in us. It dimmeth our knowledge, weakeneth our faith, stays our
prayer, stops our hearts to the word, etc.

4 A man shall have much a-doe to rise after any great sin: It cost David and
Peter many sower tears. 5 Sin deserves all kind of punishments now and
hereafter: 6 And has most sharply been punished.

3 We should what we could repent for former committed sin, but endeavor to
prevent such as we might be likely to fall into. It will be some help for us
this way. 1 Always to think that the Angels behold us, yea, that we do
nothing, but that God himself vieweth and looks upon, 2 What we may, always
to give our selves to exercises of religion and good company, sin dare not be
there. 3 Remember thy Baptism, what thou did promise there: to renounce
the world, flesh, devil, and endeavor to keep Gods commandments, and how
that God will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain. 4 Censure
your self sharply for smaller sins, and think none little, so shall you be
more able in time to forbear all, thinks Chrysostom. 5 Not only so, but if
you would forbear sins, be not too bold to adventure upon all indifferent
things. 6 Resist sins in the beginning. 7 Bernard says, that three ways was
he kept from sin: by taking away occasion, having strength to resist
tentation, and soundnes of affection. 8 Remember how short and small the
pleasure of sin is, and how long and grievous the punishment is. 9 Often
receive the Lords Supper.

Thus much for the fifth duty, the sixth follows: They walk in his ways. And
this all Interpreters read not alike: some thus, they work none iniquity,
who walk in his ways, others they work none iniquity, but walk in his
ways: it is most plain and simple to read it, without either relative or
aduersatiue particle, as is likewise in the Hebrew.

This duty is set out affirmatively, after the former negative, not only
according to the manner of the Hebrew tongue, which sets one opposite out by
the other, but also to show what kind of sanctification we should have, such
whereby we should not only forbear sin, but follow holiness and
righteousness. Heathen people and hypocrites abstain from many things, they do
not all which are commanded.

There are in this sixth duty act of walking. object, in his ways.


The act of walking is metaphorical and borrowed, and declares setting, and
ordering of life: wherein, besides the things we have had before, are,

1 Ability to discern the right way from bypath, and to put a difference
between Christ's voice and others. Ioh. 10, 4, 5.

And this comes by the bright Lamp of the word of God the word of God, the
work of it is any way profitable for mankind, to soul or body, for this life
or that which is to come. Take heed of others.

The duties are well done, if first, 1 the party who perform them be in
Christ, that is, be justified: 2 do the duties for conscience to God, and in
obedience to Gods commandments: 3 he call upon God in the beginning of his
work, for gift sufficient and enlarged, for a blessing of his work, and
thanks afterward: 4 his mind be always free, even in the work, that he can
lift up himself to God, and never be unfit for duties of godliness and charity.
If ones works be not thus done, himself can have little comfort in them.

In that the Prophet names these ways, without designing which or how many,
he would not have us doubt of any, but that a party who desires to be in
blessed state, should endeavor in all. Some like some, few all. All who will be
blessed, must run on in all. Whatsoever the Lord commands (says the
Israelites) that will we do. Deuteronomy. 5, 27.

Here must be repeated again the particle surely, in the sense, and for the
reasons we had in the duty immediately going before.

Thus much for the sixth duty by way of doctrine, some use would further be made
of it: 1 to exhort us to walk in these ways: 2 to give some helps to further
us in this walking: 3 to try whether we walk aright.

We may easily, even exhort our selves if we would, 1 but think, that these are
the only ways, all other are bypath, Psalm. 125, 5. Esa, 30, 21.

2 That this is Gods commandment, walk in the way. This is the way, etc.

3 And that once entered in, we should find them most sweet, and easy, and
that his (that is Gods) commandments are not grievous. 4 Besides, company
will do much, where Christ, his Apostles, and Prophets, and all holy men of
all time have taken this course: 5 So as in this way they have been blessed: 6
and can but out of it be most wretched, and miserable.

Best helps and means are, 1 the spirit of God, who will lead his into all
truth, by whom we must walk. 2 Forget that which is behind, look to that
which is before. Philippians, 3, 14. 3 Not to go forward, argues going
backward.

We shall try whether we walk aright: 1 If we follow our guide, the spirit,
and word. 2 If the godly who know this way, and walk in it, cannot find us
swaruing. 3 If we draw nearer our home in heaven.

out at large, and in general, of a godly man, now follows the more
special, under the person and example of the Prophet, and that from the
beginning of the 4 verse, to the end of the eight, and that as after in order
we shall see, by six sundry properties or graces.

But here a question may arise, how far we may build upon particular
examples, general doctrine?

Aun. Examples are, 1 bad, which we must only avoid always. 2 Good. 1
Extraordinary. 2 Ordinary.

Extraordinary are good examples but of some particular parson, at some
special time, by some special commandment, or privilege. Of which sort is
Moses killing of the Aegiptian, Exodus 2. Abraham's purpose to kill his son,
Phynies fact in slaying the adulterers, the Israelites in robbing the
Aegiptians, Moses fasting 40 days, etc. These some call heroycall, or above
the common reach of man, examples, and presidents.

These in the parties at that time, and upon the commandment, and instinct of
God are commendable: but of us not mutable, unless by virtue of such like
privilege, as the persons who performed these facts had.

Ordinary examples are good, and of such facts and duties, as ought to be in
all parties of the same kind of calling, at all times by virtue of the general
commandment, as all duties of the law and Gospel: the which both may, and
must

Thus does God command. Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28. Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9.

In Gods commandment: 1 is a most clear bewraying of Gods will, otherwise,
if it could not be understood, it might rather seem to be a charm then a
charge. 2 And that in all the particulars which God does require.

Now though the Prophet seem to say that God has commanded, leaving it
doubtful whether he does still, and for ever command. Yet it is most certain
that Gods morrall commandments, as these are, and of the Gospel are
continual, sounding in the word, and not mute, even in hearts of Gods children.

1 We must the^ so long as the word is in the world, know that that is the
recorded charge, which continually and every minute is renewed.

2 So always be exorcised in the word, as remembering that then we are hearing,
and taking our charge.

3 And that the more particulars are plainly delivered, the better shall we be
helped to our duties: never rest in generals.

4 Know that the breach of the least commandments, has punishment, as
performance of the least reward.

The kind of duty follows, To keep thy precepts dilligently, whereof is, 1
the matter, Keeping thy precepts. 2 Manner, or adiunct, dilligently.

In the matter object, precepts. act, keeping.


The word precepts is in Hebrew Pickkude, signifying precepts of understanding,
which God has set, and placed in the heart, and understanding teaches the^, as
Rabbi David says; and are for substance the same with law testimony as
before: nevertheless, since it pleases the spirit of God to use some sundry
names for one thing, it must needs be with some difference. I judge therefore
that the word of God here is called by this name, in regard of the knowledge
Gods servants have of it, as of the which any of them cannot altogether be
ignorant. They are therefore that which James calls the word engraffed. 1,
21, or springing in or among you.

God is wont to sow it, and make it grow into the hearts of his servants.

Then is it thus engraffed, when it is mingled with faith, Heb. 4, 2. which is:
1 when one believes it to be true: 2 and believes that it belongs unto him.

Here therefore does GOD forbid to do any thing against the shining truth of
his word in our hearts, nay he commands to do all things there-after.

For such are these precepts known, understood, believed to be the truth of
GOD. For better understanding whereof know that,

It is one thing to sin, so as that ones conscience may accuse him, and
another thing to sin against a man's conscience.

Who so ever sins at one time or other, his conscience will accuse him. But
every one that sins, does not sin against his conscience.

To sin against ones conscience is, after knowledge of the will of God had,
and shining in the heart, to do against it. Which God does here forbid, and
requires that according to the knowledge of Gods precepts we should do.

True it is that sometimes Gods children, even sin (which is a fearful
thing) against their own consciences, which they never should do: for who so
ever knows, and does not, to him it is sin. Yea, if he be falsely in
conscience informed, it is better to do with, then against his conscience.
Indeed the safest way is rightly to instruct the conscience.

Now then, whereas the servants of God have the knowledge of Gods
commandments, and are sometimes drawn to do against their knowledge, God
charge they should not so do.

Least we should doubt whether Gods children are brought sometimes to do
against their knowledge, call to mind Adam, who could not be ignorant, David,
Peter, and such other.

Indeed there is a difference Gods children thus sinning, and the world, and
wicked: 1 Gods children effectually called, have always a settled purpose, and
endeavor not to sin: so have not the reprobate, nay they purpose to sin.

2 The reprobate and wicked desire to have the knowledge of God, which they
have shining in their hearts, put out, the elect desire, to have it more clear
and bright.

3 The elect in their sinning at the instant of it, have their knowledge which
they have of the will of God, obscured that they cannot see. Vehemency of
tentation raises such a cloud, as hides the light of understanding, so did
the wine intoxicate Noah and Lot, David likewise and Peter were thus beguiled,
that though before they knew, yet now tentation made them forget God: the
wicked in the midst of their sins, see, and know they should do otherwise.

4 The elect, when so ever any knowledge of God shines in them, if they sin,
it is with great strife and contention of the flesh and the spirit, as we see
in Paul, Romans 7, and Gal. 5, 17, the reprobate are not so, the strong man
holds them.

5 The elect are more grieved for these sins then any other, they are most
perplexed for them, and desire to rise out of them by renewing repentance, etc,
so do not the reprobate, but rest, and sometimes glory in them.

This seems to be the meaning of the words, the instructions are,

1 Never shall we fully profit by the word, till it be rooted and ingraffed in
us.

2 In any case let us take heed, that we never sin against our consciences:
because 1 nothing will so wound the conscience afterward as this. 2 It is the
high way to sin against the holy Ghost.

Now to help us this way, it will be good to.

1 Keep as bright as we can always in our hearts, the light of the word of
God shining.

2 Resist the beginnings of tentations to sin, else continuing, and
multiplying, they will grow too strong. Tentations are like to the cloud that
appeared to Elias servant, little or nothing at the first, and presently it
ouer-spread the whole sky. Thoughts rise in the head, and suddenly drown the
heart.

3 Take heed of solitarines: there would the devil have us alone hand to hand.
Good company will keep our knowledge the brighter, and help us with
counsel, example, prayers, etc.

4 In any case to take heed of the custom of sin, that will take away the
feeling, and judgment of sin.

Thus much of the object, the act follows in the word keeping, whereof before
in the second verse. The word in Hebrew is diverse with that verse, 2, of
keeping, and besides all that it did signify there, does further here imply
unto us,

1 To observe, that is heedfully to mark, and bend ones mind unto, so Eli
marked Hanna. 1, Sam, 1, 12.

2 To keep, or preserve the thing safe, that it be not the worse: so David
would be kept as the apple of Gods eye: Psalm. 17, 8. so Adam should keep the
garden, Genesis 2, 15, so Cain denies to be his brothers keeper, Gen, 4, 9.

3 So to keep as the thing be not taken away, Psalm. 119, 44.

4 That it may be for use to our selves and others. Mala. 2, 7, for so were the
priests lips to preserve knowledge.

So that we see what our duties are.

1 To give dilligent heed to the word of God, and the rather: 1 for that
according to it, should all our motions and practices be framed: 2 and is very
hard in it self: so as it is needful, that even the least things should be
heeded, hitherto belongs that James, 1, 25. looking into the law.

1 The best and most holy must know, that always there is somewhat before,
whereto they must aim.

2 Such desires as these do please God, and are a token of our profiting,
while we can see our wants.

3 Always such desires are commendable, when they are with purpose and
practice.

Now follows the matter, that his ways, etc. Wherein we may consider the
thing. quality.


The thing ways, and those David's.

Ways as before, kind of life, and duties thereof, deeds, sayings, thoughts:
mine, that is David's.

1 If thou for thy self David thus prayest, why should not every one so to do
for himself.

2 And if David's ways need redressing, what shall any man's else do?

This is the thing, the quality follows, in the word directed.

Directing, is of the word Kun in Hebrew, which among other things signifies
two: 1 Straitnes. 2 Steadines.

Straitnes is when every duty is level with the word of God, nothing swaruing
therefrom. Every man's ways by nature are crooked: 2 even the best have
somewhat which may be amended: 3 they always do fear themselves, least every
duty might be better.

Steadines is constancy, that is, continuance in straitnes: and without this,
all things are nothing. For what booteth it to have something, and not always?

Now this is the more to be thought of, for that Gods children are always
subject to errors and slips.

And if they would be constant: 1 they had need look to their foundation and
root, that it be deeply set.

2 They must often try, and examine themselves.

3 It will be best for them, often to exorcise themselves in all godly duties.

The mean or subordinate end is as we have seen, now follows the utmost
end, to keep thy statutes.

Wherein is as before act, keeping. object, statutes.


Keeping, does fignifie as before, and may here for purpose. event.


For purpose, as if David should say, this is the only thing in this desire
which he wishes, or to keep Gods statutes: for event, as if he should say,
this I only desire, that once I may in obedience serve thee.

By this we may see, that Gods children desire to do duties, for duties sake,
in that David desires his ways to be directed to keep Gods statutes.

Thus much for the act, the object remains, statutes.

Statutes for meaning and intent, are the same with law, testimony, etc. as
before: but is more specially, and oftenest used, for religious and holy
ceremonies ordained by God, in the Leuiticall ministry and service. These were
for the worship of God, for outward show, base, and contemptible, and that many.

Let us all therefore learn by David's example: 1 to be more careful to keep
Gods ordinances, then men's ordinances, or then to ordain new, which are beside
the word.

Now the ordinances and rites of God ordained, are the rites and ceremonies in
the Sacraments, so as that the pure administration in them is to be kept.

2 And since that God has commanded them, nothing is to be thought, neither
too much, nor too little.

3 Yea, where as David desires to keep these statutes, he means that he
would not rest in the deed done, without motions and changes in the heart: for
all rites kept are superfluous, without the inward and spiritual worship:
wherefore always in ceremonies look for the substance, which is Christ.

4 And that wishing that he might keep the outward ordinances, he shows the
inward spiritual worship is harder to be performed.

Thus much for the second duty: now follows the third,

4 Duties to men, are toward our selves. others.


Many can keep Gods commandments in things toward themselves, they must also
keep toward others.

5 Commandments, forbid faults. enjoin duties.


Many can better forbear faults, then do good duties, and yet both are Gods
commandments.

6 Some will keep Gods commandments in one estate, and neglect them in
another, many in prosperity profess the Gospel, shrink from it in the
cross: some in the cross will be meek, will pray, etc. they are not so in
prosperity.

He who keeps Gods commandments, will endeavor in them in one estate, as
well as in another, else does not he keep all Gods commandments.

Now follows the time of this respecting all Gods commandments, when: which
unless it were to special purpose had not been set down. This is diverse
times in this Psalm, even in the next verse, and verse 32, etc.

Here is no limitation or setting down of this time, certain it is that
sometime it was, though not a-like always, neither can be in any. It is hard
to tell the particular times when David had respect: yet we may be sure he had
respect: 1 When God stirred up his heart to be set here about, which was in
his private exorcise of reading, and praying, and meditating, or public.

2 It was not always, at least not in the same tenor and measure. Sometimes
David sinned, and did not respect Gods commandments.

3 Though it were not always, the Prophet is not ashamed to imply so much,
that others might take knowledge thereof. We gather then, that,

1 If David could not always have respect unto Gods commandments, let every
of us know, we shall never find our selves of better metal then he was, our
nature is most abominable, which (besides outward tentations) will turn our
eyes from Gods commandments.

2 If we would respect them, we must seek to God, and continually use the
means.

3 It is clear that David considered how he found himself, calling himself
home to a reckoning, as every one should do.

4 The Saints of God how holy so ever, will confess their wants and defaults.

Thus much of the cause or occasion, now follows the event, then shall I not
be confounded.

Wherein is likewise set down the thing. time.


The thing, I shall not be confounded: the time then.

Confusion comes of a Latin word, which though it may signify such a
mixture of things together, that one cannot discern between them, yet here
the Hebrew whereof this comes, will not bear it, but signifies greatly to
be ashamed.

Shame is taken 1 properly. For the affection usually so called, and appears
in the countenance. 2 Improperly. When it is referred to the soul and
conscience, as very often, shame and confusion is so taken in the scriptures.

Being confounded is taken in the second sense, to wit, improperly in this
place, for excessive shame of the conscience before God and man. Which is, when
a man is as much cast down in conscience before God, as the most shame faced
man is or can be in countenance before any, yea and more.

Now this shame or confusion may be considered, firstly, from a cause of it:
which is to miss, or be disappointed, for then shall a man have bodily shame,
if he miss of his known particular designment, or when so ever (being of any
good nature) he does amiss, so even for the conscience, if a sin be
committed, or we miss of our desires to God, our consciences are cast down.
So as that David here means: that,

He shall have no cause of shame.

1 Cause of shame is wittingly committing of any sin, true it is that all
sin will make ashamed, but this most. Therefore David will avoid sin, as
every one should do.

2 Another cause of shame is missing our desires, so shall not David, God will
hear his prayers, as all other of his children. Psalm. 25, 2, 3. Thus are the
wicked ashamed, that is disappointed of their hope. Mark the fruit of godly
prayers.

Secondly, from the effects, for as natural or worldly shame has many and
great effects, so much more has the shame of conscience, as being part of the
torment of hell.

1 As in worldly shame, one and a first work is to change the mind, so shame
of conscience, will make it change the mind and judgment: for seeing it self
to have done amiss, it must needs repent, and that much blaming and accusing
it self. So shall not David need to fear that he shall do: for endeavoring
to keep Gods commandments, he shall not need to change his mind, but to
continue and increase. So Abigael tells David, that when God shall have given
him the Kingdom, that it shall be no grief unto him, nor offense of mind,
that he has not shed blood causeless. 1, Sam. 25, 31, she means this work
of the conscience.

So shall David, and all other Gods servants, be free from greatly blaming
themselves, which what a torment it is, we cannot be ignorant: look Proverb.
5, 11, 12.

Indeed repentance is a continual practice of all, and every the children of
GOD: so as that the former may be doubted of.

Aun. Repentance may be considered, as beginning. increasing.


Beginning, is at the first turn and change of man to God, after which a man
is preserved, from the wilful committing of gross sins.

Increasing repentance is, grows in the former, when living out of gross
sins, and being truly turned to God, we labor to draw nearer and nearer unto
him: thus with increasing repentance we must always change and repent, not
with the first and beginning repentance, which we can not but have, if we
regard Gods commandments.

2 As worldly shame has fear to come in presence, so is it in shame of the
conscience, wicked men dare not come in the presence of God: Adam and Eve hid
themselves, Cain fled from the presence of God.

David, and other Gods children shall not thus be ashamed.

3 Natural shame makes one always doubt, whether duties do please, it
rather thinks they displease: so does fear and shame of conscience drive a
man to think, that God does not care for any thing that he does. So was it
with Cain, as in deed he saw he did not please God. Genesis 4, 5.

From this David, and those who respect Gods commandments, are free.

4 Natural shame discourageth a man from doing duties as not being liked: so
will this shame of conscience make, that a man shall have no heart in any good
duty.

Thirdly, from the property, bodily, or worldly shame, is with as great
unquietness as possibly may be. It cannot be otherwise with shame and confusion
of the conscience: from this likewise David and other Gods children are free.

This which the Prophet speaks, I should not be confounded, is a kind of
speech, in which by the less, the more and greater is set down, so Psalm. 51,
17. Thou do not despise, for thou do very well like, and 1, Cor, 11, 22.
I praise you not, that is, I much dispraise and blame you: so Heb. 13, 17. Will
be not profitable for you, that is, will be very hurtful: so is it here, I
shall not be confounded, that is, I shall have great boldness and comfort. All
which does arise from a clear and good conscience, which is a continual
feast, Proverb. 1, 5, 15, so that the thing the Prophet means, that he has a
good conscience, and the fruit thereof.

And first for a good conscience: 1 what it is: 2 how it is wrought: 3 what be
the properties of it.

Before we can know a good conscience, know what conscience is, which well we
may do by the parts of it.

The first is a knowledge of truth and falshoode, good, and bad. Therefore is it
called conscience, that is with knowledge, and that not only in general
rules, but in special and particular, wherein conscience especially appears:
general rules are in the Synteresis, particular knowledge, and remembrance in
the Syneidesis or conscience.

The second a diligent marking and recording, as every particular thing is
believed, or not believed, done, or not done, thought or not thought, according
to knowledge.

The third, is affection rising after knowledge and marking, and by things
done, thought, believed, spoken, according to knowledge arises joy, hope, and
comfort, otherwise, grief, fear, and trouble.

Good conscience is, when the knowledge is true, full, and sound, when it
lets not slip any particular, but calls all to count, and finds them
rightly according to knowledge performed, whereupon arises continual joy,
quiet, comfort.

Good conscience is wrought, as all other graces of Gods spirit. No man's
conscience is good by nature: other means therefore are needful.

1 One is, sound faith of justification, when the party having Christ's
righteousness imputed by God himself applies it by faith, to the forgiveness of
all his sins, and accounting of righteousness: so as that the conscience is
cleansed and quieted in regard of all things past.

2 Sanctification, which arising and living in faith, keeps with faith, and
preserves good conscience for afterward: without these never good conscience.

Now the properties of good conscience are many.

1 Truly and fully always to admonish, according to the light of the word of
God, shining in the heart.

2 To witness that all and every thing is done, according to the full knowledge
of Gods will.

3 To give a good hope in all things.

4 To make one lead an unblameable life.

Thus much for good conscience, the fruit follows, which is wondrous great
every way: and has all things contrary to confusion.

1 It makes one never to change his general resolution.

2 It delights to come into the presence of God.

3 Is persuaded that God likes it.

4 Has courage in all good duties.

5 Trust in the favor of God. 6 Has peace of conscience. 7 Joy in the spirit.
8 Looking for all good things from God. 9 Patience in the cross.

Thus much of the thing, now follows the time then, to wit, when I shall have
respect, as if he should say, unless I have respect, etc, I shall be
confounded.

1 Que. Who can respect all, and every of the commandments of God?

Aun. None: and therefore all have great cause of shame.

2 And seeing that all Gods commandments must be respected, even the least
are to be regarded, not neglected.

3 No marvel therefore if none can at any time be secure, but shall find
himself tossed between fear and hope, etc.

4 And why, since there is such good consequence of respecting Gods
commandments, do not we all most carefully regard them?

Thus much for the third particular, in the Prophet David, now follows the
fourth, verse, 7, profession to praise God. Which duty should be in every
servant of God. Psalm. 50, 14. In so much as that not only men, but even all
other creatures ought to perform the same. Psalm. 150.

Of this profession there are two parts, 1 The duty, to praise God with an
upright heart. 2 The cause, learning of the judgments of thy righteousness.

In the duty are, 1 the fact of praising God, etc. 2 The publishing of it, in
that he says, I will praise, etc.

The fact has the thing, to praise God. manner, with an upright heart.


In the thing are action, to praise. object, thee o Iehoua.


The word here used for praise, is in the Hebrew (Ode) whereupon by the way
comes the Greek word Ode, for a song. It signifies both to confess and
praise, but yet notwithstanding with some difference. For when it signifies to
confess, it has one kind of preposition, when to praise another, or other
regiment: so does the Greek word Ezomologoumai signify both. Neither is it
without cause, that one word signifies these two things. For then praise is
true, when it is free and frank, as confession, also every true confession is
greatly to the praise of God, look Joshua, 7, 19, 1, Sam. 6, 5. John, 9, 24.

Here does it signify to praise.

To praise, is to acknowledge the excellency, or worth of a thing.

Excellency in God is infinite every way, as he is in himself. toward his
creatures.


In himself, for excellency of Essence, persons, properties etc. above all
human conceit.

Toward his creatures, making them so excellent, preserving them, etc. and as
to all creatures ingenerall, so to the Church, and especially to the party
praising.

And indeed there is nothing whence a party may not draw arguments to praise
God.

Gods mercy is most sweet, considered in creation. redemption. conservation.


Every one of these cannot choose but be very great, being from so great a God,
to us who deserve the contrary, especially in such necessary things as he
gives us for our being and well being.

Acknowledging, is our profession, that this excellency is in God.

Now this our profession must be: 1 open, so as it may be known: 2 frank and
cheerful, not constrained: 3 with harmony of mouth, heart, and life.

Who would not perform this duty: 1 pleasing God: 2 due from himself?

Thus much for the action, now follows the object, thee, o Iehoua, whom
indeed we are alone to praise, as being only worthy.

1 God being to be praised, is to be considered with means of any thing, or
without means. Many will praise God, and acknowledge his hand, when they see
him work without means, because then they see nothing, whereto they can
ascribe that work but only to God, and yet it is only God who gives means,
renueth them, and blesses them, so as in the midst of all means must we
lift up our heart to God, and praise him, and never sacrifice unto our net.

2 God may be considered toward our selves or others. Many will praise God for
themselves: few for others, and yet so must they do, and even for their
enemies: so far must we all be from envying or lessening any of Gods works.

3 God gives prosperity adversity. Some feeling the sweetness of prosperity,
can acknowledge Gods goodness. Where is any that praises God for adversity? And
yet so must we all do, and not only that, but rejoice therein. Romans 5, 3.

1 Then shall a man be the fitter to praise God for adversity, when he has some
while been under: never at the first will or can a man usually thank for it. 2
When by having been under it he has gotten some good by it, as knowledge of
Gods providence, justice, power, persuasion of Gods goodness, increase of faith,
exorcise of patience, meekenes, prayer, etc. else will our praising for it be
but cold. And therefore all men's speeches, who say, they thank God for
afflictions, are not ever true.

Hitherto of the thing, now follows the manner, With an upright heart: so as
it must be with the heart, and that upright: so as here is, 1 subject. 2
Adiunct.

The subject, is heart, put here for the soul, because that it is as it were
the chair of estate of the soul, wherein it most shows it self in presence.

The soul is put for the whole man, where the soul is, first affection, then
all parts and powers of soul and body. This does the Prophet name,

1 Because God chiefly respects the heart: 2 And the most part of men do
commonly neglect it.

God respects it: 1 As to be the first, so as without this all is nothing. 2
With this all other follow: 3 In this is a sweet feeling of Gods infinite
goodness toward us: 4 And as in the bodily heart there is continual beating, so
is there in this a renewing, and continual frequentation of all godly duties.

1 Wherefore every one who praises God, must do it from his heart, that is,
his soul, that is, 1 from his judgment, as being settled that he ought so to
do: 2 from his will and affections, as delighting therein.

2 Who so ever (says he) praises God with his heart, must do it with his
whole man, else his praise is no praise.

3 No praising of God without feeling. 4 All praising of God continued always
renewed.

The adiunct follows upright, for declaring whereof, it shall be good to
consider: 1 What it is: 2 How it is wrought and gotten: 3 How it may be tried:
4 How it may be kept and preserved.

What it is, may somewhat appear by the very name it self, especially in the
Hebrew tongue, where word for word it is thus, with vprightnes of heart, and is
indeed in effect that our translation has with an upright heart, save that it
signifies it in great measure and perfection: so does the Hebrew tongue, use
Nowne Substantives for Adjectives, very significantly. Now this vprightnes,
though it be in English the same word, with that in the 1 ver. of this Psalm,
yet is not so in the Hebrew, but somewhat more general, and signifies right
or strait. Upright is but one respect of right or strait, right has all
respects in it upward, downward, on both sides, etc. It is therefore here a
word used improperly, contrary to that which is wrethen or crooked: and for
meaning and intent, seems to be the same with clean heart, Psalm. 51, 12.
signifying such a disposition in the soul and whole man, as has nothing
justly greatly to be blamed, human frailty only excepted.

It is termed right: 1 Because it is according to the right statutes of Iehoua,
Psalm. 19, 9. 2 And is after the first and original straitnes which was in man,
according to Gods image, from the which men swaruing are called, Luke, 9, 41, a
crooked generation, and Philip. 2, 15, crooked Nations. And practices of such
parties are phrased, Psalm. 125, 5, crooked ways.

Yet this must be remembered to be understood euangelically, as before whole
heart.

Heere-vpon S. Augustine says that, that man has a strait or right heart, who
wills all things which God will.

Of this sort can be no heart not regenerate and borne a new, all natural hearts
are crooked. The Poet could call them crooked minds. But for the full
knowledge what this is, three things are necessary.

1 True, sound, and full saving instruction and knowledge, so as that where
this is not, no straitnes or rightnes of heart can be. This knowledge must be: 1
In the necessary grounds of salvation, the Trinity, Christ, faith,
justification, sanctification: 2 In this particular duty of praising God. So as
that every one must know that God is to be praised: 2 Fitly take the occasion
when it is given: 3 Rightly perform the duty of praise: as we may read
before.

2 Sincerity, that there be counterfetting, no deceauing.

3 Continual conformity to the word of God, or first straitnes of Gods image,
wherein man was created. All which are so necessary, as that to the parties
endued heerewith, only God is pleased. Psalm, 73, 1, Math. 5, 8. Psalm, 24, 4.

This is wrought and gotten as other graces of salvation, that is, by
justification. sanctification.


By justification, when the sins of our natural or usual crookednes, for
Christ's righteousness being forgiven, his straitnes and vprightnes is imputed
to us by God the Father, sealed to us by the holy Ghost, who likewise works
faith in us, whereby we apply it to our selves.

By sanctification, when receiving the powerful spirit of sanctification we
are renewed, to think, do, say, and every way practice right things, otherwise
there can be no true straitnes in us.

This may we try whether it be in our selves, (it is hard to judge of others.)
1, By the causes of it, and use of them.

1 If the party who thinks he has it, have from the first occasion offered,
used the means thereof (to wit the preaching of the word) in simplicity and
continuance, it is the more likely to be present, otherwise not.

Seasons of things not neglected prevail much: twigges may be bowed in time,
flesh will sometimes take salt: one may come too late to both of these. Again,
formal use only of the former is never sufficient. It pearceth not to the
heart, where this must be.

2, By the fruits. One whereof, is perceauing of a man's own crookednes.
Always the more straitnes, the more perceauing of crookednes. For as in the
body, the sickness is most dangerous, when the distemperature is general that
no part can perceive it, and when all things are in quiet by reason of strong
hold, the captivity is the greater: so no perceauing of crookednes little or no
straitnes at all. With this is always joined patience of reprehensions, from
conscience of crookednes, worthy to be found fault with.

Another is delighting in strait things, as the word of God, godly company.
Like likes like. Right men love right speeches, actions.

Here is never fear of too much precisenes, a thing can never be too right
and strait. Right lines, are the only within their points.

A third is plainenes and opennes. Crooked legs delight not to show
themselves. Close men, in duties of the open worship of God, and their calling
may always be suspected.

A fourth, willingness to offer it self at any time to be tried. It is a token
when Rahel was loath to be raised and searched that she had stolen and hidden:
so crooked hearts are loath to come to the rule and square.

This is kept and preserved, by the continuance in those things whereby it
first is wrought, first must justification be had and kept, then sanctification
continually renewed. Heereto may somewhat help meditation, and searching of the
heart, that as soon as any crookednes appears, it may be made strait,
prayer, Sacraments, and such like.

All this has been touching the fact of praising God, now follows the
publishing of it, in that he says, he will praise: thus does David very often.

Quest. Could not David have done this, and never been acknowne of it?

Aun. In some case David might have concealed this duty, so might Daniel, 6,
Dan: but here he ought not to be willing so to do.

1 This is one use of the known examples in good duties, they show that it is
not impossible (as some dream) to perform them.

2 David is a public teacher of the Church, and therefore must teach in word
and deed.

3 He is a Prince, and must give the first on set: others will sooner imitate.

4 He would show that men must not be ashamed (for all men's censures) of their
good deeds. Well says Aristotle, he who sets out his good duties too much,
and concealeth them too much, both are proud.

5 He would hereby tie himself to the more conscionable performance of this
practice, for having engaged him self by solemn profession, it were the
greater shame for him to start back. All these respects are to prevail with us
in like cases.

Thus much for the duty of praising God, etc. Now follows the cause, When I
shall learn, etc. Whereof we may consider as it is in it self, and as it has
use in this place. Considering of it in it self, we may sunder the endeavor of
learning. object: the judgments of thy, etc.


Endeavor of learning, is in the words:

When I shall learn.

Learning can never be understood without teaching.

To learn, is to profit according to the intent of the teacher.

A teacher, is one offering means of profiting: and is principal less. more.


A less principal teacher is, whereof there is some necessity, and yet he is
not sufficient. This teacher is 1 mute, Which makes no sound as books, other
creatures. 2 Vocal. Who makes a sound, as teachers, commonly so called, in
Church, School, family.

More principal is he who is necessary and sufficient, so only is the holy
spirit, who fully and sufficiently teaches all. His chair is in heaven, his
forms are here upon earth.

The intent of the teacher is: 1, That the learner should hearken and give
heed to the Master and teacher. So as that reading, hearing, and the
breathing of the holy Ghost, are necessary, according to our diverse teachers.

2, That the learner understand: without this all is in vain, yet is it hard
in matters of divinity. Therefore had they need: 1 plainly to be delivered: 2
often to be repeated: 3 diverse times to be questioned, and conferred of.

3, That he lay up for necessary uses, in and according to his kind of
learning.

Necessary uses in divinity are: 1 to know doctrine of salvation: 2 to have
saving faith: 3 to amend and turn our lives: 4 to order every particular
practice of life.

4, Always to be profiting and going forward, that he may rise from one form
to another.

All this is to learn.

David does not say, that he has learned, or will learn, had he not, or would
he not therefore learn? yes he had, and would.

Again it may be thought that David now had not learned: but sure it is that
he had, but he does not much account of it, in laboring for that which he
wants, he thinks nothing of that which he has.

Now let us all by David's example, learn Gods righteous judgments, which we
had need the more to think: because, 1 that all excellent things (such is
this) are very hard: 2 we have no helps of nature to this, as to other
learning: 3 nor take so much time for it: 4 Besides, many think that little of
this learning is sufficient: 5 surely it is of marvelous use.

Somewhat may we judge of our profiting in this learning. 1 If we can discern
between good and bad, truth and falsehood, saving doctrine and others, and best
like of saving learning. 2 If we learn to like and practice, not only to
speak and know. 3 If we like, and be able to teach others.

4 If when our Master, less principal, be sometime absent we can take out a
lesson by our selves, by meditating, praying, etc.

5 If our profiting be according to the time, and means, and excellent
teachers.

Hitherto the endeavor of learning, the object follows. The judgments of thy
righteousness. Wherein is declared the kind of thing judgments, the subject of
it thine, and the quality, of righteousness.

The kind of thing is, judgments.

Judgments are one of the ten names, whereby the word of God is called in this
Psalm, and may better be understood, if we aright know what it is to judge.

To judge properly, is to determine or give sentence, and by a manner of
speech, where the part is put for the whole, it is to rule, order, or govern.
So God is called the Judge of all the world. Genesis 18, 15, and John, 5, 22. The
Father has committed all judgment, that is, regiment, to his son.

Now all Gods judging is infinitely wise, as constant.

God judges sometimes by his works, as Esa, 26, 8. Ier. 1, 16, 1, Cor. 11, 29.
where that which is translated condemnation, is better judgment, that is,
punishment.

And these works are toward ones self or some other, of mercy or justice, and
must not be neglected. We must know that,

1 They are all of God: 2 Mark of what kind they are, favors, or
punishments. 3 Get somewhat out of them to instruct us in the knowledge or
worship of God.

But yet these kinds of judgments are not here meant. For besides, God
judges by his word, 1, Cor. 14, 24, he is judged of all, the word wherein they
are exercised judges him: so Ezech. 20, 4.

These are the judgments understood, which are many, some of greater, other of
less importance, as the branches and clauses of the word of God are.

These one is said to learn: 1 when he well understands them: 2 gets
that fruit by them which God would he should: 3 and in more particular uses
them, as a rule to frame every special office, and practice of life by.

The subject or party whose they are, is God, of whom sundry times we have
spoken before.

The quality remains: It may be doubted, to what the word righteousness may be
referred, for the Hebrew is, as that it may be thus, of thy righteousness, that
is, of thee who art righteous, as Psalm. 15, 1, in the mountain of thy
holiness, of thee who art holy: so Psalm. 51, 11. Take not thy holy spirit from
me, that is, the spirit of thee who art holy.

Or thus, of thy righteousness, that is, which are very just, for in the Hebrew
tongue substantives are put for adjectives, and then they signify some fulness
and perfection.

Both senses are true, and may be taken here, for God himself is righteous,
and his word.

Righteous is that which gives every thing the own.

Quest. How then is Gods word righteous, to promise us favor who are sinners,
can it be ours, or due unto us?

Aun. Certain it is that it is ours, not by our own desert, but, 1 by Gods
promise: 2 And be Christ's desert, so as God should not be righteous, if he
should not give favor to the faithful and repentant, having promised
himself, and his son deserved it.

Gods judgments are termed just, 1 being Gods, who is just: 2 endeavoring to
draw us to justice.

Let none therefore murmr at any word or work of God, and every one labor
to be the more righteous by them.

Hitherto have we considered the cause alone by it self, now it follows
joined with the effect. When I shall learn, then, etc.

1 He shows that there can be no sufficient praising of God, without learning
of his judgments.

2 That he would refer all his knowledge to the praising of God.

Thus much for David's fourth particular practice and duty the fifth follows in
the beginning of the eighth verse, I will keep thy statutes.

Whereof are two parts, the thing. profession of it.


Of the thing we may see before, verse, 4, the latter part of it, neither
shall any thing need to be said of the profession, that having been
declared, verse, 7, only some few questions may here be answered, and
observations taken.

Quest. David professes as though he had some ability in himself, is it so,
or whence was it?

Aun. All that David had was from God. An unregenerate man can do nothing, a
regenerate man by Christ, or Gods grace in him can do.

Quest. When James says, 4, 15, that we ought to say if the Lord will. etc,
whether does David offend, leaving it out?

Aun. David, though he leave it out in word, yet does he not so in heart: so
must we, and sin not.

Compare this profession with that wish above, verse, 5, O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes, that which he there prays for, here he
obtains.

Endeavor to profit is never unfruitful. So end many Psalms in hope and joy,
beginning with fear and grief.

Mark that David speaking thus boldly, fore-casteth the worst which might
hinder, so must every one do.

Thus much for the fifth special practice and duty, now follows the sixth and
last. Forsake me not over long. And is of the kind of deprecations, wherein a
thing is prayed to be kept away.

In this deprecation, may be considered the thing. persons.


The thing, not to be forsaken ouer-long.

Wherein are the kind, forsaking. measure, over long.


Forsaking in God must be considered as Gods presence is, for to his presence
is his forsaking contrary.

God is present by essence. works.


He is no where absent, nor forsakes in his essence, which is always every
where.

His works are of power, sustaining all creatures. grace.


Gods power so long as things are, is likewise present, when it is away things
cease to be. This is in all creatures, David speaks of men, and some: so as
that this absence of power is not here understood.

Grace is some peculiar favor of God. And is common. special.


Common is indeed a necessary gift to salvation, but not sufficient, and may
be in the reprobate; such is understanding of the saving doctrine in the Bible,
2 to be able to conceive prayer, etc, these many wicked men have.

Indeed these are many times taken away.

Special is a gift of salvation, and that in the elect, as faith, hope, and
charity.

Gods forsaking of a man in these is understood: for sometimes God takes even
these away, but we must remember that,

1 He never takes them away fully, some branches or sparkles of them remain,
as the root of a tree.

2 He never takes them away finally, if he take them away, he gives them
again.

Now God so takes these away, as that sometime,

1 He takes away the thing it self.

2 He takes the knowledge or feeling of the thing to be present.

3 He takes away the work and fruit of the thing: this is Gods forsaking.

Against all these David prays, and is grieved at them all.

1 Because, if God never so little forsake us, we cannot but quite forsake him.

Annas Burgeus had a good saying at his death to God, Forsake not me least I
forsake thee.

2 If God should thus forsake, he could have no comfort of his own salvation,
not having, or not finding or feeling faith, he could not bear the cross, or
rise from sin.

Thus much of the kind, the measure follows in English over long, the Hebrew
is [Meod] and does signify, 1 much: 2 continuance.

David desires to be forsaken neither way.

Much forsaking or great, appears in the want of a great grace, or being left
in a great cross or sin. This is death to a man.

Continuance is for length of time in a little grace tentation, or sin, or
cross. a greater. This is bell.


Thus would not David be left: 1 Though some of Gods children are: 2 Gods
children do tremble to think of this kind of forsaking.

Now follow the persons forsaking God. forsaken David, me.


Certain it is that God does forsake, as mankind in general, so his own
children. Yet,

1 God is always just, not being bound to his creatures.

2 We are not free from fault, we first forsake God, before he forsake us.

1 Wherefore in all forsakings seek to God. 2 Search out your own slippery
heart.

The person forsaken is David, who may be considered as a common man. man elect.


He is here to be understood as elect.

1 If David fear to be forsaken, who dare be secure?

2 In that David fears this, it is certain he called him self to account,
and marked when God was absent, present.

3 Know that the children of God, who never can fall away, may be brought to
fear, and think that they may fall away.

Let us all therefore gather what strength of grace we can.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF the Gospel.
WE will expound (by the help of God) the History of the Gospel.

This History contains the deeds and sayings of Christ, God and man: which
things, if any other, are most worthy to be known of all Christians.

1 As being, in the narration, which was to be set down of our blessed Savior.

2 Where also are the maine sentences of wholesome doctrine.

3 And which are a most clear commentary of the Law and the Prophets.

4 Whence the Apostles have drawn. 5 And the church does drink unto salvation.

Learned disputations before an unlearned multitude we omit.

Only we will draw one thread out of all four Evangelists, not neglecting to
our power, the description of times and places, after a rude manner.

And that we may finish this our task (all introductions set aside) we are to
know, the inscriptions, and the treatises.

The inscriptions are general, or particular.

The general is of all the books together, in Greek. Latin, whence also in
English.


In Greek, Tes kaines diathekes apanta, that is, all of the new Testament.

In Latin, Novum Jesus Christi testamentum, that is, the new Testament of Jesus
Christ.

The Greek inscription has the kind of that which is written, and the
perfection.

The kind of that which is written, is expressed in this word, Testament. This
is set out by an adiunct or property, new.

A testament is taken, 1 properly, for the last will of a man. 2 Improperly, for
a covenant, or league, or articles of agreement between parties.

And this testament sometimes, is unwritten, before the scriptures were penned.
written.


In this place the written testament is understood, which contains (as it
were) the last will of Christ, written down, and the articles of agreement
between Christ and men touching salvation.

Wherefore let us know that our labor in the testament, is to be bestowed in
reading, and hearing of these articles. 2 We are to take care, that we may
keep the conditions. 3 Nothing can be added, but of such as will forge and
falsify writings.

But it is also said to be new.

The covenant of God, has been either touching salvation. not touching
salvation.


Gods covenant touching salvation was double, 1 of works, with Angels, and
Adam before the fall. 2 Of faith, and it is with man alone, since the fall.

Sometimes the covenant of works is propounded after the fall, that it might
convince of sin, and prepare to the other covenant, which is of faith.

And this covenant of faith, is concerning men to be saved by faith on Christ.

This league in substance is truly one and the same, and has always been and
shall be: as being for Christ his sake, unto the same salvation.

Notwithstanding in diverse respects it is distinguished into, the old. new.


The old was by Moses, with the people of the Jews, until the resurrection of
Christ, placed in ceremonies, which was to die, and now truly is dead: and is
called old by reason of time and vanity, because that for oldnes it is vanished
away.

The new is by Christ, with the Christian people, always to endure and new,
clearly published by Christ, always the same, wherein more men are renewed:
hence is it called new.

Many truly were saved by this, before the coming of Christ, yet
notwithstanding because this covenant was not clearly propounded, it was not
then called new.

Wherefore this testament in that regard is said to be new, for that it
contains those books which do publish this testament, and that in this
manner, to wit more clearly, etc.

1 Let us remember that this testament is touching salvation: 2 And that our
own salvation.

3 To be laid hold on by faith. 4 And let our selves procure that it may be new
in renewing of us.

The perfection is noted in the word all. Whereby is declared,

1 That every one of these books is appertaining to the covenant.

So that the Papists are malicious, who exclaim that certain books are by
our men cut off from the Canon. For what if Luther doubted of one or two?

2 That no other book under any color is to be thrust upon the Church,
otherwise then Stapleton thinks, De libris pastoris.

The inscription which is commonly used in Latin, contains besides the kind
of the thing written, the person also of Jesus Christ, who is the storehouse of
salvation.

The particular inscription is of every book severally, and namely of the
Evangelists.

And it is in those four, uniform, containing of that which is written, the
kinde^ penman.


The kind of the writing is from the subject matter, a Gospel, not that, the
other books of the Epistles, and of the old testament have not the Gospel, but
the name remained in these, because that after the old testament, these
contained the Gospel more clearly revealed, and because they went before the
Epistles.

This word Gospel does declare glad tidings, such as especially this touching
salvation, is,

1 Of necessity this Gospel must be had from without our selves.

2 We are to rejoice herein before other things.

By use the Greek name is made also Latin.

In English Gospel, as it were, Godspell the word of God, or Ghostspell the
word of the spirit, by way of excellency. The word for the spirit, that is,
the soul.

The penmen are four, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John.

And they were only penmen as the particle, according, does declare. The
spirit suggested, they received: nevertheless Mark was helped by Peter, and
Luke by Paul.

Why four, why two of the Apostles, and two of the seauenty, why in this order
we omit to enquire.

Whom to understand, it will be profitable to remember.

1 That they do not after the same manner cite testimonies out of the old
testament: for sometimes they fetch them from the Hebrew, sometimes from the
Septuagint translation, sometimes they are carried with the free judgment of
the spirit.

2 That they follow rather the sums of doctrine, then the accurate
observation of times.

3 That they do not disagree, howsoever some things may seem to jar.

4 That they put the Hebrew tongue for the Syriake.

5 They are inspired of God.

6 They have a general and perpetual doctrine.

Matthew (who was before a publican) wrote first of all the eight year after
the ascension of Christ, and that (as some think) in the Hebrew tongue. Him
John translated into Greek, through the procurement of some. Mark wrote two
years after Matthew, being taught by Peter, and first of all (as some say) in
the Latin tongue.

Luke instructed by Paul, wrote the fifteenth year after the ascension of
Christ. At length John the thirty two years after Christ. He surviewed the
other three, approved them, and writ down against the heretics, certain
things which were left out.

1 Why should we not therefore learn out of these? seeing the Lord would have
such, and so excellent Authors to pen these things, would he not have al to
read and know the^?

2 And seeing these writings are inspired by God, let us read and hear them
with the direction of the spirit.

3 Neither let us ever think that this doctrine, confirmed with so many
witnesses, is to be doubted of. 4 And not with Ridly, Cromwell, Luther, to be
conned by heart.

Luk, 1, Chap: from the 1, ver. to the 5.

Hitherto have been the inscriptions: now follow the treatises to be compiled
into one narration.

Wherein are the praeface, and the narration.

The praeface is in the 1 of Luk, 1, 2, 3, 4, verse, which contains three
things, the person, the thing, the causes.

The person is of the writer, Luke. unto whom is written, the most noble
Theophilus.


The thing, is the orderly writing of those things, whereof we are fully
persuaded.

The causes are, impulsive. final.


The impulsive causes are from comparison of equals, or of less, and they are
three.

The first, it is as meet that I should as others, and peradventure more.

The second, if they have written being moved of themselves, why should not I
especially write, being stirred up by the spirit of God?

The third, I have known all things as certainly, and peradventure more
certainly then they: For they have delivered them unto me, which from the
beginning saw them their selves, and were Ministers of the word, and I have
searched out perfectly all things from the beginning.

The final cause is, that Theophilus might know the truth of those speeches
which he had heard.

The party writing is Luke, by profession a Physician, in regard of Country one
of Antiochia, one (as Epiphanius says) of the 70 Disciples. Luk, 10, 1. This
man is made an Evangelist, the 10 Apostles being passed by.

Understand that God is tied to no man, and that he calls whom so ever he
wills, to what function so ever it pleases him. Thus he made Paul that had
been a persecutor, to become an Apostle, and also Peter who was a fisherman.

So that, 1 We ought to distrust nothing which shall please the Lord, 2
Neither let us indeed ascribe any thing to secondarie causes, but all unto
God. 3 We ought so much the more to believe, because we see the power of God
to show it self in most contemptible things.

Que. But why does Luke alone take pains in writing of a praeface?

Aun. Not that his writings were not authentical, but for that being
instructed in Rethorique, he does thus purchase favor and attention (whence he
is thought to have written the best Greek:) as also that he might satisfy
the Church, requiring a reason of his fact, and might procure greatest
authority.

Wherefore use of humane learning, consisting in tongues and Arts, is not at all
altogether to be rejected, whiles it may serve to edefie the Church.

2 And godly men undertake nothing whereof they have not warrantable
inducements. 3 We are also to take care that our doctrine may be most
acceptable in the eyes of the world.

The person unto whom is written is Theophilus. Some think this name to be
appellatiue, others proper: look Baronius. 533.

He is most noble, that is, according to the Greek, placed in authority.

1 Princes are not excluded from the Kingdom of heaven.

2 The godly honor the chief men in the Church.

3 Christians do speak courteously and ciuilly, neither does that hinder
which is in Job, 32, 22.

Que. But why writ Luke unto this man?

Aun. Not only for private consideration, (for peradventure he had been
before instructed of Luke) but also for the good of the Church. For if a man in
great place and authority shall have once received the word, others also will
receive the same.

4 Wherefore we ought especially labor to bring all those unto Christ, which
are in any high place, not only for themselves, but for the Church, that
others may be converted unto the faith, and confirmed in the same.

5 Godly men must be holily wise.

6 Neither does this book any thing more contain particular doctrine, because
of this compellation or dedication, then the Epistles of Paul.

The thing it self follows, which is the writing of an orderly disposed
narration, etc, as was showed before.

Wherein are the manner, orderly disposed, etc. matter, those things whereof
we are fully persuaded.


The manner contains 3 things: narration, order, writing.

A narration is a plain propounding, and setting forth of the thing as it is
in it self, without any external glosing.

So as the Evangelists ought to propound nothing which is not received: and no
coloring is either to be set upon it, or to be expected.

The order, from point to point: with respect had of the time, that the truth
might be more manifested, and the memory helped.

So likewise let us also endeavor, to keep in memory, sayings, and writings.

Writing is a setting down, in books or monuments.

So as we ought to receive nothing which is unwritten.

The matter follows, those things whereof we are fully persuaded. He means
the deeds and sayings of Christ. Wherefore let us hear of Christ.

These are said to be fully persuaded of: the persons in whom, we.

The word in the Greek which signifies to be fully persuaded of, is a
metaphore borrowed from ships, which are carried with full sail, and it
signifies a most certain persuasion of the truth, so as nothing can make us
to recoile from it, no not death, or any thing else.

This persuasion is proper to faith, necessarily required in every one of us.

The persons, we, to wit the Disciples and Apostles that were called, none
other. Wherefore the Gospel was in the world: neither was it believed of all.

Let us not therefore much disquiet our selves, if now also all do not believe
the Gospel.

And seeing that Luke does bring in the called alone, to bear witness for the
truth of this doctrine, let us know that not what the world, but what the
called do, is to be regarded.

The causes follow, and first the impulsive.

The first, as was reheased before.

These men were, many. Cerinthus, Merinthus, as Epiphan: says. 186.

Apelles, Basilides, and others, under the names of Thomas, Matthew, as Ambr:
witnesses, also under the names of James, and Nichodemus. Peradventure he
means others, which had written before him, men inspired of God: but these
were not many, they were only two.

The force of the reason is: that we ought to be as diligent for the true
doctrine, as others are for that which is false.

We gather therefore that diverse forged, Apocriphall, and such like writings
should be in the Church. So as there is required very great judgment in
reading.

Wherefore let us not be dismayed with Popish writings, but let us try all
things, and keep that which is good.

2 That every man is according to his place, to encounter with false teachers.

And these only have taken in hand, not finished: but I will (says Luke) go
thorough withal.

The second reason: they did it of their own heads, but I do it by the
instigation of the holy Ghost.

Observe that wicked men do intrude themselves into matters without a calling:
that godly men undertake duties, God only moving them.

Que. But it may be demanded, how I shall know that I am stirred up of God to
do any thing.

Aun. By observing these things. 1 That the work be honest. 2 That you be
furnished with gifts neceslatie for the discharge of it. 3 That moving
authority concur, God within us, the Church or the commonwealth, or the
family without us. 4 That you seek to obey God, and to do good unto others.

The third reason is in the verse, 2, 3. Verse, 2. and 3.
I know all things most perfectly, wherein he shows the work of others
toward him, and his own industry toward the thing it self.

The work of others is, as they have delivered them unto us, which from the
beginning, etc. by whom is meant the Apostles. For these were they which saw
them their selves, and were Ministers of the word.

Where is contained a description, 1 of persons; which are such, as saw; or
were Ministers of the word. 2 Of action, have delivered.

By the word, some understand Christ not vnsitly: but Luke does not use to
speak so. I think therefore that the preaching of the Gospel is meant: look
Piscator upon this place.

I gather, 1 That the word of God is known to no body from himself.

2 That the word of God is most excellent, whereunto the Apostles have served
as Ministers: so as none ought to contemn the base function of the ministry.

3 That those which saw, and were ministers of the word, ministered unto the
word, and not unto themselves.

The action is, have delivered: that is, have related by word of mouth.

Is there place then to be given unto traditions? yes surely to written
traditions, but not to unwritten: excepting only such as appertain to decent
and comely order, and not to godliness.

Observe. 1 That those which saw, had not forgotten the word.

2 That they rehearsed to others those things which they knew themselves.

Hitherto concerning the work of others toward him: now follows his own
endeavor, he had searched out all things perfectly from the beginning. The
act, he had searched out. The object, all things, etc.

He searched out, not only sought after, as namely who had learned and
understood them.

Obseru: 1 That Luke followed after holy men. 2 He looked for fruit by
conuersing with them, and seeks after all things that appertain unto Christ,
from them that understood them.

3 He does not give over before he has attained.

4 He gets that which he seeks. Our travail is never in vain.

Perfectly. 1 As that nothing was wanting. 2 He will not slightly know these
things but thoroughly: for number to have all, and to make use of. This must be
our study, neither is it blamed, if it be not most fruitful. It must be most
diligent, for instruction and use, to inform others.

All things, they be the speeches and deeds of Christ, howbeit not all, but
such as were necessary unto salvation: for the world could not contain the
books that should be written of all.

Understand therefore that wholesome things are to be sought out.

2 And that learned men know more themselves, then is needful they should
teach others. 3 That only the salvation of the hearers is to be aimed at.

Also he searched out these things from the beginning, which respects the
order, namely from the first ministry of John. And he went thorough unto the
end. Thus also we must do.

Hitherto were the impulsive causes: that thou might acknowledge, etc.

Wherein are certain propositions.

1 Theophilus was instructed in the word.

2 Yet the acknowledging of the truth is necessary.

3 Theophilus did not at the first acknowledge the truth of those things
whereof he had heard.

4 Luke wrote the Gospel, that Theophilus might acknowledge the truth.

The doctrine and use is manifold.

Observe out of the first proposition. 1 What catechizing or instructing is.

2 That it ought to go before.

3 That Catechizing and a larger manner of expounding, and applying the word of
God, are for substance all one. Only after Catechizing a more accurate and
large exposition is necessary.

4 That Theophilus, a man of ripe years was catechized, and stood in need
thereof: so as we ought not to scorn it. That it is also necessary. And seeing
we are instructed from our youth, there is good reason why we ought to be more
learned.

But how if we have cause to examine our selves, and search whether we have no
need of Catechizing?

5 That Theophilus, a most excellent man for place and offspring, gave his mind
unto catechizing, and that he spared so much time from his own business to
bestow on this.

Observe out of the second proposition. 1 What is that which is translated
certainty, namely, that truth whereof a man is persuaded.

Whereon who so ever rests, he shall never fall, nor miscarie.

Of such is the word of God in it self. Wherefore fearful is the speech of
one, calling the History of Christ a fable.

And he that groundeth upon the word of god cannot err.

2 That such truth is to be acknowledged.

Now acknowledgement has, 1 More full understanding. 2 Distinction. 3
Profession.

Out of the third proposition, after the proof of it, search whether in the
world there is not always the same slacknes in the hearers of the word: which
we shall understand by the causes of it: which are, 1 The excellency of the
doctrine it self, going beyond our capacity, which even not Adam knew in
paradise. 2 The deprauation of our nature. 3 The spiritual adversaries. 4 The
slender using of means. 5 The contempt of the doctrine it self.

Que. But whence may we be able to judge of our acknowledging?

Aun. Out of the former.

Theophilus being learned, yet did not he sufficiently understand.

1 Much less did the unlearned.

2 Observe that ignorance if it will amend it self, and go on to
acknowledgement, does not condemn.

Luke does not forsake rude Theophilus.

Out of the fourth proposition observe. 1 That to acknowledge the truth, means
are requisite. 2 That the care of the Ministers must be, that the hearers may
have the certainty.

But why? Aun. Not only for the solid comfort of the hearers, but unless the
certainty be acknowledged, the godly shall halt in their duties. For they shall
not so put their affiance in God as they ought.

3 That writing is sufficient to persuade touching the certainty, and therefore
miracles are not to be expected.

4 If once writing sufficed, ought not much more, so often reading and
preaching establish our faith?

John, 1, Chap: from the 1, ver: to the 15.

Hitherto has been the praeface: the narration follows, in the rest of the
whole body of the Gospels.

And it is summarie, of the whole Gospel. particular and distinct of every
several branch.


The summarie narration is contained in the first Chapter of John, from the
beginning of the first ver: to the end of the 14.

And it is concerning our Savior Christ, God and man, and that either in
himself, or in the ministry of John the Baptist, both which (the order
scarsely observed) are here contained.

Now the sum of the 14 verses, is a description of Christ, God and man. Whereof
are two parts: the former touching his deity, the latter touching his humanity.

That which is touching his deity, is from the first verse to the end of the
13. Wherein he avouches that Christ is God, showing it himself, as also
confirming it by testimony.

He shows it in the ver: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

In the doctrine touching Christ his deity, two things are to be considered,
his essence. person.


His essence in the ve: beginning and ending, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10.

And here are comprehended, his eternity, the name, and appellation of God,
his effects.

The person is noted in these words, was with God.

His eternity is propounded in the first verse, repeated in the second.

Seeing the Church by way of teaching uses the words of essence and person
(although they be not found in the scripture) we are to expound the same.

The essence is, that whereby the deity has his being, and it is common.

The person is, that whereby the deity is distinguished, and it is proper.

There is only one essence, but a three fold person, the Father, the Son, the
holy Ghost.

This is therefore the drift of John, namely to show that Christ is both God,
and also a distinct person.

This is the sum, now let us consider the words of the text.



In the beginning was the word, this is the first proposition, for the deity
of Christ, proved from his eternity, the most plain and natural disposition
whereof is thus. The word was in the beginning.

And here may be considered, the subject, the word. attribute, was in the
beginning.


The Greek word which is translated Word, signifies either reason, or speech.
Tertullian in this place does translate it reason.

But we will not innouate any thing. The English translation has it, word, it
had been better speech, but that use has so prevailed. For a word is but one,
speech does consist of many, which respect is agreeable to Christ.

All do agree that by the word is meant, Christ, namely he of whom all we,
and the new testament do so clearly preach: but all do not agree in the same
motion or reason of it.

We omit nice and crabbed questions, only we will endeavor to do good.

This word may be taken, 1 passiuely, touching whom the word is. 2 Actiuely,
who is the word and the speaker.

I suppose that both ways, it may rightly be understood in this place. For the
whole speech of the scriptures is concerning Christ, John, 1, 45. Luk, 24, 25,
27, ver.

Actiuely, by a metaphor, who has disclosed the counsel of God the Father
touching our salvation, John, 1, 18. Heb: 1, 1, John, 4, 25. Math. 17, 5.

I am not ignorant what the Fathers say, concerning speech uttered by mouth,
and conceived in the mind.

These things which are spoken of Christ, are to be understood, all others
excluded.

Use.

Seeing that all speech in the scripture is touching Christ, let us seek him
in our reading and hearing.

2 And seeing he speaks of the counsel of God, let us hear him.

3 It is a great matter to bear the name of a Preacher, delivering this word.

Observe the excellency of the word.

Hitherto has been the subject, now follows the attribute, was in the
beginning.

Beginning here is meant in regard of time, when things began to be: wherefore
in the 1 of John, 1, Chap: 1, ver: it is said from the beginning.

Que. Began he therefore then to be, as some heretics thought?

Aun. No: for the affirming of the present, does not deny the time past: but
John would have it thus understood, when things began, then this word appeared,
as 1, Genesis and the 3. Gen: 15, after the fall, not when he was first brought
forth into the world.

The word is from eternity, but as soon as time is, he appears.

That we might always set before our eyes the word. And seek him.

Neither judge of things ever according to outward appearance.

Was, that is, subsisted in the preterperfect tense, declaring his eternity;
he is God from himself, a person from the Father, by an unutterable manner of
begetting. Math. 3, 17. Luk, 3, 22.

And this word was, declares him to have been God before all worlds.

Every eternal thing is God. The heathen and heretics are condemned, and all
the Jews, which deny the eternity of Christ.

2 Learn also the certainty of the salvation of the elect, which is grounded
upon the eternal word.

3 Also that our happiness shall with him endure for ever.

And the word was with God, this is the second proposition, for the
personalitie (that we may so speak) of the word. Wherein are to be considered
the particle (and) and the sentence.

The particle (and,) declares that it is not sufficient to believe the word
to be God, but also a distinct person.

The sentence will be clear, after these words are opened, with God.

God is taken essentially, often for the whole Trinity. personally, for the
father, as in this place, so also John, 17, 3.


With whom to be, shows that the father and the son have each their being.
Now this cannot be but in equal and distinct persons. The Father therefore is
one, the Son is another: see the 3 of Math: 16, 17. Math: 28, 19.

This distinction is only by an incommunicable property, the father
begets, the son is begotten.

In these things let us be wise according to the scriptures, in our judgment.
speeches.


Equality is by which the word is in essence, divine attributes, and works
equal.

But it may be objected: the Father is greater then the Son.

Aun. In regard of human nature, not otherwise.

Use.

Let us remember that God is so to be worshipped, as the mystery of the
Trinity requires, otherwise we shall not worship him.

2 That there is the same nature, will, etc. of the word, with the Father. So
as being persuaded of the good pleasure of Christ concerning our salvation, we
cannot doubt of the Fathers.

3 Hence an answer may be returned to such as demand, what was before the
world.

The third proposition, and that word was God.

Word, as before, also the verb was. God in this place is not put personally
but essentially, as it is used upon every of the three persons: otherwise the
same should be affirmed of the same, the word is the word.

Expressly therefore the word is called God, neither is it so called only, but
also is so indeed. Many testimonies may be here heaped up.

Use.

1 Though the word be God, yet is there but one God.

Que. How can it be that 3 should be called God, and there be only one.

Aun. Very well: by reason of the indiuisiblenes of essence. It is also a most
profound mystery, where-into we are not to diue.

2 The cavil of Arrius is excluded, calling Christ a made God. He was God from
himself before all times.

3 The word of Christ, and concerning Christ, is divine.

Hereunto we are most diligently to attend.

4 Even to the word, seeing he is God, prayers are due, otherwise then the
Papists falsely say we do deny.

Thus has been the proposition in the deity and person of the word, the
repetition follows in the 2, verse.

1 Whence let us understand, that in teaching place is to be given to
repetitions.

2 And that the article of that doctrine is not learned altogether, and at once.

3 And these words in the beginning, are to be repeated by a certain property
of speech, called Apo koinou.

Hitherto has been the setting down of the doctrine: the confirmation of the
divine essence of the word follows.

And it is, from effects, verse, 3, 4, 5. testimony, in the rest.


The effects are all things existing, which seeing they had their first being
from God, and now are said to have been by the Word they prove the Word to be
God.

That the Word created all things, the Evangelist shows by a distribution.
For all things that are, are either void of life, living creatures, endued with
a reasonable soul: these the Word made, therefore all things.

The 3 verse serves to prove the first part of the minor proposition: the
fourth and fifth do serve for the second and third.

The 3 ver: is enlarged by a Pleonasmus, as John, 1, 20. Psalm. 40, 10, 11. Esa,
38, 1.

And it has two propositions. The first: all things were made by it. The
second: and without it was made nothing that was made.

In the first there are contained three things. The Author, implied in the
word, it. 2 The things that were made, all things. 3 The manner of making, by
it.

It, that is, the word, Heb. 1, 10. Psalm. 102, 26. Heb. 1, 2. Yet not alone,
but with the Father, and the holy Ghost. The works of the Trinity unto any
thing without, Opera ad extra.
are inseperable from any person: wherefore the Jews observe that the name of
God is of the plural number.

Que. Why therefore does the Evangelist so diligently set down that which is
now so common and vulgar a thing in divinity?

Aun. The mystery of the Trinity was not so distinctly known. Add to this,
that the Jews did acknowledge rather one God, then three persons, and truly
least of all supposed they the son of Mary to have been God.

Use.

Seeing that the Word, who also was made man and our Savior, has created all
things, let us know that we having the Word, have titles and interest to the
creatures, according to the measure of the gift of God, otherwise not: so as we
are first to seek for him.

He does also no less give unto us then he did at the first create: that if we
have any thing, we are to render thanks unto him.

The things made, are, all things, which considered together, they argue his
power, severally, his wisdom and mercy. All things, both the greatest and
the smallest, and those evils which are now called the evils of punishment.
Genesis 1. Mala paenae.
Psalm. 33, 6.

Wherefore seeing that no other cunning Artificer, but even the Word himself
has created the very least things, let us know that they are most worthy our
consideration, and let us bestow some labor in meditating of them, even of
Lyce and Pismeeres.

Quest. But how does God create the evils of punishment? An. Surely they are
very good, and most profitable.

All things are meant that Angels may not be excluded, and invisible spirits,
yea the whole world.

Wherefore those Philosophers err which make the world to have no beginning.

In this place notwithstanding, I think all things are put Synecdochically for
the creatures without life: as the heavens, the earth, the meteores, the
elements, and those things which are dug out of the earth.

Wherefore natural Philosophy is very profitable, which unfolds the natures
of these things.

The manner of making is implied in these words, by it.

Hereof also 2 things are auerred. What is the manner of their existence,
namely, that they were made: and how, by it.

They exist when they are first brought forth into being.

Also they are sustained and vpholden. Heb. 1, 3.

Moreover they are administered and governed.

By it, that is, (as I guess) he commanding: so in the 1, of Genesis For Gods
saying is there commanding.

Learn the power of Gods word, when God himself wills.

And let us accuse our selves, so incredulous to believe, and stiff necked to
obey the word of God.

Learn also to use the word (nature) aright.

Hitherto has been the first proposition: the second follows: and without it
was made nothing that was made.

And it seems to be a secret answer to an objection, which might thus be
gathered: Are evil things then made by him, namely sins?

Aun. No: an evil thing was never made, therefore it is not by the word.

Que. What is then the original of sin?

Aun. The Creators forsaking of the creature, and the abuse of free will in the
creature.

Que. Is it not therefore God (be it spoken without blasphemy) the occasion of
sin?

Aun. Nothing at all. God is tied or bound to no creature, he is most free.

Thus far proceeded the first part of the distribution: In it was life.

By it, is meant the word, as was said before. Was, also, as before, that is
subsisted from eternity. Only we are to enquire concerning life, and the
particle, in.

Life improperly so called, which is a vigor, whereby things continue in their
proper condition, is not to be understood in this place: because in that sense
it was taken in the member going before.

But life, properly so called, is to be conceived.

And it is natural. spiritual. heavenly.


All these are within the word, yet natural life seems here especially to
be meant.

The particle, in, delareth that it is in the word, as in a fountain, that it
may be transfused into the Church.

Hitherto we are rather to understand it of life transfused into the Church.
Notwithstanding, these things are not spoken more of the Word, then of the
Father, and the holy Ghost. Look the branch, concerning things made.

We gather therefore. 1 That the Word is the fountain of life, John, 5, 26,
Acts, 17, 28, Colo, 3, 4. John, 14, 6.

Wherefore the name nature is wisely to be used.

2 We are to give thanks unto the Word for life received, what soever means
have been used.

3 If what things the Word had in himself, the same he does derive into us,
why should not we likewise do so unto our brethren?

4 Seeing life is from him, we are even to frame our natural life according to
his will. Now natural life stands in nourishing, growing, procreation, and
the senses.

5 Neither can there be a better rule of governing life the^ the Word. Gala, 2,
20.

The third member remains, And the life was the light of men, etc. Verse, 4,
and 5.

And here are contained a proposition in the end of the fourth verse: an
explication in the fifth.

Every word severally of the proposition is to be unfolded.

Life is put for the fountain, or that which springs from hence. Here is
meant the fountain, as immediately before is set down, that which springs
from it.

In this place the person which is the fountain, is understood, which is life,
and many other things. So is Christ life, John 14, 6, Colo, 3, 4, that the Word
himself is here to be meant.

Was, as before, he truly being life from himself. For so the Son has life
in himself, Ioh, 5, 26, to wit, essentially, and he is the Lord of life, Acts,
3, 15. By his voice, those that were dead in sin are raised up.

He so was, that he always is, and remains.

Light is that which makes manifest, Ephe, 5, 13.

And it is uncreated. created.


Uncreated, as God, light of light.

Created, which is taken properly. improperly.


Properly, whereof is handled in natural Philosophy. Improperly, so it is in
this place, and it is a metaphor or borrowed word. For even as light makes all
things manifest, so does the Word: and it is well translated in the latin Lux,
not lumen.

Now this light is an instrument and gift of perceiving, and it is natural.
supernatural.


Natural which is intellectual, a gift given by GOD to man, whereby he is
able to understand things.

Supernatural is, of grace. glory.


The Word is light, that is, the fountain of this manifold light, yet
notwithstanding, this place is to be understood of natural light, as it may
appear out of the 9. verse.

And it is the reasonable soul with the faculties and instruments, hereof the
Word is the maker, which because from the first creation of it, it had a
knowledge of divine truth, and now has certain sparkles thereof, it is called
light: and that truly, not only because it is precious as light, but for that
as the Sun has it self to the world, so this light unto man.

Men, are all, and every one: so that of necessity we are to understand this
of natural light, either before, or after the fall.

He was also the light of Angels, but the speech is directed to men, he
speaks nothing of Angels.

These are the words, the use follows.

1 The principal thing in a man is his reasonable soul, for the beautifying
whereof we are to labor.

2 So is the Word light, as that he does impart and communicate the same.

He gives the soul indeed after a special manner, in putting it into the
body he creates it, and in creating it he does put it in.

It is not by propagation.

It is not a portion of divine essence.

3 That witness and skill wheresoever they be, are to be acknowledged the
gifts of God.

4 Seeing that God does instill natural light, there is cause why we should
increase the same for the use of this life.

5 If natural light be from the Word, is not much more supernatural: so as we
are more to labor for this.

Thus has been the proposition:

In the first sentence we are to search concerning the light it self, and the
attribute, or that which is affirmed of it.

Light is either God, or a creature.

Light is put for God, as 1, Ioh, 1, 5. Now the name of God is taken
essentially, and is truly used upon the 3. persons.

But here it is applied and attributed unto the Word, as it appears out of
the context. Besides Christ himself, John, 8, 12. calls himself light.

Indeed most justly. Who was not only prefigured in the Vrim of the Priests,
but also in the Candlestick.

Moreover, Esaias, 60, 2, and Luke 1, 78. In which respect also he may be called
the day star, 2, Pet, 1, 19, Mala, 4, 2, he is called a sun. Hence the
imitation into Christ is called light, 2, Cor, 4, 4, and we are said to have
received light, Heb, 10, 32.

Now Christ is called light by a metaphor or borrowed kind of speech. 1 For
that he is the brightness of the glory of his Father, Heb, 1, 3.

2 For that there shines unto us the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ, 2, Cor, 4, 6.

3 That as the light is some spiritual thing, so it is certain, that the
Word, as he is considered in himself with the Father, is of that nature.

4 What things the light effects, he does much more, namely to lay things
open, to declare differences, to show the way unto our feet. etc.

5 Because there is no darkness in him, that is no sin, nor affection to it.

6 And because it is most excellent light, as that it can darken the sight of
the eye, which we can never thoroughly behold.

Quest. How are the Apostles said to be the light of the world?

Aun. By reason of the light of doctrine.

Wherefore let us know, 1 That what things we would know touching God the
Father, the same are to belearned from this light: He is in the bosom of the
Father Ezegesato,
he has declared him, hear him.

2 When as the light shines in the face of Christ, it is in regard of his
incarnation, otherwise we were not able to perceive the brightness. Wherefore
even as they which see the eclipse of the sun in the water, so let us behold
God through the slesh.

3 That carnal and sensual thoughts are to be removed. This light is a
spirit, and to be worshipped in spirit, and to be beheld by the eyes of the
mind. Indeed we shall see with our bodily eyes, his body in heaven.

4 As Christ lays all things open, so especially those things which
appertain unto salvation, Esaias, 9, 2. Luke, 1, 79, Luke, 2, 32. Without him
there is no light unto salvation. Wherefore Paul, Ephe, 3, 4. Christ is the
key of the Scriptures, etc. He is he that gives light.

5 Yea, he bewrays as light, what difference there is betwixt the Law, and
the Gospel. Heb, 5, 14, Philip, 1, 10.

6 He shows the way unto heaven, he is the light, the life, and the way:
without him we shall wander, and go out of the way.

7 None can truly believe in Christ, and yet have a purpose to sin.

What communion is there betwixt light and darkness? The light scatters
darkness.

This is the subject, the attribute follows. Shines in the darkness.

To shine, in this place, is to show it self clearly. For it is the Sun.

Besides, the time is to be considered, which signifies that it is now, and
continual.

Who therefore would not open his eyes, considering that Christ shines, Esa.
60, 1.

2 Seeing Christ had no need to shine to himself, but only to his, why
should not we shine to others, and not hide the good things we have?

3 At the time when John wrote, Christ had ascended into heaven, and yet he
says that he now shines, even as he did before.

Wherefore now also he shines, that if we would open our eyes, we cannot be
ignorant. Let us take heed that this be not our condemnation, that the light
came into the world, and we loved darkness.

4 And seeing he does continually shine, men shall be without excuse.

But he shines in the darkness.

Darkness is properly, to the eyes. improperly, to the mind.


The light truly shines every where, yet notwithstanding there is this darkness
of the mind.

By darkness, is meant a thing that is dark, the adiunct being put for the
subject, as wickedness for a wicked man.

This darkness therefore are men, as Ephe. 5, 8, hence are the works of darkness.
Truly such are men by nature after the fall. Where we are to consider the
affection and the measure.

The affection or privation, is a loss of light. This light was the glory of
the image of God, seated in the mind, and in the will.

This is wholly lost in matters of salvation.

The measure is so great, that we are darkness it self, not only dark, and
surely the very darkness of Egypt that might be felt, which do not only want
light, but also shut it out, that how great this darkness is, we can hardly
judge.

1 How great therefore is our misery, so long as we live in the darkness of our
minds, and of our wills.

2 So, as that we see this to be the cause of ignorance, errors, and all manner
of sins.

3 Neither are we able to do any thing so long as we are in this darkness,
wherewith we are ouer-whelmed.

4 Why do we not therefore use all means that we may be in the light?

The second sentence or proposition is this, and the darkness comprehended it
not.

Whatsoever difficulty is in this place, it is in the word, comprehended,
which properly signifies to hold all. The whole light all the creatures are
not able to contain: neither does the Evangelist signify this. It is certain
that the fault of darkness is here meant, which is, that they had not
apprehended it, rather then not comprehended it.

Neither is this not apprehending every way condemned. For who apprehends
what things were done before the world? Here therefore is reprehended the not
apprehending of those things, which are necessary to salvation. Of which
condition are these: to be ignorant that the Word is God, that the Word ought
to be made man, that he is the Savior of the world, that he is to be laid hold
on by faith.

A man may be in the midst of light, he himself notwithstanding remaining
blind. Wherefore let us not footh up our selves in the bare having of the
means.

2 We sin grievously, if we see not the light which shines.

Then God reputeth us not to comprehend the light, when we be ignorant of those
things which tend to our own faluation.

John, 1, Chap: 6, 7, verse, There was a man sent from God.


The party witnessing is, a man sent from God, whose name was John: that which
he witnessed is, that he came for a witness, etc.

In the party we may consider, the condition of the party, a man: his warrant,
sent from God: his name, John.

It is said he was, otherwise then before, where a being in the word it self
was implied, here is meant, that he so was made and created.

Aman: that is, borne of a woman, of mankind, a male, a man grown, as may
appear, in that John's ministry began a little before Christ's baptising,
when Christ was about 30 years, John was but six months before him.

Que. But why, may some body say, needs this, to say, that John was of
mankind, etc.

Aun. Some by occasion of Mal: 3, 1, did think that John was an Angel in
nature: nay, the Jews at this time of John's ministry, could not well tell
what to think of him: as John, 1, 21, for ending of which doubts, it is here
said, he was a man: that is, as of the nature of man, so having the most
infirmities of man, and nothing to outward show more then ordinary.

Hereby we see, that even in great matters, God uses the ministry of men.
This appears through the body of scriptures.

1 God does thus for our good, that we may the better learn things taught.
For if GOD himself, or an Angel should teach us, we should be so astonished, as
that we could not mark, or attend.

2 Secondly, to try our faith: for if God himself, or Angels should teach, we
might for fear attend; but when men like our selves, subject to the like, and
greater passions then our selves, teach, and we learn, it is manifest that the
evidence of the truth prevails with us.

Let us therefore attend to the ministeries of men, not looking for Angels or
revelations.

And seeing that John was so a man, as that he had no other outward grace of
countenance, friends, speech, etc: let us know that these outward things give
no sound force to the word, to prevail with our consciences, but only that
which carries, is the evident truth of the word of God.

His warrant follows, sent from God: where mark that John would do nothing
without his warrant, no more should we.

Now here we may consider, the party sending, God: the kind of John's warrant,
sent.

God is Father, Son, and holy Ghost, who only is able, and careful to send.
Math. 28, 18, 19. Ephe. 4, 11. Matthew, 9, 38.

1 Wherefore we wanting John's, are in Gods displeasure; desirous to have them,
must seek to him; having them, must thank him for them.

2 John's sent, must carry themselves in compass of their commission, as being
sent from God.

3 All must entertain such as are sent from GOD accordingly, with due respect
of the sender.

The kind of John's warrant follows, sent, that is, he having direction what
to do, was commanded to go about it. God commanded thus by his word, Luke
3, 2.

One might ask, whether this word were by mouth, or to the minds, immediate by
God himself, or some others: but it is more curious then needs. It was most
like to be to John's mind, by the instinct of the holy Ghost, which John had
from his mothers womb, Luk, 1, 15.

For it is not probable, that in those corrupt times, any should whet on, John
outwardly. John began his ministry somewhat before Christ.

This word of God to John, implies a sufficiency in John. God never sends
but such as are furnished with abiliments for the duties doing: such ability is
called a gift.

As John did, so must all, not go about any thing, without, as warrant, so in
particular, and from the word of God, so as all must be certain, that they are
sent.

Que. How may that be, will some body say?

Aun. When I have a gift, and authority will have me use it.

When may I judge I have a gift? When I have used the means, and have
approbation of those who are to try, and judge.

1 Authority is of God in his word, allowing by his spirit, stirring to be
willing to use our gift.

2 Men calling to the use thereof, and setting (to that end) in some place.

It may be said John was not so, he had no calling of or from men. Aun. Sending
or calling is ordinary, or extraordinary.

Ordinary requires always human authority, so does not extraordinary.

Indeed extraordinary, though it have not vocation of men before, yet it has
approbation of them for afterward, as the seal for ratifying of the sending.
Now then John's calling was extraordinary.

This calling has place in disordered Churches, which are beginning to be
reformed, not in settled and confirmed Churches. Of the former kind the Jews
Church was, when John first came.

By this may we answer our adversaries of the Church of Rome, demanding us
whence Luther and Zuinglius came, being sent from no human authority, whence
the Ministers who after succeeded sprang, since none were made by Bishops,
usually so called.

These men's first calling in part, was extraordinary, and therefore could have
no human authority, which was so disordered, as that it had need to be
reformed.

The times were as those in which John Baptist came: it may appear by Gods
raising up Zuinglius and Luther about one time in sundry places, neither
knowing of other: by the wonderful gifts of the spirit they had: by Luthers
strange preservation, and bringing on still to see more and more: by their
success, that in part their calling was extraordinary.

Nevertheless, they were made elders by their ordinary Bishops, and they
being elders, ordained others successively.

The learned know that Bishop and elder, so called in the scriptures, differ
not much: so as that way, they had warrant enough.

Lastly, the approbation of the Church, and success, sufficiently shows the
lawfulnes of their coming and reforming.

This sending is mentioned, as being that which will afford courage to any in
his place.

His name John, of a word, which signifies to show favor and grace.

Now he was thus called, because God bestowed him upon his parents in their
old age as a special grace and favor, and for that he should be a chief
Preacher of grace. This name was foretold, Luk, 1, 13. given Luk, 1, 60.63.

One John, writ this Gospel, and is called he whom Jesus loved: this mentioned
here is not he.

Another is the Baptist, who came preaching and baptising: this is John, that
is the Baptist.

Now sithence the spirit of God notes names, let us know he looks to greater
matters: 2, and let us not be secure, even in the least: 3, besides, when we
have occasion to give names, let us appoint such as may put us in mind of some
good.

comparison, simply in the seventh verse, by comparison in the other.

The simple setting out of the office, shows the chief point thereof. To
witness, which is made known by his readiness, in that he came: by that
whereof he witnessed, of the light: by the end, that all might believe by him.

John's readiness, appears in that it is said, he came without delay after he
was furnished with gifts, and warranted by calling.

So must every one of us, after enabling by gifts, called of God, not defer.

God was angry with Moses for excusing: he punished Jonas for starting aside;
if any discouragements should have prevailed they might with John, but he brake
thorough all.

He witnessed. To witness, is to show somewhat of any thing.

John showed 1 the truth, John, 10, 41, 2 He made things more clear, as
witnesses should, he pointed to the Lamb of God.

It may be objected John, 5, 33, 34, as though Christ refused his witness.

Aunsw. Christ speaks there as not needing himseffe John's testimony, Christ
himself was of sufficient credit alone.

But here it is said, John came to witness, for the Church, which had need,
and to make things clear to it, which it could not easily perceive.

Mark then how careful the Lord is for his Church, that though himself need
none, yet will use men for their own benefit, so as that if we should not
profit thereby, we should be too too forgetful of our own good.

2 And that we had need to have things made easy, as well as those to whom
John came.

Quest. How did John witness, by word, work, writing, some or all?

Aun. Only by word, he did no miracle, John, 10, 41, and yet he was an
extraordinary man, and his ministry very strange. Whereby we may perceive
our adversaries have small reason to require them of Luther, Zuinglius, etc,
more then of John. We teach the same doctrine that John and Christ did, and
have the same miracles which he did for confirmation. So as that himself
should be a monster, who should now look for miracles, which often the wicked
and hypocrites have done.

Christ was content with one John's witness. How inexcusable should we be, not
believing so many Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Teachers, etc?

John bare witness of the light. The light before mentioned, is called the
Word. All the Ministry is to spread abroad this light. All hearing should be to
be enlightened heerin.

The end, that all, etc, shortly it is, that there should be belief.

To believe, is a word that cannot be understood without respect to another.
Somewhat must one believe. It is here to be vnder-stoode as John witnessed: so
as the meaning is, that they might believe that which John witnessed.

1 John did witness that he was God, 2 made man, 3 taking away the sins of
the world, 4 they had withal a settled purpose to believe, whatsoever more
should be revealed touching this light, else had they not sufficiently believed.

Now believing in it self, is to take knowledge of the thing that I believe,
what it is, and what the meaning of it is. 2 To be persuaded that that which I
believe is true, and worthy to be respected even to my good, whereupon I will
endure any thing rather then shrink from it. 3 To apply it particularly unto
my self.

Now this end was intended by God, and John, and effected.

And it is made known, by the parties whom it concerns, and the instrument
thereof.

The parties are all.

The Scripture uses to say all, of some, says Theophilact.

So does it here all, that is sundry sorts, not all and every particular.

Thus sometimes it signifies the greater part, sometime the better, and may be
discerned by the place where it is.

Here it is the best, such as are ordained to salvation, for those are the
best part of the world: so as that these all, are such who are appointed to
salvation, and life everlasting: none other. Indeed diverse have outward
means, but never with intent on Gods part to have them blessed: For he will
have some hardened, and not believe in his everlasting decree, though they
continue in unbelief by their own sin.

So as that it is not true, that God in his everlasting counsel would have
every particular man in the world saved.

Indeed such general speeches are used, 1 to teach us that we should not give
definitive sentence of any, to say such a one is a reprobate, that only is in
God.

2 That when we hear or read, the Word to speak so at large, our selves
every one should particularly apply unto our selves.

3 When we find our selves to believe, we should not lift up our selves in
conceit above others. God is no other to us then to others. He is all in his
mercy.

Thus much for the parties. Now follows the instrument by him: that is, by
John, who was the mean or occasion of their believing: so 1, Cor, 3, 5. Paul
and Apollo are said to be the Ministers, by whom the Corinthians believed.

So God ordeineth, that man's ministry should be the means of believing.

So God blesses it to occasion faith, as every where in the scriptures may
appear.

Mark then that of conscience, we ought to attend to the ministry of men.

That we may look for a blessing in conscionably, attending thereunto.

That howsoever men be occasions of believing, yet are they not the only
causes. God must be sought unto, and bless, else all other is nothing.

Hitherto the setting down of John Baptistes office simply in it self.

Now follows the comparison with Christ in the 8 verse,

It is denied of John that he was that light verse, 8, and yet least any man
should mistake, as though the Evangelist should gainesay any thing which he had
delivered before, he repeateth the last clause touching the chief point of
John's ministry, that though he were not that light, yet he bare witness of
the light.

It may be demanded, how it can be true that John should not be that light,
seeing John is called, a burning, and a shining light. John, 5, 35.

Answer. John was a light, the word was the light. The greek words take away
the difference. The word which is used of John is Lychnos, as you say, a lynck,
or torch, or great candle. Christ or the Word is the light, that is, the chief
and principal.

John is a light enlightened and set on fire: Christ is light enlightening and
kindeling. Christ is like the sun: John like the Moon reflecting the suns
light.

John was light by office, and in measure: the Word is light naturally, and
infinitely.

But some man may say, who doubts of the difference between John and Christ?

Answer: The Jews; John 1, John's disciples, Herod, and others, and therefore
least any man should think better of John, the^ there was cause for, therefore
the Evangelist thus speaks here.

Mark how the common people ouer-reach sometimes in their judgments of the
Ministers.

That it is not safe, to be carried away, with the bare conceit of the people.

And in that that John so speaks for Christ, we all should learn, all that
we can, to keep and increase the authority of Christ.

The clause repeated is expounded before.

Now follow those things which are affirmed of Christ: that he was the true
light. He that is, the Word, was as before: light is, as before: the hardness
is in the Word true.

True is first contrary to false or counterfeit. Some things seem to have
light, as fishbones and rotten wood in the night, and yet have none, Christ was
not so.

Secondly, it is opposed to shadow: as the law was by Moses: but grace and
truth by Christ: truth, that is, that which was foreshaddowed in the law.

Thirdly, true is as much as natural, not made etc.

In every of these senses may the Word be said to be the true light: but
besides I think the meaning is as John 15, 1, wherein Christ is called the true
vine, that is, I take it, the most excellent vine. So here true light, most
excellent light.

From him therefore should we fetch light of doctrine, of living, of comfort,
all which should be as dear unto us as the light is or can be.

The second thing affirmed of Christ, is that he lightneth every man which
comes into the world. Where is set down, what he does, and to whom.

He inlightneth, that is as we heard before, with natural light: though other
be in Christ. The sun communicates not all his light to the Moon, no more
does Christ to man.

Remember by this that natural light is the gift of God, and that therefore
it should be used to the setting forth of the glory of God.

He does this to every one that comes into the world: that is, to every
Mothers-Child which is borne into the world: this must be understood of the
gift of light, not of the use of light, which infants and Idiots have not,
though they have the gift.

The third thing said of the Word, is, that it was in the world.

That which is said, is, that he was. The limitation or restraint, is the
place, in the world.

This was does not only signify divine existence and being, but seeing the
divine being is every where, it notes the presence thereof, and that even in
respect of time, for though indeed the Word were before, and shall be after
time, yet here it is declared, that he was from the world created to Christ
incarnate.

There be four degrees of the presence of the Word to a creature.

The first is the most wonderful of all, when the Word makes one person with
a creature, as in the hypostaticall union of the two natures in Christ.

The second is the presence of glory, whereby the Word is present to the
blessed Angels and Saints, in glory in heaven.

The third is the presence of grace, whereby he is present to the elect and
called in this life, by his especial saving grace and favor.

The fourth is the presence of power, whereby he is with every creature, from
the highest heaven to the lowest earth.

World, does here signify all the creatures together, and every special
thereof.

A question may be: In what sense of the four the presence here meant, is to
be taken?

Aun. It may be true in any of the three last, yet it is only meant of the
fourth and last of all.

For indeed the Word is present to every creature, and so as that by the
reasonable creature, he might be perceived to be present.

The Word is present,

1 By his divine infinite essence:

2 By his omniscience, knowing all things.

3 By his infinite power, upholding all things.

4 By his wonderful wisdom, ruling all things.

He may be perceived in some sort to be present, as well as God the Father, in
so much as some think, some Heathen had a glimps hereof, sure it is the Jews
had: some think that Aristotle, and Plato had.

All this which John writes of the Word for his time, is true in ours, and
rather more then less.

1 Learn then that seeing the essence of the Word is every where, that he is
God equal to the father.

2 That he knowing all, sinners had need take heed of sin: they who do
well may have great comfort.

3 Since he vpholdeth all things, know that without God all things are vain,
and nothing to be desired, as a Jew observed in Ish and Isha, where Iod and He
were, which made Iah the name of God, all was well, but they being taken away,
there was nothing but esh, that is, fire and contention: so worldly things
where God is may have comfort, otherwise not.

4 The Word ruling the world, it cannot be chosen, but all shall be to the
good of such as trust in the Word.

5 Seeing the Word is so present as he may be found, it is our duties to
search him out.

6 Whereas now in these times he is more manifested then heretofore, if we
have no more of him then ordinary, our sin is the more.

7 Being present every where, we can need help no where.

The fourth thing said of the Word, is that the world was made by him.

This is nothing but a repetition of the 3 and 4 verses before, saving that
which there was spoken of parts, (...) named here in whole, as being indeed
an especial matter of faith. Look Hebr. 11, and 3.

Faith has especial place here, as being a thing very hard to be believed,
and being believed is of very great use.

It appears that it is hard to believe, for that Aristotle a notable man for
natural wit, could not be persuaded that God should make the world.

The Arrians could not be persuaded, that the person of the Word did make the
world.

The use of this being believed is manifest: for that whosoever belieueth this,
cannot but be persuaded of the omnipotency of the Word. For he who makes all
things of nothing, can do any thing: 1 Can save us, 2 Hear our prayers, 3
Deliver us out of our crosses: 4 Turn all things to our good.

If any man desire to know the will of this Word, let him look to his
incarnation.

For as our creation puts us in mind of the Words power, so his
incarnation puts us in mind of his good will.

The fifth thing said of the Word, is that the world knew him not.

Whereby is shown, what reckoning there was of him: and here we may consider
whereby they were carried in not regarding the Word, and that is, by not
knowing of him. Secondly, who were thus carried, and they are said to be the
world.

This not knowing, is noted, though not named as a fault: for clearing whereof
we must remember, that knowing is either negative, or privative.

Negative not knowing is that, whereby one is so ignorant, as that it
concerns him not to know: as for me to be ignorant what the counsel last
deliberated of, what God has decreed touching such and such a man.

Private, is when one is ignorant of that which concerns him, and that which
he ought to know. The which is noted here in this place.

For otherwise Christ according to his humane nature knows not the end of the
world: knew not that the Figtree had no fruit of it, etc, so are the Saints
ignorant of many matters. All knowledge here is in part, etc.

Now justly is this privative ignorance blamed. For that one ought to know the
Word.

1 In whom our happiness does consist.

2 Of knowing whom we have many means.

3 For that this ignorance is never alone, but has unbelief, disobedience,
etc.

They who are carried away with this ignorance, are contained under the name of
the world.

World does not here signify (as before) for all the creatures jointly or
severally, for some part of the world cannot know, as unreasonable creatures,
and therefore must not be blamed for ignorance.

The world therefore here is a part of the world, wicked, unrepentant,
reprobate parties, for whom Christ prays not, Ioh, 17, 9, in which sense the
devil is said to be Prince of the world.

And indeed wicked men are thus termed, for that they are many, and the
greatest part of the world, and hurt the whole world. As Adam and Euah, and in
the time of the flood.

Whereby by the way we had need to take heed of wicked men.

1 Mark then from both these put together the estate of most people in the
world. They know not the Word, and whatsoever other things they know (as they
may many) yet are they of no worth.

2 Ignorance of the Word is a sin.

3 It is never alone.

4 These thought they knew, as Heathen and Jews, so as one may be deceived
touching his own estate.

5 Since their ignorance is blamed, we ought to know, and not only so, but to
love, believe, profess, obey, etc.

The sixth thing spoken of the Word, that he came to his own: wherein is a
behavior of this Word, in an action, and showing whereto this action was.

This action is, he came. This is not meant of the Godhead only, for that
being present every where, cannot be said to come.

This is therefore in respect of the Words being made flesh, by occasion
whereof he was not only in the world, but preached, wrought miracles, lived
and died among his.

1 So as that if we would look for the Word, we should seek him in this his
coming.

2 Where these are, there is the Word, so as these ought to be made of.

This action was to his own, not only all creatures in general, but special
some things, as Judea, Jerusalem, the Temple, all which in special sort were
Gods.

1 We may see here that the Jews have the pre-eminence, so as that refusing,
their condemnation is the iuster.

2 God is marvelous kind coming thus to tender him self, so as if we be not
saved, the fault is ours, what could God do more?

3 God showing more favors, looks for more duties. If I had not come (says
Christ) they had had no sin: that is, not so great.

4 If Christ thus offer himself, why should not we offer up our selves to him,
and one to another in all good we can.

The seventh thing said, is that his own received him not. Where is showed
the behauior of men toward him, as their reckoning of him before.

Here are persons, and behavior. The persons, his own.

The word in English, is the same with own before: but in Greek they differ.
The former is Neuter, this Masculine. The former noted things: this notes
persons.

These parties are such, whom God after a special sort had made his, as his
peculiar people. They were the Jews, whose prerogatives are. Rom, 3, 2, that
to them were committed the oracles of God. Look 9, Rom, 4, and so forward.

1 Every of these is most excellent.

2 We now have them as well as they.

3 They alone are not sufficient; for the Jews had them and received not
Christ.

But here a question may be, whether but some, or none received the word?

Aun. Some did receive, all did not, whom it concerned, and who had means.

1 Where we may see, that howsoever that the Gospel has not the full fruit
we could wish, yet some it has.

2 That Christ, though he were not received, being in his calling, gave not
over.

3 Though the world mark not who receives the word, yet God does.

Their behavior is, that they received him not. It is the neglect of duty.

We may consider toward whom this was, and what the fault was.

It was toward the Word, in his doctrine, his person, his office, his members,
ministers or professors, all and every whereof we ought to receive.

The fault is not receiving. This not receiving, is refusing of a thing
proffered and tendered, which in such a case as this cannot choose but be a
grievous sin: so as Christ bid his Apostle in the like, to shake off the dust
of their feet for a witness.

The Jews no doubt thought, that they did not offend this way; so as that we
may see into how grievous a sin a man may fall before ever he be aware.

This receiving is as the thing bodily, spiritually. Christ is both man and
God, and must be received both ways, so as that they offend, who give not
Christ the best outward entertainment they can.

Much more they who do not 1 know, 2, acknowledge, 3 love, 4 believe, 5 obey
Christ.

Now if Christ the King of heaven and earth, was not received, why should we
think much if we be not?

The eight thing said of the Word, is whosoever, as many as received, etc.
Wherein we may consider what he does, and to whom.

He gives prerogative to be the sons of God to such as receive him.

These are noted by two marks, of faith and regeneration.

In that which he does, we may mark what it is called, who does it, and the
thing done.

It is called a gift, in that it is said, he gives.

Giving is free bestowing of property, this is free, else were it desert, or
bargain, or some such.

And indeed Christ was given to us. Esaias, 9, 6. John, 3, 16.

But it may be objected, that it is a ransom or purchase.

Answer. As it is from Christ to God the father, so it is a ransom, but from
the Father, and Christ to us, a free gift.

So as that there is nothing in our selves to procure this, nor keep it, but
all is favor, which wanting we must pray for, having, we must praise God.

He that does this, is the Word.

It may be objected that every good gift, is from the Father of lights, and so
from the Father.

Father, James 1, 17, is a name common to the three persons. But putcase it be
for the first person, the Father gives all to the Son: whereupon we may see
that the Son is God, in that he can make sons of God, and this of being a
child of God, cannot but be an excellent favor, in that the whole Trinity
gives it.

The thing done follows, prerogative to be the sons of God: wherein is the
kind of the thing, and the commendation.

The kind, to be the sons of God, commendation, prerogative.

The Word translated, sons, were better children as it signifies, so as that
ignorant people, might not be hindered of their comfort intended here, being of
woman's sex.

These children are said to be of God.

Child of God, is either by nature, or favor.

By nature, as the Word and Christ, nothing else.

It may be objected, 2 Peter, 1, 4, that we should be partakers of the divine
nature.

Answer: nature does signify qualities and properties flowing from the divine
nature, not the essence it self.

It is not meant therefore here, Children by nature.

By favor are Angels or mankind.

We never shall be Angels, for we shall have our souls at the last resurrection
joined to our bodies, Angels are spirits.

We shall be like Angels for immortality, needing no bodily things, being in the
presence of God, otherwise not.

Mankind, or men and women, may be the Children of God by creation, or
generation, adoption, regeneration, imitation.

By creation, as Adam and Eve, whom God himself immediately made.

By generation, as all other men and women.

Adoption, by being made a Child after one is not by nature.

Regeneration, when the beginning of heavenly life, is wrought in a party.

Imitation, when one indeauoureth to be like God, in recovery of his image.

Creation is not here understood. For so are all creatures after a sort the
children of God: and here the Evangelist sets out an especial favor.

The other three sorts are true: but yet adoption is cheefely meant, whereof
so much is mentioned in the scriptures, and is the forerunning cause of the
other two following.

A doption is a word taken from the civil law.

Here it signifies Gods favor to some of Adams posterity, whereby he takes
them to himself in special sort, giving them the rites and dues of children.

Hence comes the household of faith, Galat: 6, 10, the father-hood, Ephe: 3.

For better knowing hereof, we may consider the benefits gotten by this
adoption, and the properties thereof.

In the civil law, it is said, the adopted gets the adopters name, money
and holy things, as place of burial etc.

Ours, do far surmount these, for we obtain.

Gods favor and indulgence toward us. Malac: 3, 17.

Wherein is 1 free forgiveness of sins all, fault and punishment: this is
blessedness, has peace of conscience etc.

2 Acceptance of imperfect obedience.

Secondly, the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, father.

This has a gift, and ability to pray, promise and persuasion to be heard.

3 That our father does lay up for us, 2, Cor, 12, 14, Heb: 11, 40.

4 Protection in good estate, deliverance out of evil, so God dealt by
Israel. Exodus, 4, 22, 23.

5 Quietness of conscience in the use of the creatures Eccle, 3, 12.

6 Inheritance in the heavens.

7 Causing of all things to work, for the adopteds good.

The properties are that this adoption is.

1 To a better estate, then all the world can afford.

2 With exception of the cross.

3 It is permanent, though it may be shaken, it never shall be undone.

Thus far the thing: The commendation follows, prerogative.

Some abuse this word, for power by nature to some good thing, untruly,
unlearnedly.

They read it so, power: as that it should be meant, to be in the parties
power, if they would, to be the sons God.

Here it cannot be so taken, as being said, of such who have the Spirit.

Sure it is, that for first conversion, we can do nothing, but are only
passiues.

Besides I say, unlearnedly, for that the word, is used for prerogative, or
privilege diverse times elsewhere, 1 Cor: (...).

This may appear, to be a very great prerogative.

1 If we consider who bestows it, to wit, God, infinite.

2 Upon whom, his utter enemies, most miserable.

3 What things, as of adoption. The estate of being a child is inestimable:
look Hottom: in instit: 42.

4 Passing by how many mighty, noble, etc.

Justly then ought we, remembering whence we are raised to how great estate,
carry our selves humbly all our life long.

2 Show all reverence to God, who has showed these favors on us.

3 Carry our selves so to the world, as not discrediting the house we are of.

4 Prefer being a son or daughter to God, above all things in the world
beside.

Thus far what he does. Now follows to whom, as many as received him, these
are noted by their believing in his name, and by their begetting, etc.

These to whom, are set out by their duty, of receiving him: and their
generality as many.

The duty we have known before: here it is set,

1 As necessary, as no way to be the children of God, without it, of what
condition soever one be.

2 Noting the time of receiving him, to wit, when he came among them; and
proffered himself unto them. So that though we have purpose to receive him,
and do not when he offers, we are never the nearer, when once the door is
shut: look, Luke, 13, 25. Matthew, 25, 10.

The generality shuts out no receiver, neither in the manner of receiving,
nor in the measure, nor in the condition of the receiver.

Some cannot receive Christ, every way outwardly: though it be but with a cup
of cold water, they shall not loose their reward.

Some receive him with small knowledge, weak faith; they are children if they
will grow, and continue.

Some are receivers in many and great crosses, yet will their being children,
lessen and ease their crosses.

Now then, seeing that receivers of the Word have such favors, who would not
receive?

Or seeing that the Word does so think of receivers, why should not we make
great account of them?

But here it may be demanded, 1 Is our receiving the Word, a cause of our
being the children of God?

Aun. No: we are children adopted in Christ. It is no working cause with God,
it only declares unto me.

2 Is our receiving before our being children?

Neither. In order is first being a child, then follows receiving, though
sometimes for time they go together.

3 What then is the meaning hereof?

Aun. The Evangelist writes to young and new receivers, who were willing
indeed to receive, but presently saw nothing but crosses and calamities: he
therefore wishes the^ to know their estate though nothing, yet that they are
the children of God: whereupon Paul prays for the Ephesians, 1, chap, 18
verse.

1 By this Christians should learn not to mislike their present estate for
crosses, but to search into it, and they shall find matter of great comfort.

2 That never any saving grace is alone, receiving is with adoption, so as that
we finding out one saving grace in our selves, we may be sure that we have more.

3 Adoption is in the beginning of all saving graces.

4 We may judge of our adoption, by our receiving the Word.

Now follows the noting of these parties: 1 by their belief, and wherein is
the action, or duty, and object.

Action or duty is believing, whereof we have spoken in another place.

Object, his Name, his, that is the word coming, as before.

His Name by a manner of speech in the Hebrew tongue, is put for himself, God
is his Name, Gods Name is himself.

Now him, must we understand as before, verse 11.

1 Mark, that first the things that make the word known, are called himself,
so as that as we use them, we use him.

2 That faith is a note of a true receiver.

3 That faith especially respects Christ.



Wherein is shown, whence they are not borne, and whence they are.

They are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man.

These three branches for substance signify one thing.

Blood, the Greek is bloods, that whereof man takes his beginning of
conception, or his beginning to be in the world. Look Ezech, 16, 6.

Will, is here strong lust, and concupiscence, as is in creatures for
procreation.

Flesh, some part or nature unregenerate.

Will, again as before.

In all which the Evangelist would note the usual beginning of man.

1 Which first it is good for us thoroughly to think of.

2 In thinking thereof to keep a tenor of humility, considering whence we rise.

3 Note the vile lusting of the flesh.

4 Learn to speak unseemly things, comely and honestly.

By this the Evangelist would show, that the usual manner of birth, makes not
one the child of GOD: not but that Gods children are carnally borne, but this
is not sufficient.

Quest. How is it said 1, Cor, 7, 14, that their children are holy?

Aun. Not morrally, but so as that they may not be hindered of the seals of
the covenant.

1 Learn hereby first, not to rejoice in nature, parentage, etc.

2 Presume not too much of good natures.

3 Let parents help their children, to another birth.

Now follows whence they are borne, to wit, they are borne of God, where
first, we must a little open the words.

God is essentially, Father, as 1, Peter 1, 3, the Son, as 1, John, 12, the
holy Ghost, as John 3, 3, 5, for the works of the Trinity, to the creature,
are joint.

Of, in greek en, usually signifies matter, here it does not so, but the
efficient, or first worker. In deed natural parents are so efficient, as of
their matter we came, so is it not in our spiritual begetting.

Borne: should better be, begotten, to express the greek word, and the thing
here meant.

The mother properly bears, here God is as a father who begets: so that
the meaning is, the whole holy Trinity, works in us this change.

This being borne, is the same with being the child of God, save that there is
signified one kind of being child, to wit, by adoption, hear by regeneration,
there title, here possession as it were in part.

To better understanding hereof, we may consider the thing, the Author: the
thing, being begotten; and this in the necessity of it, and in the nature.

The necessity is such as that the Evangelist notes it, not only to be
commendable present, but necessary, so as without it we shall never well
entertain the Word. Look. Ioh: 3, 3, 5, 7. So as unless we become as little
children, we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.

The nature is not a like understood of all, some take it for that which is
called sanctification, others for the whole work of grace, with whom I join.
And as it is called regeneration or begetting, so is it like thereunto: save
that generation produces substance, this does produce only qualities, and not
all, not powers, but habits, restoring to the power integrity, with ready
applycation, to the first and proper object.

Christ defines it, John, 3, 3, to be borne, begotten again: the kind of it,
birth, begetting, the property of it, again.

1 Birth or begetting in this kind, has infusion of life this is called seed
of God, 1, John, 3, 9, to wit the gift of the holy ghost, like natural heat,
this continues as long as spiritual life continues.

2 Diffusion of it over the whole man, powers, parts, practices, the
counter-poyson of original sin.

The property again, not to the same life as Nicodemus thought, but to
another, which is called the life of God, Christ, the inner man the new man.
And is.

When a man in any life natural, civil, household, solitary, sociall, pleases
God.

1 When is that? 1, when he is quickening his faith, and repentance.

2 Has direction for every particular.

3 Does every thing thereafter in Christ.

1 Where mark, that the life of the regenerate, and unregenerate, may be in
the same things.

2 That regeneration stretches to the whole man.

Que. But it may be demanded: Is not one regenerate partaker of natural birth?

Aun. Yes, but so as that which he receives from nature, is ordered by the
Spirit.

By this it may appear, that all are not regenerate, and that it is hard to be
regenerate.

Thus much of the thing. The Author follows. God: and God only. For there is
no begetting, but of the flesh, or God, that which is of the flesh, is flesh.

Now indeed though this new birth be principally of God, yet are there under
serving causes; whereof for all that none have power to work of themselves.

Object. Paul says, he begat the Corinthians, 1, Cor, 4, 15, and traueled in
birth of the Galathians, 4, Galat, 19: was Tymotheus, and Tyrus his father.

Sol. Ministerially: not that Paul or Apollos, could do any thing of
themselves. God gave the increase.

2 Object. Christ says, 3. John, 5, we must be borne of water, and the holy
ghost.

Solu. Water there does but expound the work of the holy Ghost; for as water
softneth and cleanses: so must every one be, who is borne again.

In the same is it said we must be baptized, with the holy Ghost, and fire,
that is, the holy Ghost working like fire, eating out dross, and enkindling
burning love of all good things.

3 Object. It is said Tytus, 3, 5. Ephe: 5, 26, that Baptism regenerateth.

Solu. It confirms to the due receiver, regeneration, nothing else.

So then God alone only works effectually, and yet uses under means, as
that we must neither neglect means, nor trust alone unto them.

Question, why are men in this kind, said to be borne of God, as though they
were not so in nature likewise?

Answer, for that this new birth is so excellent, as that in comparison of the
former, it may seem to be the only.

Question: whether is faith before regeneration, for here it is placed before
it?

Answer: faith is in a party, before he can know that himself is regenerated.
One may be regenerat before he has faith, as infants.

Thus much for the meaning: the use follows.

1 Seeing none receive the Word, and so are not the childred of God, but such
as are begotten of God, it is our duty to endeavor, after this new begetting,
and for that none beget themselves, it will be the safest to examine, whether we
be begotten, yea or no.

That shall we find by these notes.

1 Grace imitateth nature, which first makes vital, then others parts.

The vital part of a Christian is Christ, which when it is formed in us,
shows our new begetting. Galath: 4, 19, 1, John, 5, 12, he therefore that has
not knowledge of him, faith in him, etc. may suspect himself.

2 The party begotten a new, uses all things of outward life, by direction of
Gods word, to the glory of God.

3 He sins not, 1, John, 3, 9, that is, before he sinnneth, he purposes not
so to do, after he has sinned, he will not continue therein.

4 He is willing to help others to be regenerate.

5 He grows by nourishment of the Word, exercises active, passive.

6 Motion bewrays life, spiritual motion is of the heart in prayer.

7 Sense of heavenly things, with ability to put difference between them, to
take liking of them, and affect them.

8 Hatred of him because it is sin, in our selves, even the secretest.

9 Love of the brethren.

Secondly, mark that this here is begetting, we are not perfected, nor shall be
here, only we must labor thereto, and never give over though we come short.

Thus much for this eight saying, touching the Word, and his Godhead: now
follows his manhood in the fourteenth verse; wherein we may consider the
joining of it to the former, and as it is in it self.

It is joined to the former, by this particle, and: which shows that this
truth here mentioned, is as necessary as the former.

In it self, it contains 4 speeches.

1 The first, the Word was made flesh.

2 The second, the Word dwelt among us.

3 The third, we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten of
the father.

4 The fourth, he was full of grace and truth.

For the first, let us consider the meaning, the reason, the use.

The meaning will arise, from the words and phrase, well understood.

The Word is God, as before, contrary to Arrius, and other heretics, who take
Christ but for a bare man.

Was, that is, so was as now is, and for ever shall continue.

Object. It may be objected that he died, and so the union may seem to be
dissolved.

Solu. No, for though the soul and body were parted for a time, yet neither
was severed from the Godhead.

So he was made as not changed, the Godhead was not turned into the Manhood.

As not being one mixed of the Manhood, and Godhead together, as when bread is
made of water and meal.

But by assuming or taking the Manhood to God.

So as that Nestorius dividing the persons, and Eutiches confounding the
natures, do err.

Object. But it may be doubted whether there should not thus be two persons?

Solu. No, but one, for the Manhood has no being, nor never had of or in it
self, but in the Word.

Flesh does here signify man, as all flesh, that is, mankind is grass.

Now man is body and soul.

Body sensible, natural, this Christ had, not heavenly, imaginary,
fantastical.

Soul likewise Christ had, when he said, My soul is heavy to the death.

Neither does he save that which he does not take.

So as that Apollinaris erreth, who says the Godhead was in stead of a soul.

By this that Christ had a soul, it appears that he had two wills, not
contrary: one of the Godhead, the other of the Manhood.

Otherwise then the Monothelites erroniously teach.

Ob. But it may be said: whence had Christ this flesh?

Sol. His body he had of the substance of the Virgin, his soul was created of
nothing in the womb of the virgin.

Ob. The virgin was conceived in sin, how then could Christ his body be free
therefrom?

Solu. The holy Ghost who wrought the conception of Christ, did cleanse that
part of the virgin from all sin.

Que. When was he thus made flesh?

Aun. Immediately when the virgin had consented to the message of the Angel,
and said, Be it unto me according to thy word.

Que. How could the body be joined to God?

Aun. By the soul.

This is the meaning. The reason why this was done in time, is, for that it
was ordained before all time.

Que. Why did God ordain this means?

Aun. Not for that he could not have appointed some other, but for that this
seemed best to him, for to manifest his mercy, and justice: by his mercy in
giving his Son, his justice, in not sparing him: his justice, that man
offending, should satisfy in doing and suffering, his mercy in procuring,
that God should enable the Manhood so to do and suffer.

1 The use is manifold. First to teach us the love of God, and care for our
salvation: for he giving such a notable means, how can we doubt.

2 Consider our honor and prerogative, to be as it were the brothers of
Christ. Heb, 2, 11.

3 Learn how to approach to God, by the man Christ.

4 Know that Christ can have compassion of us, having had experience of our
infirmities. Heb, 2, 17, 18.

The second speech follows. Wherein we may consider the meaning, the use.

For the meaning, know first, that the Word made flesh must be repeated.

Dwelling does signify, as in a Tent or boothe, whereby the sicklenesse, and
uncertainty of our life is implied, and where as it is said he dwelt, the
meaning is, he does not so now in person.

Among us, is not only in our nature, but in our presence: our, who are
Apostles of Jerusalem, of Judea.

Now he so conuersed, as Acts, 10.38.

1 Make this use then. First to follow his humility, Phillip. 2, 5.

2 In our conuersing, to take occasion of doing all the good we can.

3 Know that as Christ dwelling among the^, and they not profiting, their sin
was the greater: so will it be with us, or any, amongst whom Christ any way or
while dwells.

The third speech follows, And we saw, etc. wherein is set down what is said
of Christ, and how it is confimed.

It is said of him, that he had glory, as of the only begotten of the Father.
It is confirmed in that he says, we saw it.

That which is said of Christ, has the bare thing, or the measure, the bare
thing is glory, the measure in the rest.

Glory to speak properly, does signify natural brightness, as the glory of
the sun, etc.

Now for that the greater the brightness is, the more is the excellency of
the thing whence it comes, therefore glory does signfie bewrayed excellency,
and here bewraied divine excellency, which Christ had, 17, John 5, so as that
John's meaning is, we saw him to be God, and easily perceived it.

The measure is, of an only son of a Father. Father does here signify God
the Father, of, distinction of person between the Father, and the only
begotten.

Only begotten, who is to have all that which the Father has.

Christ is sometimes called the only begotten son of GOD, in respect of the
divine nature, which of all Gods sons he only has. Others are sons by
adoption and favor.

Sometimes, first borne, in respect of the humane nature wherein he excels
all other.

Ob. But how does this (will some say) increase the glory?

Solu. The Fathers glory is infinite, the Sons is equal: therefore it is
very great.

Besides, this glory is increased by the particle as, which signifies truly
not only likeness, so else where.

It appears from hence, 1 That the Word is GOD, 2 That he is a person
distinct from the Father, 3 That he is equal to the Father.

Now follows how it is confirmed, we saw, that is, often and wistly looked
upon. We who conuersed with him, to whom God gave eyes to see. All did not
perceive this.

Que. How could they perceive it?

Aun. By his wonderful works.

See 1, that it is not sufficient to be in means, unless God open the heart.

2 The children of God by means labor for strength of faith.

The fourth and last speech is, that Christ was full of grace and truth.

Wherein is the thing. measure.


The thing grace. truth.


Grace, the holy Spirit without measure in himself, whereof he gives to his,
whereby they profit to salvation by means.

Truth, presence of good things, not as by Moses, in shadows and shows.

So as that we should seek to Christ for both these.

Thus far the sum, and brief of the story of the Gospel.

Now follows the setting down at large, in the special branches thereof.

All is of Christ. Christ is set out in his harbinger or forerunner John. Or in
his own personal presence.

The things of John or Christ, are neither summarilie, (...) part set together,
but intermedled, and mingled the (...) with the other.

First, mention is made of John, 1 for that he was prophesied to come before
Christ.

2 For that he was before Christ in time, in the flesh.

3 Being to be witness to Christ, it was meet his person should be known,
that the sufficientnesse of his witness might appear.

4 The birth of Christ, being to be of a Virgin, might somewhat be made more
probable, when it should be known that two old folks (whereof one was barren)
should have a child,

Luke, 1, chap. 5, verse.

The first thing delivered of John, is his conception, 1, Luke: from the
beginning of the 5 verse, to the later end of the 25.

In all which are three things, 1. Somewhat before the conception, to the 24
verse, 2. The conception it self, verse, 24, 3. Somewhat immediately after,
verse, 25.

That which is before the conception, is the making known his Parents, by whom
he was conceived.

His parents are made known, jointly, severally.


Jointly by their time, their godliness, not having of children.

Severally, the husband; and first from his kind of life, generally, that he
was a Priest, 2, particularly, of the course of Abia: 3, by his name, 4, that
he was married, 5, that to him this conception was foretold.

The Wife, 1, by her stock, that she was of the daughters of Aaron, 2, by her
name, she was called Elizabet.

The time was, In the days of Herod, then King of Judea.

Where we may consider how the time is called, and how it is further made
known.

It is called in the Greek days: by an usual manner of speaking in the
scriptures, belonging to the Hebrew tongue, for that a day was the first
difference of time.

1 To teach us that time, and things in time, are but momentary, and but for a
day.

2 That good Governors reigns, are but in days, so as that in them, we must
not be secure.

3 That Tyrants shall no continue for ever, that we should not be discouraged.

Question. But what special time was this in?

Answer. About the 31 or 32 of Herod's reign, when he grew to be most
outrageous, murdering Salomes husband, and son, the 40 gentlemen, and their
teachers, yea even his own sons Aristobulus, and Alexander, and a little
after the Sanhedrim, and infants of Bethlehem.

Question, why is this time thus noted?

1 Answer, to teach us first: that though tyrants rage never so much, God will
have his Church and number.

2 That the godly will not give over their profession, for fear of Tyrants,
but in corrupted and corrupting times, will be the same.

3 That God in such disordered times, takes knowledge of such as truly fear
him, so as that they should not be discouraged by any adversaries.

This time is further set out, 1, by the person in it, and by his calling.

The person is named Herod, his calling King: and that, of Judea.

There were three Herod's mentioned in scripture.

One in the Acts 12, Herod Agrippa, I take it the graund child to this.

Another, who cut of John the Baptistes head, called Herod Antipas.

The third, this: the son of Antipater, by his fathers, and by his own
means, called the great for his victories, buildings of the Temple, Sebaste,
Amphitheatrum, etc.

He is noted to be King: to put a difference between him, and other gouenours
before him, for his father Antipater, was but deputed by Caesar. The
Assamonaei, had not this title of King.

Now this man the Senators of Rome made King.

Judea, is opposed (I take it) to the territories of Samaria, and was the place
of the visible Church.

Mark what great places in the world, wicked men like Herod, may mount unto,
1, so as that we need not envy them, neither think these outward things the
best.

2 Know that if under an evil Prince, Zachary and Elysabeth were good, what
should we be in good laws and Governors?

3 And seeing that Judea came to Herod's government, let us take heed, least
that by our sins we procure the like judgment to our selves, and if the same
befall us, let us labor beforehand for so much grace, as may make us hold out
therein.

Question. But why is Herod's being King mentioned?

Answer. To show that Jacobs prophecy, Genesis, 49, 10, is fulfilled.

Question. Was not the scepter gone from Judah in the Machabees time, who were
of the Tribe of Leui?

Aun. They were but keepers thereof in dangerous times.

Again, it is not meant (I take it) that the Governor should always be of
Judah, but that among the people of the Jews, in this Herod's time, who was the
first king of Judea, it was others.

1 Here we see the certainty of things fortold in the scriptures.

2 That promises to the Church for outward things are not for ever.

3 This were enough to prove to a Jew that Christ were come.

Thus much for the time: the next mentioned is the man, for his kind of life
generally that he was a Priest.

A Priest was as is discribed, 5, Heb, 1, and represented Christ.

He was of the order of Aaron, this order ended when Christ dyed.

Priests were not in that time contemptible, but of good regard succeeding into
the room of the duty of the eldest son: so was Aaron the elder brother,
Priest.

Quest. Are there no Priests now?

Aun. If you speak of Priests improperly to offer spiritual sacrifices, all
Christians are Priests, but if you speak properly, there are none since Christ.

Quest. What think you of the Priests of the Romish Church?

Aun. As of Ierobohams Priests, they have filled their own hands, and have no
calling, and whereas they pretend to be after the order of Melchisedec, they
show themselves unlearned and wicked, for there was no order of Priesthood
according to Melchisedec: but as Melchisedec is mentioned without father,
mother, genealogy: so is Christ: again, so to be, does properly belong unto
Christ.

1 Know from all this there is no reconciliation without Christ, whom the
Priest did represent.

2 That then Priesthood was no disgrace, why should ministry now be?

3 Use wisely the name of Priest, of Pressed, or Proestos, not of Sacerdos.

4 Since Zachary executed the Priests office, in such times when he saw little
fruit, and might be discouraged, let us all learn to keep our stations,
wherein we are set of God, going cheerfully on in our duties, committing
success unto God, though many discouragments encounter us.

Particularly, he was of the course of Abia. For better understanding hereof,
look, 1, Chron: 24. Whence it appears that David ordained 24 courses of
Priests, every one to serve his week or fortnight, as may appear, 2, Chron:
23, 8.

The course of Abia was the eight of those, 24.

David distinguished these thus, not only by his Princely authority, but in
spired by the holy Ghost, being to give his best directions to Solomon, who
should build the Temple, whereto Gods solemn worship should be tied, after a
long time it had been in a flitting Tent or tabernacle.

Thus he does, 1 That no Priest (though there were many) should be idle.

2 That the burden being borne by course, and not always lying upon one,
might be the better borne with longer continuance.

3 That things being done by course, none might be grieved, trodden down too
much, or grow insolent, being lifted up above his brethren, but all might be
done lovingly, and brotherly.

1 Kings may do no more in Church matters, then they have warrant for, by Gods
word and Spirit.

2 No Minister in the Church should be idle, but work in due time.

3 It should be provided they might so work, as that they might continue the
longest for the most good of the Church.

4 There should be no inordinate superiority among them.

His name was Zachary, wherein we may consider the very name, and why it is
recorded so to be.

Zachary signifies remembering GOD. Some think it was he mentioned, Math, 23,
35, slain between the Temple, and the Altar, but they have no warrant so to
think.

Sure it is this name was well liked, for that the friends would have had John
to be thus called. It shall therefore concern those who give names, to give
such as may put in mind to the caller, called, or hearer some good.

It is here recorded so to be. First, because there were but few at that time
so godly. 2 To show that God keeps a record of his. 3 That we might have them
as Presidents, whom we might follow, and be like.

It follows, that he had a wife: which means, that as himself, so his
wife was maintained by his Priests office, not only so, but their whole charge.

Que. It may be demanded, whether it be not as lawful for such as attend the
word and Sacraments now, to have wives, as it was for the Priests?

Aun. Yes all alike, for that there is nothing against it in the word, but for
it, as might be showed, and cannot be denied by the Papists themselves: who
teach that to forbid (as they speak) Priests marriage, is not divine, but
Apostolic, or Church-law.

They know that none of us now do take the vow.

Quest. But what say you of their Priests, whether may they lawfully marry, or
no?

An. If they made a vow of single life, and cannot keep it, they ought to
marry.

But see their reasons whereupon out of Scripture their Church inioyneth single
life.

1 They abuse this very place, Luke, 1, 23, and 1, Chron, 24, for that they say
when they ministered they were from their wives. Answer. They were indeed
from their vviues, especially those who dwelled not in Jerusalem, where the
service was to be performed, not for any thing, but that the distance of place
hindered, as such as go to the Term at London, leave their wives at home.

2 That 1 to Titus, a Bishop must be Sophron, the vulgar translateth,
continent. Aun. Improperly, for Paul requires the same in vviues, 1, Tim, 3,
11, and in young men, not dissuading marriage, but that they should be of sound
mind, and grave carriage.

3 The 2, Tim. 2, 4, None that goes on warfare, entangleth himself with the
business of this world.

Aun. This may concern Leuiticall priests as well as any, whose service is
called warfare, and yet they were married. It is spoken of all Christians who
war against satan, the world, the flesh. He who does but use Gods ordinance,
no more entangleth himself this way, then he who eats and drinks.

Indeed if he wrap himself in an unequal match, he entangleth himself: but
if being sufficient, and doing his duty, if he be feign to seek
maintenance, it is the Churches fault.

4 The 12, of Exodus, 11, they who eat the Passover had their loins girt, the
loins being the seat of lust. etc.

Aun. Those were not Priests all, again symbolicall divinity will not bear
argument. But who knows not that at the first Passover they were presently
to pass, and therefore were their long loose garments trussed up.

5 The 28 of Exodus, 42, the Priests must have breeches, ergo.

Aun. It was for their loose and open garments, least mounting the Altar, some
uncomeliness might appear.

6 The 1, Corin, 7, 5, they must for bear to prayer. Now Priests always
pray, or are about holy things.

Aun. That place is of all Christians married, who are bid to pray continually,
but it is only meant of extraordinary prayer, and fasting.

7 The 1, Sam, 21, 4, Ahimelech would not give hallowed bread, unless they had
kept themselves from women.

Aun. The parties were not Priests, but soldiers, or such like. Neither for
any thing, but in regard of legal pollution, whereto women often fell, by
occasion whereof, who so touched them were unclean.

These are their cheifest reasons out of Scripture, whereby it appears how
injurious they are, without any great color to their own company.

Now follows concerning the wife: First, that she was of the daughters of
Aaron.

Daughter is of the posterity: for Aaron was diverse hundred years before her.
Aaron was chief Priest.

Quest. Did Zacharias take her, because he was bound to take in his Tribe, as
other were?

Aun. No, for Priests might marry in any Tribe.

Quest. Why then?

Aun. Most likely for her grace and godliness, though being of the Priests
stock, she could not have much wealth for her portion.

1 Mark first how God and the world differ. He gave liberty to the Priest to
marry any where, we think any wife almost too good for a Minister.

2 Learn how to choose for grace and godliness, rather then credit or portion.

Her name was Elisabet, she is named for the same causes that Zachary was, as
before.

down, both just before God. walking, etc. out, both just before God. walking,
etc.


In the setting down, we may consider the persons. the things said of them.


Persons, both Zachary, and Elisabet, not one only, but both, and that at and
before their marriage, as afterward carrying with them their whole family, so
continuing very comfortably.

1 Learn, that it is not sufficient for one: both married, must be just.

2 Yea before their marriage, which must be in the Lord, it is an hard adventure
to set upon one vnreclaimed. Remember Solomon.

3 They must have a care of their family.

Having exercises of religion with their family, procuring that duties of
particular calling be done according to godliness: and that their family be
brought to the public exercises of Gods worship.

4 They must hold on their course, nothing must make them intermit.

5 Now such a couple cannot choose but live most comfortably, growing in
assurance of their own salvation, procuring others: always whetting each
other to good, and comforting in GOD, expecting all blessings in marriage, more
easily bearing all crosses incident thereunto.

The second thing said of them is, that they were just before God. And here is
the virtue, and the trial thereof.

The virtue is just, trial, before God.

Just a party is, who does justice.

Justice is obedience to the truth of God. Justice is either particular, or
general.

Particular, is to the second Table.

General, is obedience to the whole Law.

General justice is here meant. This may be considered as it is, by
imputation, or renouation.

Justice by imputation, is when all Christ's righteousness is reckoned or
imputed to one.

Justice by renouation, is when by the work of the holy Ghost, one is renewed
to do the Law, this is commonly called sanctification.

Que. By whether of these two are they here said to be just?

Aunsw. By both: by the first, because it serves to acquit them before God,
and to procure their acceptance to life everlasting.

By the second, because by it they show themselves to be righteous, both before
God and man, and this latter is principally meant.

One is so renewed, when he knows, loves, and does the will of GOD himself,
and all his being accepted in Christ.

Now this thus said of the^, is so to be understood, as their chief study and
endeavor, and principal care to be and continue just.

So as that the duties of their particular calling, rightly performed, are
practices of this justice.

Thus must every of us do.

In single or married life, endeavor chiefly to be just.

2 Indeuouring to be just, we must be renewed in all obedience.

3 Beginning of justice, is from having Christ his justice to be reckoned ours.

4 The duties of ones calling upon days for them, are (being rightly
performed) just deeds, and must be followed.

Quest. May not one intermit the duties of his calling?

Aun. Yes: Being hindered by some cross, for necessary refreshing, and for to
do a religious duty.

Quest. In what respect may one on the working day, intermit aduty of his
calling, to be at a religious duty of prayer and the word?

Aun. 1. When commodity appearing from his calling is uncertain, the benefit
of religious duty being certain.

2 When the duty of the calling intermitted may be recompensed by rising
earlier, spending less, and working harder.

3 When one finds in himself, that he is not sufficiently furnished with
saving grace, he ought first to seek therefore.

The trial follows, before God.

God is an infinite spirit seeing all things.

Before: or in his presence, a borrowed speech, taken from men, in whose eyes
when things are said to be done, they are done before them: this shows Gods
knowledge.

Gods knowledge, signifies Gods perceiving, and approving of the thing: so
Gen: 1, 17. 2, Sam: 16, 21.

Not that they deserved any thing thereby, only they were accepted in Christ,
themselves remembered they had to do with God, approved themselves to him, and
had comfort in him.

1 Know that whatsoever we do, we are unprofitable servants.

2 In all duties remember we have to do with God.

3 We must be sincere. So may we judge our selves to be,

1 When we travail more with our own hearts more to be so, then any thing,
caring for the witness of our conscience more, then the estimation of others.

2 When we are the same alone and in company, etc.

3 If we never be lifted up in the conceit of our justice, to think better of
our selves, or worse of others.

4 When we are willing to be tried.

The further setting out of this their godliness follows, and is in
expounding of the former, for in that they were said to be just, the meaning
is, that they walked in all the commandments of the Lord.

In that they were said to be just before God: the meaning is, that they were
without blame.

The former part expounding their justice, is taken from their life led
according to Gods word.

1 Learn that first men's estate must be judged by their life.

2 Life must be ruled by Gods word.

The expounding and making more plain their being just, is from the framing of
their life to Gods word; wherein we may see whereto they did conform, and in
what manner.

They did conform their lives, to all the commandments, and ordinances of the
Lord. The Lord is the true Iehoua.

Commandments and ordinances are two names, which set out the word of God.
Commandments signify the morrall, ordinances the ceremonial law.

The ordinances are called in Greek Dikaiomata, as you would say,
righteousnesses, whereupon some gather, we may be just before thereby.

Dikaiomata is the same Word which the 72 Interpreters in the old testament,
put for Kukkim, which when men endeavor to keep with the morrall law, good
reason they should be counted just, but that none could fully keep them, see
Acts, 15, 10, where they are called a yoke vnportable.

Now these commandments and ordinances are written, named, not some but all,
and every of them.

Quest. Can a man keep all Gods commandments?

Aun. Not of himself, but in Christ.

A man may be said to keep all, when Christ his keeping of all is imputed to
him; when himself is renewed to keep all, as the Word requires.

The Word requires keeping of all, legally, euangelically.


Legally, to the uttermost with the whole man, so did never any but Adam before
his fall keep them, and Christ.

Euangelically, when one is renewed by Gods Spirit to like them, to endeavor to
keep them, and be sorry when he cannot.

This is here meant, so may one keep them, not to deserve by them.

The order may be marked, morrall are set before ceremonial.

Learn hence: 1, that our life must be framed according to the written Word.

2 We must endeavor in all Gods commandments, not neglect the least.

3 Greater duties must be done first, and with greater care.

4 Never look to deserve any thing by your working.

The manner follows they walked. Metaphor: that is, lived; whereby is employed.

1 First, they ordered every particular thereafter.

2 They never swarued from the Word.

3 They continued in it.

4 They went forward.

5 Looked to their iorneyes end in heaven.

Now follows the exposition of before God: that is, without reproof.

One lives without reproof, when after his effectual calling, he cannot
justly be charged with any gross open sin before, or of men.

Learn 1. That it is possible for a man by grace in this life to come to this
estate.

2 Men must have a care as well of good name as good conscience.

3 The most upright must look to be exercised with false surmises.

4 What the practices are of one that desires to live without reprofe.

And those are, 1 To be undoubtedly assured of the forgiveness of his sins,
and of his unfeigned conuesion unto God, and often to renew this his assurance.
2 To beware of sin in respect of God, and his own conscience.

3 Through very hatred of sin not to offend. 4 Not to fall again into the same
offense. 5 To shun a man's proper faults whereunto he is most addicted. 6 No
not to commit the least of all. 7 In things lawful which are not necessary,
not to be much conversant.

8 Not to intermedle with other men's matters: but look what he is called unto
which is needful, that to do. 9 To take heed of all appearance of evil. 10
Yea to avoid even the occasions of sin.

5 Mark that godliness has authority, it shall have witness from the
wicked.

6 Since those people among whom Zachary and Elisabet lived, did not deprave
them, but gave them their due for reputation, let not us misconster the godly
carriage of our brethren.

7 What ones duty is when he is thought amiss of.

It shall be the part of a Christian man when he is slaundered by others, to
retain charity and patience.

1 To sift himself whether he has not sinned in some other kind, that he may
seek for pardon for it at the hands of God.

2 To lift up his mind from the accuser unto GOD, by whose wisdom all things
are ruled, and what he wills, diligently to search, and to perform.

3 To be grieved more with the sin of the slander, then with our own loss.

4 Not to be discouraged from endeavor in well doing. For that is the devils
intent, by this means to make us recoile.

5 Not to seem to take knowledge of it, that it may spread the less, and that
our adversaries may not from our grief gather the more joy.

The third thing said of them jointly, repeated the parties, and their cross
set down.

The parties as before Zachary, and Elisabet just, etc.

1 Gods children are subject to the same outward discomforts whereto other are,
so as they must look for them.

2 Walking in Gods commandments the cross may fall upon one.

1 So as that judge no man evil for his cross.

2 And as in thy cross, it is good presently to examine thy heart for sin, so
do not thy self that wrong to think, that if thou have repented for sin,
God is yet angry with thee.

3 Both married parties may be yoaked in one cross.

Their cross is that they had no child: because etc, where is the cause, and
continuance.

This is noted as a cross coming from God, children are the good blessings of
God, and every thing that has life, has gift to bring forth it like.

Children does God promise and give to Abraham and others as a favor.

Indeed the want of children does not straight way argue the anger of God, they
are but a common blessing to the good and bad.

Even in this kind, Zachary and Elisabet had more cause of grief; others,
though they had not many, yet might have a son, these had not so much as a
daughter.

Que. Why did God deal thus by them?

Aun. It is enough that he did this: nevertheless he did it to show,

1 That they were not just only for reward, as the devil charge Job.

2 To teach them that children are the gift of God.

3 To stir them up to pray.

4 And make them think of their duty to children as to make desire for
children.

1 Know then that God stays from us children, and brings such other crosses.

1 So as that we must needs think them good, which God does insflict. And
should bear them patiently.

2 Children are the favor of God, and the more the greater, so as they are too
blame, who think them a charge, or being married, would have none.

3 Gods children may want of the common favors, as children, etc.

4 In the cross God makes them drink deeper then others. Others may have
sons or daughters, these have not so much as one daughter.

5 Yet mark they are righteous, and want nothing to everlasting life: so good
is God, though he deprive of outward comforts.

6 As they want the comfort of good children, so are they free from pains,
cost, care, and have not the grief which comes by evil children.

7 Men should when they want children, or are under any cross, know the thing
they want is Gods gift, pray for it, vow it up to God, if God shall give it
them, as Hanna did her Samuel.

This is the cross: the cause follows, because that Elisabet was barren, and
here is the person, and the thing: the person, Elisabet, as before.

The thing, that she was barren.

Barrenness is natural inability to conceive.

This is noted as a blemish in Elisabet, not only for that children are a
benefit, but for that the Jews were much given to outward things, and that
most of the Jewish women were very fruitful, and they were the more desirous
to bear, for that (as some think) every of them looked to bear the Messiah.

Now this cross is the more grievous, for that it crossed them of one of their
chief intents in undertaking of marriage, namely children.

And could not be but occasion of grief, between a married couple.

And yet this blemish was without any fault of Elisabets, being in her by
nature, or the work of God.

See 1 how it pleases God, to let his children be under some reproach, and kind
of infamy. Sure for their good, to make them walk humbly with their God.

2 God many times crosses a man in his good intents, and desires to teach us
wholly to resign our selves over unto him.

3 As Zachary and Elisabet for all the barrenness and cross, continued their
justice amongst men, and kindness between themselves: so must we in what
domestical crosses soever.

4 It is a great comfort, howsoever we bear some blame, that the fault yet is
not ours. Elisabet had shame amongst women that she had no child, yet was it
not her fault, but natural barrenness: the like will be a great comfort unto
us in the like estate.

The continuance remains: both were well stricken in age, that is, this want
of children continued, till they were well stricken in years.

Now sure it is (no doubt) that they often prayed for children, and might seem
now to be out of hope.

1 God is wont to hold his children long time under the cross, so as that they
ought to prepare strength to continue and hold out.

2 When Gods children pray for outward things, he does not presently give them:
the exercise of their faith, and having other spiritual things are better.

3 When things seem past hope, God can work.

The fifth thing particulerly set down touching Zachary is,

Wherein is the tidings themselves, and that which immediately follows upon it.

The tidings are from the 8 to the 21 verse.

In the tidings are the time and messenger.

The time 8, 9, 10, and this is particularly set down to be when going into the
house of God he burnt incense, while the people was praying.

More largely set out, in that it was a part of his Priests office before. God
as his course came in order, according to the custom of the Priests office by
lot.

This latter stands first, and therefore will we consider of it first. It
has four special points in it.

1 That Zachary executed the priests office before god.

2 He did this as his course came in order.

3 There were certain customs of the Priests office.

4 He did this by lot.

The first has what he did, and how.

What, he executed the Priests office: how, before God.

A priest as before, representing Christ.

Executing the office, is not only to have the credit and profit of the place,
but to do the duty, how troublesome soever it seem.

1 Learn Gods goodness to the Church, that even before Christ's coming, he
left not the Church without instruction in Christ.

2 We must be as ready to bear the burdens of duties, as to have the credit
and profits.

3 No trouble should hinder us from doing our duty.

4 This message was brought to him, when he was in the duties of his calling,
so as that it is good to attend on them.

Before God: as in the presence of God, not only as this was a religious
duty, but as of his calling.

1 God indeed is after a special sort present in Church assemblies, so as we
should with desire resort thither, and with reverence continue there.

2 In any duty of any calling, a man should carry himself, as to God.

The second point is, that he thus did, as his course came in order.

Of these courses and order, look verse 5.

It is said his course, not that he rushed into another man's course.

Josephus writes that in his time, the number of parties in some one of these
courses was 5000, so as though Zacharias had not executed this office, some
other of the order likely might, or he might easily have got some other, for
consideration to have supplied his room. Greater is his commendation, that
though these courses had long agone been ordained, the execution of the duties
was not neglected.

1 Learn not to intrude into another man's course.

2 We must not as many do, when many are joined in one duty, put it of to
others. It is too true a saying, that which all men care for, no man cares for.

3 Yea we should, all that we possibly could, do our duties our selves.

4 In no case should time continued, make duties discontinued.

5 Most probable it is, that Zachary in the time of breathing till his course
came, he prepared himself to be the better furnished, for the next time to do
his duty; so should every of us.

1 The best preparation is, first by disburdning of the mind of other thoughts.

2 By seeking to God for grace by prayer.

The third point is: that he thus did, according to the custom of the Priests
office.

Of the priests office, we have heard before.

Custom, is often practice.

Custom is divine, renewed by authority of God, humane, renewed by authority
of man.


Humane are then good, when not binding conscience.

They are to edification: comely without scandal.

Both these no doubt Zachary observed.

It was very much that custom caused not, that Zachary did his duty with less
care, and conscience.

1 Mark, first the best custom is from God.

2 Good men must keep good customs of their places, being persuaded of the
lawfulness of them in their heart, not giving scandal to others.

3 Often doing a duty, should not make us do it the more slightly.

Therefore, let us remember Gods commandment to do it.

The necessity we have of doing it.

The fourth point is, that he did thus by Lot.

It may be demanded, whether he did the Priests office, according to the Lot
that fell to Abia, or this of offering incense, for some think the number of
the Priests increasing, and many duties being to be done, as offering the
lambs in sacryfice, looking to the lights, burning incense, etc, all which one
could not well do; they cast lots therefore who should do which, and to burn
incense fell to Zacharias. This opinion is not much amiss, if any place of
scripture would give light unto it.

But yet I think the former is meant, 1, because the scripture (that I know
of) no where mentions the latter.

2 Secondly, the former is manifest, 1, Chron, 24, 7, 10, verse.

3 Besides the labor of al was not so much, but one might well do all, having
help of the Leuits, as they were wont to have.

A lot it is certain was used.

I omit to speak of the manner of casting lots.

The word of God teaches that they were never used: 1. But in very great
matters, such as were godly. Look Leuit, 16, 8, Joshua, 7, 16, Acts, 1, 26.

2 To find out immediately the will of God. Proverbs, 16, 33.

3 With great reverence, having prayer before, Acts, 1, 24, 26.

Indeed the soldiers cast lots for Christ's garment, Ioh: 19, 24.

Hence some godly learned have gathered, that it is not seemly for a Christian
to use lots in sport.

For better understanding: know that lots are of 4 sorts.

1 Divine, appointed and used by God, these are commended of all.

2 For diabolical divination, as Haman; these are condemned of all.

3 Political for choice of Magistrates, in cases of war, these are tolerated.

4 Ludicrous for sport, these are called into question of most, let us try
whether they be lawful, yea or no.

1 Hierom says: a lot is hidden and incomprehensible predestination, ruled by
God, who dare play with this?

2 There cannot be showed any warrant for it in scripture, by precept,
practice, general, special, express, or employed, etc.

3 The scripture notes wicked men to have used them so: Psalm, 22, 18, John,
19, 24.

4 I see not but that a man may as well jest with the word, sacraments, oaths,
and such like.

5 Gods providence rules in all things, and therefore it may be said other
exercises should by this reason be forbidden. Indeed Gods providence does rule
every where, but in the most though, by means, but in a lot immediate. Now to
dally with that is dangerous and unmeet. For example: we all live by the
government of Queen, and Counsel, should every child, and wanton do well,
who would call the Prince and counsel personally to determine their sports.

6 Learned men hold then are lots only lawful, when they are necessary: what
necessity is there for play?

7 The difference between learned men, cannot but make men doubt whether it be
lawful, yea or no: then to use them doubtingly is sin.

Other reasons might be brought.

Of this kind are dice, cards, tables, drawing of cuts, lotteries, etc.

1 We are to be desired to forbear them.

2 We must use Gods ordinances with reverence.

3 And as the lot determined the will of God, we must labor in all our
affairs to be persuaded thereof toward us.

The time it self particularly set down follows, and is, While he burnt
incense, when he went into the Temple of the Lord, etc, verse, 10.

Where are things done in time, and the order of time.

Things done, burning incense, and the whole multitude continuing, etc.

The order is when, or after he went into the Temple of the Lord.

Burning incense: is to make (as we speak) perfume by burning, this was
according to Gods commandment. Exodus, 30, 7, 8.

There are two incense burnings mentioned in scriptures, commended by God.

One daily by the ordinary Priests, intercessory; Exodus, 30, 8, 10.

The other yearly the tenth day of the seventh month, by the high Priest,
propitiatory with blood. Leuit: 16, 11, 12.

These are distinct, and therefore the quotation in our Bibles of the 30 Exodus,
and 16 Leuit: to this place are not fit.

It may be demanded wether of these two incense burnings is here meant.

Some say the later, and therefore also judge that Zachary was the high Priest,
unsoundly.

1 For Luke calls him barely the Priest not high, which he would not have
done, if he had been the high Priest.

2 He did this by Lot: so did not the high Priest.

3 Then should he have gone into the most Holy, which is not mentioned, and
therefore not meant.

4 This his perfuming, was intercessory, as may appear by the peoples praying
in the mean while.

5 Zachary went home into the country, the high Priests house was in
Jerusalem, look Adrichom, 15, 1.

6 For the propitiatory, God gave order that none should be in the Temple, now
there wear a great many.

7 The high Priest at this time might be named, Matthias the son of
Theophilus.

This incense burning was the former.

It was ceremonial, as may appear, Exodus, 30.

The substance hereof, and of others was Christ making intercession for us. Now
indeed to compare it with Christ, it was but base.

Yet was it very sweet. Look Exodus, 30.34, 35, 36, 37.

It was burnt in the morning and evening. Look Exodus 30, 7, 8.

I gather then 1 That the Papists have no color for their Frankincense burning
at their mass, from this place or such others.

All ceremonies were mortal in themselves, died in Christ, were deadly
afterward.

2 Christ is our Mediator, not only of redemption, but intercession. Ephe. 5,
2.

3 How base soever Gods ordinances seem, they must be used with reverence and
diligence.

4 As the perfume smelled sweet, so does Christ in the nostrils of God, and we
in him.

5 As this perfume was daily, so should we seek to God in Christ every day.

6 As this was evening, and morning, so should be begin and end the day by
prayers to God in Christ.

The order is, (for it is here best to take the words as they lie) when, or
after he went into the Temple of the Lord.

Not that he had not his private prayers before.

This order notes the place, the place is marked by his coming to it, and the
owner of it.

The place is the Temple whereto he came, the owner of it is the Lord.

The Temple most usually taken, is the whole building, first founded and
beautified by Solomon, reedified in the time of Ezra and Nehemiah, after
repaired by Herod the great, spoken of before, for the solemn worship of God.

1 It had three parts. The first the outermost, called the Court, where the
people kept their assemblies, called Salomons porch, where Christ and his
Apostles preached, whence Christ drove the buyers and the sellers.

2 The second called the Holy, where the Priests burn^ sacrifice and Incense.

3 The third, called the most holy, where was the Arc, whetherto went once a
year the high Priest, to make reconciliation for the people.

This Temple was a type of Christ.

This manner of distinction was ceremonious, and for those times, as the Author
to the Hebrews notes, 9, 10.

The temple here so called, is the second room or distinction.

So as that the Papists have no warrant for distinguishing their Churches (as
they do) into body, and Chauncell, etc, having no warrant of commandment.

Object. Gods Temple was so: therefore.

Solu. God directed it so. The case is not like, when the Priest was in the
holy, or most holy, nothing was said, so as the people were not defrauded of
edification: in the Papists Churches, most is done in the Chauncell, which the
people hear not, but walk up and down in the body of the Church.

To this Zachary came first, not only doing the duty, but in manner and
form as it should be, the like must we do.

2 He was not content to be in the place, but to do the duty substantially,
no more must we.

3 Though the Temple were then even a den of thieues, he did not for his part
forbear to come, to due his duty commanded.

Why then should we forbear Gods ordinances for wicked resorters to them, so
that we do not communicate their sins?

The owner of the Temple is the Lord, Iehoua the true God, the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost.

Not that he was tied to the Temple, or did infuse actual holiness into it,
as some fondly thought, but for that.

1 God commanded it to be built. 2 It was dedicate to his honor and service.
3 Thereupon called by his name. 4 Wherein himself made special appearance in
favor. 5 And still (though it were profaned) kept the name and use. 6 Till
the Jews not returning to God, it was utterly rased. 1 Learn first not to
think superstitiously of Churches, putting holiness in the place.
2 We must not judge of our deeds by intention, it is necessary to have Gods
warrant for every thing, as Solomon had for the Temple.

3 Public places are for Gods public service.

4 And should be called by his name, if by any.

5 In holy public assemblies, there is a more special presence of God.

6 Therefore let us look to our feet when we come thither. Eccle. 4, 5.

7 Churches that have been abused, the abuse taken away, may serve for the
worship of God.

8 As the Lords Temple (when the people among who^ it was, would not repent)
was turned, so may any visible Church be defaced.

the whole multitude of the people were without in prayer, while the incense
was burning.

This sets out the time precisely, and seems to have been in the feast of
trumpets.

John was prophesied to be the voice of a crier. He began to preach in the
feast of trumpets, therefore it is most likely he was thereabouts conceived,
which was the 11 of September, on Thursday. For Christ, who was 6 months
younger then John, was conceived the 25 of March.

But be this as it may be, here are five things to be marked.

1 What was done, they prayed. 2 Of whom, the whole multitude of people. 3
Where, without. 4 When, while the incense was burning. 5 How long, while the
incense was burning.

I shall not need to show what it is to pray. It is craving things needful of
God according to his will, or so, praising him.

It is not said whether one uttered the prayer, and the others joined thereto,
or whether (as in singing of Psalms) they all uttered them together.

I think this latter. Look the title of the Psalm, 22.

Sure it was some set form of prayer, to agree with the set form of the
incense-burning.

Forget not then, 1 That one of practice in the Temple of the Lord, is to pray.

2 That set forms of prayer are warrantable.

3 That they should be resorted unto.

4 Then is Christ's intercession for us, when we by his Spirit can pray for our
selves.

The people prayed. The people are here, such as Paul 1, Cor, 14, 23, calls
unlearned. Not Priests, though it can not be thought but some Priests were
among the^, but they are thus called by the greater part, who for that (as some
think) this was one of the three feastiuall times when all the males were to
appear, were of diverse sorts, some of higher place, who might pretend
employment in greater matters, poorer, who might allege that they could not
attend this, ouerlaboured, who should need refreshing.

Women are not here mentioned, but sure it is there were of them. As may
appear by Anna, 1, Sam, 1, and Luke, 2, 30.

Mary came up with Joseph to the feasts afterward.

Yea children came, as may appear by the precept. Exo. 23, 17. and the
practice, Luke the 2, 42, 43. Thus seems Paul to have been brought up. Now
for that good examples are patterns for us, we must learn,

1 Not men in high place to pretend employment unnecessary, for exemption from
the duties of the worship of God, though the duties seem baser, as ordinary
prayer.

2 Poor men in pretense of needing to work or buy, etc, must not forbear.

3 Servants should not make such times only for bodily refreshing,

4 Yea women which ask more dressing, and nurse children, must all they can,
cast to be at such assemblies.

5 Children should their way chalked to the house of God. They were in the
Temple singing Hosanna.

Now some think that this meeting was on a week day, to wit, Thursday, for
which I will not much contend. Sure it is, Gods servants did resort together to
the worship of God, not only on the Sabbaoths and set feasts, but on other
days.

God appointed the daily sacrifice: thither to did Anna Luc, 2, 37, resort.

Gods servants meditate in his word day and night.

A practice see, Act, 13, 42.

And such exercises as are needful, warrantable by the good laws of our
country, should we take as appointed from God. We ought therefore to resort to
the week exercises especially.

1 For that we have as necessary use of them for our souls, as of markets for
bodily affairs.

2 They will be in steed of household exercises, which all should have, but few
have.

3 Men are so ignorant, as it is very necessary thus to be helped.

4 Few or none absent, but spend as much or more time in the week worse.

5 Men may make supply of the time, by rising early, going late to bed, working
harder, spending less.

6 It has been the practice of best Churches

7 This people have done it more heertofore then now. Men should not go back.

8 Strangers do come, 9. Those who are nigh the Church have little excuse.

10 By thus resorting we should bewray our true love to good things, when thus
without constraint we resort.

We would not secure any man, and speak but for the good of all.

This people praying, was a multitude, and whole.

It is thought, this multitude came by occasion of the feast, according as
Exodus, 23, 14. Yet sure the trumpets was not one of the^, but might be about the
feasts of trumpets. Sure this multitude was either by occasion of the feast, or
otherwise.

If it were by occasion of the feast, mark Exodus, 34, 24.

1 God promises his people outward things if they seek spiritual.

2 The people trust God, and do not fear want.

3 They had their whole families in good order, who could bring them thus
thither.

If it were not by occasion of the feast, yet did Gods servants so in
Jerusalem. Look Psalm, 110, 3, Psalm, 8, 4.

So should we do.

This multitude whole, was in prayer. Joining in heart to one voice, or with one
voice did pray.

There was no private behavior or exercises.

The children joined with them.

Now follows where, this was without; that is, in the first part of the
Temple, appointed for the people, to shadow out that yet things of Christ were
not most clear. This was but ceremonial, neither was it in base conceit of
the people.

1 The Papists have no warrant for providing so now, especially with that
contempt of the people, not providing for their edifying.

2 The Jews kept Gods ordinances in small matters, so should we, and not count
it preciseness.

3 Much more should we keep the great commandments.

The time when, while the incense was burning.

This was early in the morning.

1 We must be early in Gods service, 2, Must know the meaning thereof, 3, In
heart must do as the service shows.

The last is, how long. While the incense was burning.

It seems that it was not very long, but it was the usual time appointed by
God, kept by the people; now the Jews manner was being with the first, not to
depart till the assembly were dismissed, as Numb: 6, 23, so Nehem, 8, 3.

And for continuance, look Act: 20, 7, 11. Some were with Christ three days.
Matthew, 15, 32.

This is spoken of prayer, it must be stretched to preaching, to divine
service, and worship of God.

It is hard to continue in any good thing, much more in these; yet must we
endeavor thereafter.

To leese but a part is very prejudicial; It is not well to mislike a man for
holding us the time.

Thus far for the time, the messenger follows, verse, 11,

Where we may sunder the person and his speech.

The person, verse, 11, 12. The speech in the rest.

And the person, alone, or with the accident which fell out at his presence.

In the person may be marked, 1 his nature and office, an Angel of the Lord, 2
his manner of presence, he appeared to him.

3 His situation and place, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.

In the nature and office may be seen what he is, an Angel. Whence and from
whom, of the Lord.

Angel is a greek word, and signifies in scriptures, first a nature or
substance spiritual, created according to the image of God, being no part of
another. And this is one of the most excellentest creatures that are.

Secondly, it signifies office, or one sent, in which sense, John the Baptist
is called an Angel. Mala: 3, 1.

Thirdly, it signifies both these together, as else where in scriptures, so in
this place. And so Angels are said to be ministering spirits, etc. Heb, 1, 14.

The Lord, here, is the true Iehoua, whose, the Angels are said to be.

1 For that he created them, 2 They are about him in most special manner of
service, 3 Do his commandments toward all the creatures, but especially
toward his Church.

Yet is it not ordinary, especially in these latter times, immediately to use
these toward men. We may learn from hence.

1 Angels are not only motions, they are essences and beings.

2 How careful God is for the good of his children, that rather then they
should want, sends his own Angels for their good.

Quest. Could not God have acquainted Zacharias with this, some other way?

Aun. Yes: but for the excellency of the thing he used an Angel.

3 We must take heed how we hurt godly men, upon whom Angels do attend.

4 We ought to be ready to serve the necessities of the Saints, since the
Angels are so,

5 None should think basely of the Ministry, seeing Angels some times
execute the duties thereof, and that in smaller matters, then to teach
salvation by Christ. So that parents should not grutch their children to the
Ministry.

The manner of presence follows, appeared to him. Here is how he bewrayed
himself, and to whom.

He bewrayed himself to sight, for so signified the word appeared, that is,
was seen.

He appeared by having a bodily shape (most likely of a man) wherein appeared
extraordinary brightness.

Otherwise Angels have no bodies of their own.

The bodies they have, are not Fantastical, but made and dissolved by God.

Why do Angels appear like men? Some think, in former times to prefigure the
incarnation of Christ: I judge, that they might more familiarly be with men.

This appearing is extraordinary.

1 Do not think that Angels have bodies of their own: Thevr wings signify
their swiftness to do the will of GOD.

2 God making and dissoluing Angels bodies, can do any thing.

3 Never look after apparition of Angels. The word and sacraments are clear
enough. Good Angels speak according to Gods word.

He appeared to Zacharias.

So godly men find more favors then they look for. Some being hospital,
received Angels. Heb, 13, 2.

Let us wait therefore in our callings in well doing.

The last is his situation, standing, place, at the right, etc. that is, about
the Altar, and at the right side.

Standing, shows readiness to deliver his message.

For the Altar, look Exodus, 30, 1, 2, 3, etc.

Right side is in comparison of man.

Heart in man is the left side, the other is right, which according to diverse
positions, changes.

The Jews Temple had three partitions.

It looked to the West.

The Altar of incense was in the middle partition.

This of East and West is not but ceremonial, so as the Papists have no reason
to press such constitutions.

The accident which fell out at the Angels presence follows, verse, 12. And
when Zacharias saw him, he was, etc.

Where the chief thing is, Zacharias being troubled, and feared.

This is set out by the party, Zacharias, the occasion, seeing, etc. We will
follow the words.

Zacharias as before, a godly man, walking in all the commandments, etc. So
has it been with other godly men, Daniell, the Shepherds, Peter, Acts, 12,
11, Esaias, 6, 5.

1 The best men carry about them some relics of sin and corruption, which may
humble them.

2 No doubt Zacharias was not thus but upon this occasion, so as we must not
judge of our estate by present feeling and confidence.

3 It is hard to come to a thorough insight into our weakness, or measure of
strength.

4 If godly men be sometimes thus shaken, themselves nor others, must not for
that mislike them.

5 And if godly men feel these sometimes, what may the wicked look for?

The occasion is seeing, that is, the Angel.

Not only for that he was in a place, where at such times none but the Priests
were to be, but also for that there appeared some glory and majesty, more then
ordinary in a man.

It is to be marked, that the Angel coming to Zacharias was seen of him.
Balaam a good while could not see the Angel.

1 This must we labor after, when God offers means to see and perceive them.

2 Till Zacharias saw, he did not fear, whereby our not fearing, or having
heart in our selves, is for that we see not God.

3 It is marvel that God himself being present every where, Zacharias could
not open the eyes of his mind to perceive him, but was more affected with
bodily sight: such is all our weakness.

4 If Zacharias was thus affected at sight, why are we nothing at hearing Gods
word, and feeling his corrections?

Quest. Did not Zacharias fear before? An. Yes. But when more occasion was
offered, he feared more. So must we.

Zacharias saw the Angel appearing in a bodily shape.

An Angel is but a creature, somewhat indeed above a man.

1 Learn a practice of humiliation, when you would abase your self, never
compare your self with your equal or inferior, but with superiors, otherwise
then the most do.

2 If Zacharias could not abide the presence of the servant, what would he or
we do at the presence of the Lord?

3 And if a messenger of good tidings be thus terrible, what would one that
should denounce the everlasting wrath of God?

4 And seeing that Zacharias thus feared, it cannot be, but wicked men at Gods
presence, will call for the Mountains to fall upon them, etc.

There remains, that he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.

Here are two branches, the first, that he was troubled.

This word troubled, is like water stirred when one cannot see through it, and
shows a great perplexity of mind, when one cannot tell what to think. Some
such thing is said of Christ. John, 11, 33. John, 13, 21.

Save that Christ troubled himself, God troubled Zacharias: Christ was like
fair water in a pure glass without mixture of dregs, Zacharias was not so.

1 Learn that Christians should not be Stoics, without affections, or
passions.

2 They sometimes in somethings are ignorant.

3 For a time, sometimes they are at their wits end.

4 So to be exercised, is not a desperate estate, no more then Zacharias was.

5 Zacharias being in it, ran not away, but stood it out: so must we, and
shall have a good issue.

The second is, fear fell upon, the affection, and property.

Affection, fear, property, suddenness.

Fear here signifies looking to suffer some evil. This is the worser kind
of fear. There is another, which is of desiring to do no evil.

1 The former fear is not evil, so it be not alone.

2 Gods children may sometime be shaken with fear.

The suddenness appears by the word of fell upon him.

1 Crosses many times come suddenly.

2 Present grace on the sudden, is like to be true.

3 Now as Zacharias said nothing, it should be our best course if we came where
evil apparitions are, not (as many do) to offer speech.

1 For that we have no calling thereto, ordinary or extraordinary.

2 By this speech hurt came to mankind in Eve.

Consider the sons of Sceua, Acts, 19, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Besides, this has made the devils testimony of some account.

Quest. What should we do?

Aun. Call upon God by prayer.

Now follows the Angels speech,

It to verse 21. What fell out upon it immediately. ver: 21, 22, 23.

And this speech it self, is either First. Aunswering.


First from 13 to the latter end of 17. And here the Evangelist shows, 1
That the Angel spoke, 2 what he spoke.

That he spoke, but the Angel said to him, where is 1 The party who, the
Angel. 2 The action what, said. 3 The party to whom, Zacharias.

The Angel, far above man in excellency, sent to man, thinks no scorn to
do the message himself.

No more should any, how great soever their places be, refuse to do their
duties, even to the meanest, and if need be, even by themselves.

It may be demanded, whether this saying or speaking was with some sound to
the ear or sense, to the mind or both.

Aun. The Angel appearing in a bodily shape, might use a bodily voice.

Sure it is Zacharias did understand him.

So must Angels speak as that they may be understood.

So must people hear as understand.

Zacharias when the Angel spoke unto him, was greatly perplexed.

Thus God neglects not the troubled, but many times in their greatest need
cheereth them up.

Now follows what he spoke, fear not Zacharias, and so on to the end of the
17 verse.

All which speech is partly, 1 comfort to Zacharias in his present estate. 2
words of the Angels general charge.

Of comfort, fear not Zacharias. Where first it may be demanded, whether the
Angel were sent of purpose to comfort Zacharias.

Aun. I think, no: Nevertheless Zacharias his fear falling out, God would
have him comforted, that the Angels message might be the better entertained.
This the Angel presently knowing from God, comfort Zacharias.

1 None of us must without warrant from God, adventure upon any thing.

2 We ought like the Angels quickly to perceive the will and meaning of God.

3 God would have us so to be disposed in mind, as that his commandments
might sinck the deeper into us.

So are we disposed when cast down by fear, we are lifted up by faith.

This comfort, forbids to fear, where we may mark the manner of speaking
to the party, and the words of comfort.

The manner is, that the Angel calls him by his name, Zacharias.

Thereby showing that this apparision was not a thing at all adventures, but
for Zacharias sake, which he likewise should mark.

God would have his people know, when he sends general means, he does
particularly respect his.

The people of God must particularly apply these means to themselves.

The words of comfort, are, fear not, and signify not only that he should not
fear, but should be of good courage.

It may be demanded whether all fear is here forbidden.

Aun. No. For some fear is necessary and commendable.

Quest. What fear is forbidden? An: we must consider that fear is diverse, 1
Some proceeds from unbelief, some from faith: again, some fear drives
from God, some to seek God and his favor.

Some fear is to suffer evil, some, to do evil.

That fear is here forbidden which is from unbelief, which drives from God.

That fear which is to suffer evil, is not simply forbidden, except it be
alone without fear of doing evil, or be immoderat and too much.

Otherwise it has it use to preserve humility, the softness of the heart,
stirring up to prayer.

Now for that Zachary did fear too much, he is bid not to fear, that is, as
he did, or so much.

Where we may see, that Gods children think themselves, many times in worse
estate then indeed they are.

That they have not such cause to fear, as they think many times they have.

Quest. How should I know whether I ought to fear?

Aun. Search your conscience, if you find any sin unrepented of, fear.

Zachary must not only not fear, but be of good cheer, that is, be persuaded
of Gods love toward him, and look for a benefit.

So must every repentant sinner do.

Indeed will some say, if a good Angel did bid me not fear; it were somewhat.

Aun. We have the promises of God in his word, above the Angels words.

Thus far for the comfort, now follow the words of the Angels general charge,
for thy prayer is heard, etc.

And these we may consider joined to the former, or whole in them selves.

The word joining them is, for, which shows that the Angel presently makes
profitable use of his message, as every Angel in office ought to do. Ministers
are Surgeons, and Physicians, to apply plasters to ulcers, and medicines to
diseases, Esaias, 50, 4
and therefore does God give them the tongue of the learned to minister a word
in season, instruction to ignorant, comfort to the heavy soul, reproof to the
sinner: so as people should pray that their Ministers thus should do, and
themselves should desire thus (if they will be healed) to be dealt with.

In this manner the Angel applies: he whose prayer is heard, and who shall
have a most excellent son, must not fear.

But thy prayer is heard, and thou shall have a son. Therefore.

Now that one whose prayers are heard, need not fear, it is clear, for God
who hears, does promise to hear in love; and the things prayed for, and
granted, are such as show we are in most high favor with God, as forgiveness
of sin, justification, adoption, etc.

The like might be said of such a child as John was.

The words of the message or charge whole in themselves follow, an have two
branches: 1 thy prayer is heard: 2 thy wife Elizabet shall bear thee a child.

In the former we may consider, 1 Zacharies practice of prayer, 2 The success:
is heard.

The word here translated prayer, is in Greek as much as deprecatio^, that
is, prayer for removing, or keeping away evils, but by a speech, putting part
for the whole, is well translated, prayer.

Prayer is a craving for of things from God, according to his will.

Gods will requires that our prayers should have warrant.

1 Of commandment to pray and promise to be heard.

2 That we should desire to be heard for Christ.

3 That we should have a feeling of the things we pray for.

4 That we should ask in special faith, with persuasion that we shall be heard.

5 That we must pray in repentance, and charity.

6 That we refer the performance of our prayers to the glory of God.

Quest. What did Zachary pray for?

Aun. All things necessary for his own salvation, the discharge of his place
at home and abroad in his priests office, and for outward comforts, as a
child: so far as God should see good.

And this prayer of his, was not once, but iterated and often.

1 Learn that it is one duty of Gods children, to pray.

2 And that according to the former rules.

3 And for things which they ought to wish for.

4 And that with frequentation, and continuance.

Now follows the success, is heard.

Quest. Of whom? Aun. Of him to whom it was made namely of God.

Hearing is properly in a body which has ears, and is ascribed to God
according to the work of hearing, which is to convey knowledge, so as that, is
heard: is as much as if he should say, is taken knowledge of.

Gods taking knowledge is of all things and persons in general; and of his
Church and children in special.

This second kind is here meant.

It has 2 degrees 1: approbation, the second performance of the prayer.

Approbation is whereby God likes the petition.

Performance is, when God does the thing desired.

God always likes the prayers, sometimes he does not perform them, and that
for these ends.

1 That he might exercise their faith and hope with other graces, which would
not be so much, if we had feeling and enjoying.

2 To make us think better of the things the longer deferred.

3 That God might show his servants to pray as well for conscience, as reward,
not all for what will ye give me.

4 To inure his children more to humiliation, and to bear crossings of men,
when God himself thus deals with his children.

5 To make us more thankful for good things when we have them.

1 Know that God allows not every bodies prayer.

2 God always allows his childrens prayers.

3 When God performs not the prayers of his children, the former ends must be
wrought in them.

4 When GOD sees good, he performs the desires of his children.

Que. Why does the Angel tell Zachary that his prayer was heard?

Aun. Because not only he, but the best of Gods children sometimes doubt
hereof at some instant, so as that if we be assailed with such fear, it was
Zacharias his case.

Quest. How might I know that my prayer is heard, no Angel telling me so?

Aun. Gods word tells us, that if we ask things thereafter, God hears us,
and this is as good as if all the Angels in heaven should tell us.

Hitherto the first branch of the message: the latter follows.

Thy wife Elizabet, etc.

This tells him that he shall have a son, and that shortly. more largely.


Shortly: thy wife Elizabet shall bear thee a son, promising a gift.

Wherein we may consider: 1 the kind of the gift, a son: 2 the party by
whom, thy wife Elizabet: 3 the manner how, shall bear: 4 the party to whom,
thee old Zacharias.

We will follow the words in the text. The first is the party by whom, set
out by relation and name.

By relation: thy wife: where mark who she is, and how he calls her.

1 She is his lawful wife, no concubine, or strumpet.

Honest men always keep them to their wives, crack not their
maide-seruaunts, and then convey them away, and help them to a sorry marriage.

2 She was barren, and by years past childbearing.

1 Learn that nothing is impossible to God, especially his promises.

2 And they who are childbearing, let them seek to God, he can send if they
want children.

3 Though wives be old, GOD can afford sufficient comfort by them, though not
children, others as good as that, yea many times more sounder then younger.

Wives who are not wayed, know not their duties, their husbands dispositions,
are not every way fitted equally to draw.

So as that men should not mislike the wife of their youth in her age.

He calls her by the name of his wife, as he would have done toward any other
man, not a Priest, he speaks not disdainfully, or scornfully.

So should we learn to speak of Bishops, wives, who may as well marry as
any, and that by the learning of Papists, not vowing.

Her name is Elisabet, that signifies the oath of the mighty God.

I know not how true that observation of some Jews is, that good people are
set down by name in scriptures: not so wicked.

I take it she is named as to show, that even by that his only and old wife,
should have a son.

He had but this one wife, so is the miracle manifest.

The manner stands next, shall bear, where is the special manner, and the
time indefinit.

Bear, the word used, signifies as well to beget as bear, the meaning is,
shall conceive, go with child, and in time be safe delivered.

It had been some comfort, that she might have helped to bring it up as a dry
Nurse, but to bear it in her body was very much: not only in respect of the
great pains of childbearing in any, but especially of the first child, when
the Mother is very old, or very young, there is great danger, and yet the
spirit of God speaks nothing hereof, though it implies them.

1 Mark that these outward burdens of bearing and bringing up children, are
common to the godly and wicked, so as that the most godly shall not be freed
from them.

2 Women thinking of pains of childbearing, should renew repentance for the
first fall, remembering the curse ever since.

3 Though Gods benefits be sometimes mingled with crosses and hardness, we
must not be discouraged, look not at the hardness, look upon the favor.

The time is indefinitely set, 1 to exercise his faith.

And yet God performed it as soon as might be, so diverse times God deals
with his.

The party to whom this gift is, to thee: O old, and not very rich Zacharias.

Que. To me might Zacharias say, and not to herself?

Aun. Yes to her to, but to thee as of thy body lawfully begotten, which thou
in most special sort must think of for thy self, because:

1 How soever children are to the Mother, they keep, and propagate the Fathers
name to posterity, and stand in his stead.

2 In old age begotten, they are wont to be loved most, as Gene, 24, 36, and
Gene, 37, 3.

For that the Father seeing them, thinks him self not altogether spent, is
delighted to refresh himself with such young things, but especially, if he
have but one, and that prove toward, and likely to do well, so is it here.

And it is to be marked, that the Angel says, she shall bear to thee, and
never forbeareth to tell him this, in respect of his age, or want of wealth.

1 Think that if we have such joy to have a child in our old age, what
pleasure does GOD take in our being borne anew to him, after long time.

2 Even Fathers ought to love their children, and the more, because they have
had the less pains with them.

3 We must not be discouraged if God send us children, when we are not likely
to live to see their bringing up, or if we have not great wealth in that kind,
let us do our uttermost for the present, and leave the rest to God. Solomon
and loseph did not fare worst.

4 Children are bound to increase mutual love between parents.

5 Husbands should more love their wives, for more children brought forth.
Look Gene 29, 34, 1, Sam, 1.

The kind of benefit is a son.

A child is a benefit.

Especially to a Jew.

Promised children in scriptures were excellent, as Isaac, Josiah, Christ,
Sampson, the Shunamites child, whom some think to have been Jonas the prophet.

Let us thank God for children, and endeavor they may be good, by praying for
them, giving them to God, using all means for their good.

Now follows the further, or more largely setting down of the latter clause
of his message, and that 1 by the name 2 by the effects of this child.

For the name, it is said, thou shall call his name John.

Wherein we may consider the name, the party who gives order for it, the
means by whom it is.

The name is John. John may some body say: did the Angel speak English?

No, but he signified such a name as our John expresses.

The name John, in the Hebrew or Siriack is of the name God, Iah: and a word
which signifies favor, favored of God.

Neither is this name thus, but all for the most of scripture names are
significatiue, implying some good thing.

So should our names which we give be.

Some offend in excess, as those who take names of God, as Jesuits, Emmanuel.

Of Angels, as Gabriel, Michael, etc.

Of virtues, as patience, grace, etc.

In defect, as giving names of flowers or stones, or Heathen names to
Christians.

Quest. Is it not lawful to give any of these latter names noted.

Aun. I think it not so convenient, for that there be other very good, and we
ought to use what means of good we can, etc.

The party who gives this name is implied, to be he who sent the Angel, what
is God, so has he given names to other choice persons in scriptures.

To teach us to mark such notable personages, whom God has so called, we
shall find many worthy things in them.

As also that we should mark even names, and the least things in scripture,
much more the greatest.

Now it is to be marked that it is said, thou shall call, that is, thou
ought to call when I so appoint, that though it be but a small matter, thou
do not violate this charge.

Nothing is little which God commands.

One cannot be to precise in keeping the least of Gods appointments.

The means by whom this name is given, thou: that is, his father.

So do we see elsewhere in scriptures, so did Adam give names to the creatures,
so did Jacob change Be-nonie to Benjamin.

And whereas mothers do it, it should be by the liking of fathers.

Wherefore Parents should not wholly put over this duty of name giving to
children, to the witnesses.

And if the father should give the name, it is most meet he should be present
at the giving of it, for that in his right, the child is interessed in the
covenant.

Now follow the effects of this child, and those, 1 by themselves, 2 in their
causes.

By themselves verse.

One party is the father, the other many,

The father was old, and as it might seem, comfortless in this age, yet God
respects him, as no doubt he does others in the like case.

Ob. It may be demanded; whether the mother should not have comfort.

Sol. Yes: but that is implied in the fathers joy.

The things which are said to befall the father, are joy and gladness, both
which arise from conceit of some present or hoped good.

They differ not much, save that joy may be said to be more inward, gladness
more outward: joy the lesle, gladness the more.

These and such like affections are diversely in the unregenerate regenerate.


In the regenerate, they are, 1 in this which please God, 2 stirred by the
spirit of sanctification, 3 kept in good measure. It is otherwise in
unregenerate.

These were to be in Zachary in the best kind.

It is not said whence these should come, certain it is from GOD. Godly men
are not Stoics. All rejoicing is not lawful. The joy we have, God gives. God
gives for comfort.

God promising outward things, we are to look for them by faith and the more
he gives us, the more must we be cheerful in his service.

The effects in respect of other (who are many) follow. Where besides the
parties, we may consider the kind of thing, and the occasion. We will begin
backward. The occasion is his: that is, John Baptists birth.

His birth, to speak properly, is his coming into the world, but this is not
meant alone, but especially his life, office, and discharge thereof in love,
whereof they are said to rejoice at his birth; so Job misliking his life,
curses his birth, conception, etc, 3 Job. 3, thus in detestation of Naball and
Ahab is said, that there shall not be left a dog, etc.

So, blessed is the belly that bear thee.

Now thus affections thus noted of the people, should teach us offices, and
that,

1 The nature of true love stretches to all things, belonging to the thing
beloved.

2 That men must be judged of by their duties, and execution thereof.

3 Men must love ministeries, like John's conuincing of sin.

4 Yet so, as that they must love Christ whereto they must be lead.

5 And seeing that John was as well for the whole Church as private persons, we
all should rejoice at occasions of Church good.

The affection noted in the parties is, that they shall rejoice.

Rejoicing (I take it) is nothing but to bewray conceived joy.

This was, as especially by the former occasion, so not without simpathy to
Zacharias and Elisabets joy.

The rejoicing is always with some feeling. And as a man would think, but a
small matter where no doing is mentioned: yet it is implied that they
witnessed their joy.

1 The greater Gods benefits are, the greater feeling of them should we have.

2 If we can do nothing else, it is acceptable to God, when we do but rejoice
at good things.

3 We must not be wanting when occasion serves to witness our joy.

4 If we should joy, when good things are enjoyed, we should look for them
when we want them.

The parties are many, many may be used strictly of any number above two.

Here it signifies diverse besides the parenty.

Now surely these times were very corrupt, wherein one would think there had
not been one good, so it is,

1 God always has his number in the worst times.

2 We must not despise the beginings of grace, they will grow.

3 Mark the power of godliness, it has the same work, in many, and all in
whom it is.

Hitherto the effects, now follow the causes toward the effects. in them
selves.


Toward the effects, and so they are brought into prove, and confirm them as
for that John should be such a one, the parents and others should have cause,
and ought to rejoice.

So as who do not, are justly to be blamed.

The causes in themselves are reckoned up in 4 branches.

The first, he, that is, John, shall be great in the sight of the Lord.

Where we may see what is said of him: he shall be great.

And in what sense, in the sight of the Lord.

Great. John is so as that none greater then he among women's children.

And this great, is of great account and worth, the same in meaning with good.

Great was John, as appointed to do great things, to prepare men to Christ,
endued with great graces of knowledge, zeal, courage, etc. effecting great
things, so as that many submitted themselves to his ministry. Luke, 3.

Now John is not said simply to be great, as in the eyes of the world, for he
was very contemptible, but in the sight of the Lord.

The Lord here signifies the true God.

Sight is a borrowed speech, taken from such creatures as have eyes, whereby
the use of eyes, and that which follows thereon is implied: and therefore
when this speech is used toward creatures in general, or wicked, it implies
Gods knowledge; as Emrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord, that is, openly,
and known of God. But when it is used toward godly persons, then it signifies
to approve as here, and before of Zachary and Elisabet it was said, they were
just before God, that is, God approving their justice.

Know then that Gods children are great some way.

Though indeed, not always to the world ward,

So as that we ought not to judge of ones greatness by his outward appearance
to the world.

That who so would be great, must be in the sight of God by Christ, and the
gifts of his Spirit.

If godly men be great with GOD, they ought so to be with us.

And in no case must we wrong them, least we provoke God against us.

The second branch is, and shall neither drink wine, nor strong drink.

These words declare that he should be a Nazarite, whereof look Numb, 6, 3, so
was Sampson, save that the Nazarites, Numb, 6, 2, vowed themselves, Sampson and
John were appointed by God.

One part of the Nazarites duty was, neither to drink wine, nor strong drink.

Wine is the blood, or juice of grapes.

Strong drink, in the original Shekar, any made drink, which immoderatly
used, will procure drunkenness, as the Jews had luyce of Dates. In Wales is
Metheglin, in Ireland Husqueba, in England Sider, Beer, Ale.

Now this, and such like was forbidden them.

Quest. Why were these forbidden?

Aun. Not for any unholiness in them, or that men by forbearing of them only
were more holy, but to teach moderation by some in all things, and to show that
a means to help heereto, is to forbear lawful things.

It may seem strange, that John should forbear Wine, and Christ drink it.

Whereby we may learn, not to judge of men's holiness only by their outward
strictness, else might we prefer John before Christ.

Object. It may be objected, that Christ was a Nazarite, Math, 2, 23, and
therefore should not drink Wine.

Solu. It was not meant that he should be such a professed Nazarite, as the Law
names, but he should be such a most holy person, as the Nazarite prefigured.
So Christ is a Lamb, who was prefigured by Lambs.

If John would forbear Wine, we ought to forbear sin.

And if he quite forbore strong drink, we must take heed of drunkenness.

The third branch is, that he shall be filled with the holy Ghost, even from
his Mothers womb.

Wherein is a special gift to be bestowed upon him declared. This gift is the
holy Ghost, which is further made known by the measure of it, in that it is
said, he shall be full, and the time, in as much as it shall be from his
mothers womb.

The gift is most excellent, so as GOD when he would find out the choicest,
could not bestow a better on John, no not on his own son.

Whereby we may learn whereof to make most account.

Holy Ghost, is the third person in Trinity, and is sometimes put for the
person it self, sometimes for his works, as here it is.

Among the many works of the holy Ghost, is sanctification. furnishing to
particular calling.


Sanctification is whereby a party is made holy in the presence of God, Christ
his holiness imputed, and new in the party ingenerated.

This in parties of years, is never without faith.

Quest. Is it here meant, that John from his Mothers womb should have faith?

Aun. We may speak of faith in the seed, and as it may prove afterward or as
it is present: if in the seed (as the full care may be said to be in the
grain) it may be allowed, otherwise it is not actual, for children have no
knowledge.

Ob. It is said without faith we cannot please God: therefore.

Aun. That is meant in parties of discretion and understanding. Many such
speeches have their limitation. The party that was not circumcised was
threatened to be cut of from out of Gods people: and yet many died before time
of circumcision: therefore it is meant of contemning. So whosoever eats not
Christ's flesh, etc.

Furnishing to particular calling is, whereby one is endued with ability, to
do the work of his warrantable calling.

Now this gift is promised, not only as excellent, but as necessary.

And though John Baptist were an extraordinary man, yet somewhat in this is
for our instruction.

1 It is necessary for every one in his place to have the Holy Ghost.

2 The Holy Ghost must show himself in every of us, by sainctification and
abilities for our calling.

3 If gifts for particular calling are of the holy Ghost, particular callings
in their kind are holy.

4 That which was given to John extraordinarily, is bestowed upon us by means
of the word, prayer, endeavor.

5 Gifts of the Spirit must be used to the honor of the giver.

The measure follows, filled. This may some say, belongs to Christ who has
fullness.

Aun. Christ has fullness of himself, John from Christ. Christ has perfect
fullness, John but in comparison of others, so as this filled, is to have a
great measure above other men. The same is contrary, Act, 5, 3.

1 See, that God gives not all alike to all. So as none must repine at others,
or be grieved for themselves.

2 In the greater places men are, the more fullness need they of the Holy
Ghost.

Great places are to be judged by the great good they procure, and the great
numbers they have to do with.

Therefore Princes, Magistrates, Ministers, masters of families, must labor
for more then others.

The time is, from his mothers womb, the Syrian has it, in his mothers womb:
the meaning is, as soon as possibly may be. So was it with Jeremy, Timothy,
etc.

1 So God furnishes before he use men. Men therefore must look to their
gifts, before they venture on places.

2 He furnishes as soon as may be, to teach us that we ought so to do in our
children, or with any we have to deal with.

The fourth and last branch remains, verse, 16, 17. Which shows a great
work that John shall do.

It is named in that it is said, and many of the children of Israel shall he
turn to their Lord God.

Mark what is a cheifest work, that God sets his about.

It may be marueiled this to turn men being a work of God, how it can be said
of John.

Not indeed for that John did it by his own power or godliness, but for that
he was the means which God blessed. The like is elsewhere.

1 This should teach us to use all means with reverence.

2 In the due use of means, to wait for blessing.

3 That we need not seek outward and worldly helps, since John so silly a
man for the world, wrought this.

The work we may consider in it self, and toward the persons whom it is said
to concern.

In it self, it is converting to their Lord God.

Converting, is the same that is to cause to repent: yet by it is implied a
turning a side, so indeed have we all done.

And in this work, we may mark the nature of it, and that whereto it must be.
The nature is, converting.

Converting is changing. For better understanding whereof, we may consider the
thing to be converted, the properties of conversion, and the parts.

The thing is the whole man.

The properties are: that, 1 it must be true: 2 present: 3 manifest: 4
continually: 5 daily mending.

The parts are, 1 dying to sin, in the practice, and in the power, 2 living to
godliness.

That whereunto this turning is, is their Lord God, that is, the Lord their
God, so that it is the Lord, who is further made known by this addition, their
God.

In speaking hereof consider the meaning, and of whom it is meant.

Lord, does signify the true God as before, and that most properly in his
essence: but not so here, for Gods essence is every where, and none can trune
from it. But here it is put for Gods favor, and will: so Zephan, 2, 3.

So that here to the Lord, is to his will or liking. His will is our
sanctification, 1 Thessalonians: 4, 3.

And indeed the Angel means to the liking or liknesse of God and his image.
The beginning whereof is in faith, and perfection in wisdom and rightousnesse.

So as that whosoever will truly turn, 1 Must believe in Christ.

2 Must be holy, 3 Must be righteous.

The addition whereby the Lord is made known, is their God, which are the
words of the covenant. The foundation whereof is God, the parties couenanting,
are God and the people.

God brings all good things with him.

He in couenanting offers all good things. The people couenanting promise to
do as a people should.

Mark, 1 That though God offer a people never so many favors, yet there may
be want of turning actually to God.

2 That people professing themselves of God, may come short in doing duties.

But of whom may this be meant? It is true of the whole Trinity: nevertheless
here it seems to be spoken of Christ. For it is to be taken of him, before
whose face John went; as Luc: 1, 17.

Now sure it is, John was Christ's forerunner, and indeed John did point to the
Lamb of God. John 1, 29.

So as this place.

1 Proves that Christ is the true Lord God, as likewise Thomas calls him.
Ioh, 20, 28.

2 That if we turn to God, it must be to Christ, and by Christ.

3 That to the Jews was Christ offered.

The persons on whom this work is, are many of the children of Israel, that
is. Israelites; the children of Achaians for the Achaians, son of man. Sons
are posterity.

Israel, before Jacob.

Mark that backsliding children may come of good parents.

So as parents must not cease to bring up their children in the fear of God:
and if things fall out otherwise in their children then they desire, to comfort
themselves in their duties done.

That though men have means, as these Israelites, yet they may be turned from
God.

Such as are Israelites, when means serve, turn to God.

Many, not all. For all are not turned. Many turn at one man's preaching, and
that but a while, why do we revolt, and not be confirmed, and grow, at so many
and so long time preaching?



Generally, observing 1 That as the Angel would have Zachary persuaded of this
which was delivered so is it our duty to be thoroughly persuaded of the truth
of that which God bewrays unto us.

2 God caring so long before for his Church (it was above 400. years) he does
care for it in present.

3 We may answer the Papists, who ask us where our Church was before Luther,
the like might be said of the Church before John Baptist.

4 This prophecy so long before uttered, and in time performed, may teach us
that so shall other the word of God.

In special, this verse is to apply the prophecy in Malachie, 4, to John the
Baptist.

Which is done, by comparing the persons, the gifts, the works.

The gifts, that he should go before him in the Spirit, and power of Elias.

Where is the gift, with some making known of the person.

The person is said to go before him.

This may serve to make known all seruitours, of what sort soever generally,
but more specially John the Baptist.

All, that they must remember, they are before God, and so had need to deal
from the heart, which if they do God seeing, they may have comfort whatsoever
others think.

Specially John, where we may consider, what he is said to do, and in respect
of whom.

He is said to go before, that is, live some-while before him, in the
public office of the ministry. For indeed so he did 6 months.

This was but as a servant, to make way, for the master following to the
embacing of himself.

1 Mark that precedence in time, is no note of true advancement.

2 Though it be to our own disgrace, in comparison of others, we must do our
duties.

In respect of whom, this is Christ. One would have thought that Christ should
have gone before John, to procure credit to John, not to send John the weaker
before him: but God in all his appointments must be obeyed.

The gift is the Spirit, and power, which differ I take it, as general, and
special, or cause and effect: spirit is general, power special.

Spirit, does signify the gifts of the Spirit, whereby John did his duty.

John's duty was to preach repentance, and minister the sacrament of Baptism.

The gifts necessary heerunto, were 1 knowledge, 2 utterance: 3 zeal, which
has a great love of God, and the people, which made him neglect no
opportunities: 4 severe and strict life.

Power, might signify the efficacy which appeared in John's preaching, but
that follows afterward.

I take it therefore for a gift, whereby he could hold out in this his course
against the scoffs of the Jews, and frownings of all Herod's courtiers.

These things in John were personal, and for that time, yet is there need of
the like gifts for like persons in like times.

Consider whether our times may not in some sort be like those.

The liknesse of persons, follows in the person of Elias, though there be no
note of liknesse set out; so Esa: 1, 10. Hos: 3, 5.

It is not meant that Elias should personally revive, or that by
Metempsychosis, his soul was in John, as Pythagoras and some Jews thought it
might.

But it is called the spirit of Elias, for being like his, as Numb: 11, 25, not
that Moses lost any of the spirit, but for that they had the like. So the
spirit of Elias is said to rest upon Elizeus, that is, gifts like unto them.
Otherwise accidences go not from subject to subject.

Fitly may Elias and John be likened together in person, in respect of the
corrupt times wherein they lived.

Having not many associats in the pure worship of God.

Elias having to do with Ahab and Iesabell, John with Herod and Herodias.

They were both of great zeal, of austere life.

The Jews were deceived, looking for personal Elias, so are the Papists, in
the end of the world.

Hitherto the liknesse in gifts, the last is in work, to turn the hearts, etc.

Where are three speeches, two of or from Malachie, the third of the Angel.

The first, that he may turn, or, to turn the hearts, etc.

Where is the thing he shall do, and the parties in whom he shall do it. The
thing is, he shall turn hearts.

Turn: is as before, shall cause to repent.

Hearts, notes the original of true turning, namely, the heart.

Heart metonimically is the soul, and so synecdochically the whole man.

So as unless turning be from the heart, and the heart bring the whole man,
there is no sound repentance.

The parties are the fathers toward the children.

Fathers and children all understand not alike. Some by Fathers mean the Jews
present, Scribes and Pharisees, elder in years, and above in place, by
children, John, and the Apostles, to whom John by his preaching should draw
them to join in faith and love.

Others by Fathers understand the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc, by
children the present Jews, as John 8, 39, Math, 3, 9.

Ob. Why, but then it were fitter to be said, the hearts of the children to the
Fathers (for the Fathers now cannot change their mind) rather then of the
Fathers to the children.

Aun. You shall read the like phrases elsewhere in Scripture.

Besides, by a certain metaphor, liking or misliking is ascribed to them in
heaven. Though Abraham know us not, that is, has no cause to like us.

So Luke the 15, the Angels are said to rejoice: so hell, Esaias, 14, 9.

The latter is most probable. Now these are put for that part of the triumphant
Church, whereto here John below should gather his hearers, in unity of the
Spirit, and faith, and obedience.

For the Church is Christ's body, gathered together in one, whereof that part
in heaven is one, this in the earth the other.

Learn 1 what we should look to have wrought in us, namely, to be gathered to
the Church, and in what order, namely, first to God, then to the Church.

2 That he that is not turned to God, is not of the Catholic Church to his
own comfort.

3 So must men be gathered to God, as at one in themselves for faith and love,
else is there no true turning.

4 That here being turned to God while we are below, we are sure to have a
part among the Fathers above.

The second seech is, and the disobedient, to the wisdom of the just men,
that is, he shall turn the hearts of the disobedient, etc. This speech is
brought out as if it were in Malachie, but is not.

Where we may see that there was an other Greek translation of the Bible used,
then the supposed of the 72.

It suffices us that the holy Ghost uses here this clause.

Here are only the parties mentioned, disobedient, which are turned to the
wisdom of the just men.

Disobedient here, are the children before.

The word for the which disobedient is set in the Original, may signify
either such as will not be persuaded to believe, or rebellious.

Both does imply some stubbernesse, and therefore one The Syriac.
translation has it, stubberne.

This is against means continued: so does Steven charge the Jews, Act, 7, 51.
So says God himself that he strove with the people before the flood, Gen: 6.

Mark then how far a people may slide from God, even to be stubberne against
him.

If we take it for such as will not be persuaded: Think of:

1 Gods care toward vile sinners, in tendering means.

2 And that grace comes not always with means.

If for rebellious; first know what rebellion is. It is (I take it) to
maintain force against ones Sovereign.

This is metaphorically put for settled disobedience against God.

Secondly, how grievous a sin rebellion is, look, 1, Sam: 15, 23, that is,
wondrously displeasing unto God.

Thirdly, how far one predestinate may run in sin, as to sin very
grievously, like Manasses, Paul, etc.

Fourthly, that to grievous sinners repentant, God is good.

Fifthly, that these noted of rebellion, made a goodly show for outward things
in service of God: so may others.

These disobedient are noted to be turned, to the wisdom of the just men.

Just men, are as before, the Fathers. Who are called just, for that Christ's
justice is counted to them, and Gods Spirit works justice in them, howsoever
they have many infirmities beside.

So must we be, with this must we comfort our selves.

All read not this alike. The Greek will bear as well by the wisdom, as to
the wisdom.

Wisdom, here is that, which is properly called prudence. This properly is a
gift of God, whereby a man can well order all his actions.

There is an other name which is Sopia, and is wisdom: which is a right and
sound information of the mind in all profitable truth.

This wisdom here meant, signifies metonymically, the wise course or life
led. Where mark: that,

1 The godly are truly wise, and their directions right informations to
wisdom, otherwise then the world thinks. Memorandum, when they do
according to the Word.

2 They must walk wisely, lest they shame their profession.

If we read it by the wisdom, then is it apposed to forcible means. For
indeed true religion is never wrought in one, by compulsion. It is the gentle
persuasion of the Spirit that wins men.

So as unless we bend our hearts to attend and mark, we shall hardly be wone.

If we read it to the wisdom, we must know that wicked men must be turned to
godly, not godly to wicked.

The third, and last speech follows and is of the Angels own adding from
God, to prepare, etc.

This in effect is the same with the former. Where is declared, what John shall
do, and upon whom. He shall make ready for the Lord a people prepared.

The Lord, as it signifies the true Jehovah, so also Christ, as verse: 17.

To make ready, is as the thing is: here it signifies to make ready to
receive Christ.

Quest. Did not those who repented at John's preaching, and were baptized,
receive Christ?

Aun. Yes: but not so clearly, and so fully, as by Christ, and afterward.

Know that,

1 All our preaching is to bring to Christ.

2 It is a good degree of profiting, to be fitter for Christ.

3 We must always be more and more fit to receive Christ.

A people, is many, as before. People, is most usual term, to set out the
Jews by.

Prepared, is (as I take it) appointed. For to say, to make ready a thing
prepared, repeateth the same.

I judge therefore, that the Angel means, appointed from all eternity, and
predestined heerunto. So as whosoever is called and turned, is predestined:
neither are any converted who are not predestined, and those who are
predestinate, must be prepared to conversion or turning.

Thus far the Angels first speech, his second or answering speech follows,
from the 18 verse to the end of the 20. And it is an answer of a demand, which
Zachary made, verse, 18.

First therefore we must consider the demand, which is the occasion: secondly,
the answer, 19 and 20 verse.

The demand is, then Zacharias said to the Angel, etc. Where is declared that
he said, and what it was.

That he said, then Zacharias said to the Angel.

And here are to be considered, 1 the time, 2 persons, 3 thing.

The time then, in Greek, and: it comes to the same. The meaning is, that
when the Angel had done speaking, not before, Zacharias spoke. To teach us,

1 That we must attend to all Gods word, and not leave to hear.

2 It is a point of good manners, not to interrupt one in his speech.

The person speaking is Zacharias, a just man, and yet here offending. So as
just men have their weaknesses.

Wherefore, 1 Godly men had need be careful over themselves.

2 And wicked men have no just cause, to insult upon the godly for their slips.

3 And again, godly men must not think their own estate desperate if they
slip.

The person to whom the speech is, is the Angel.

Of this Angel before. It is not said that Zacharias knew it was an Angel,
these are the Evangelists words. Neither was it much material he should have
known it. He ought to have believed his message. It seems he knew not
thoroughly, that he was an Angel, because the Angel tells him, verse, 19,
that he so was.

Only the meaning here is, that Zachary spoke, to him, who appeared and spoke
to him.

If Zacharias did not know it was an Angel, mark that we had need look to our
speeches. We speak and so do many times, before greater personages, then we
think for, look 1, Cor, 11, 10. for the Angels.

If he knew it was an Angel, and did not forbear, see the corruption of our
heart, which cannot be kept in by the presence of Angels.

The thing is, that he said.

His speaking need not to be spoken of.

Only mark in both, that even Zachary could not rest and settle himself upon
the plain, and bare word of God.

So hard a thing is it, for every of us to do the like, we must all be
questioning and moving more speech. It was not so with Eli, Ezechias.

That which he said, was, Whereby shall I know this? For I am, etc.

It is of doubting, wherein he demands a sign, and shows that he has
reason so to do.

He demands a sign, in saying, whereby, that is, by what sign, shall I know
this? He shows his reason in the other words following.

Now to demand a sign, may not seem to be simply unlawful, for Gedion did
it twice. Judge. 6, 37, 39, So did Abraham, Gene, 15, 8.

And Moses covertly, Exodus, 4, 1, and Ezechias, Esaias, 38, 22.

And yet craving this sign, he is not only rebuked, but corrected for it.

For better clearing whereof, know that a sign in Scriptures is desired two
ways.

Either for to beget increase
faith.

To beget faith, the Jews desire a sign, and are rebuked, because they did
not, nor would not believe without.

To increase faith, did Abraham and Gedion desire a sign. For it is witnessed
of Abraham that he did believe. Gene, 15, 6.

Zachary did desire a sign in the former sort, and is justly punished
therefore.

It is worth the marking, that Mary's speech does not much differ from this.
Look Luke 1, 34, and yet her mind was far differing from Zacharias.

1 Mark that likeness of speech, does not always argue likeness of
disposition.

2 We hardly believe Gods bare word.

3 It is a sin not to believe the word without a sign. Therefore Papists
wrong themselves, when they require miracles for our doctrine.

He shows he has some show of reason to demand a sign, for I am an old
man, etc. And here it is well, that Zachary remembers his condition, as we
all should, old or young, that we are mortal.

But evil it is that Zachary abuses the course of nature, to impeach and
weaken the power of God: as we many times do.

Thus far the demand or occasion: now follows the matter of the answer.
verse 19, 20.

But first mark, the Angel does not shake of Zachary, and give over further
conference upon his unbelief, but yet vouchsafed to continue speech. So good
is God to sinful man, so kind should we be in our charge, when there is no
sinning wilfully, to follow and convince all we can.

Now the Angel shows, that Zachary has no cause to suspect him of
falsehood, from his nature, office, and calling.

Nature, for that he is an Angel, as appears by his name, office, and
calling in the rest.

No good Angel will, or indeed can lie, I am such an one: therefore.

That he is such an one, appears by his name, I am, that is, I am called
Gabriell.

Mark first, if Angels words be true, much more Gods.

The Angel tells his name, to show that these are a part of those matters,
that were before expounded by this Angel, to Daniell in his prophecy, and so
to get the more credit.

Where one would marvel, that a man seen in the Scriptures (as it is like
Zacharias was) could be ignorant of this: but such are we most of us.

Quest. Have Angels names? Look Tremellius notes on the Syriac Paraphrase in
this place, and on Iunius upon Tob, 12, 15. Aun. I think they have not, for
indeed it is not needful, God and themselves, knowing them, and distinguishing
them well enough.

And though GOD be said to call the stars by their names, the meaning is,
that God knows them every one, and has them at his commandment. So as when
Angels are named, it is but for our capacity.

The office is, that he is standing in the presence of God. It is a speech
taken from men, showing special favor to their attendants.

The Angel hereby means, that he is not the basest even among the Angels.

The Angels think no scorn to serve God: 2 they are very diligent.

Though the phrase, meant, he is wont to stand in the immediate presence of
God, yet we may learn, even in our places we are before God.

The force of the reason is this, I am in very chief place, therefore I do
not lie. Whereby he teaches, the greater his place is, the lesser should his
sin be.

His calling is, that he is sent, and that with his message.

Sending, is commandment from lawful authority to go.

1 The Angel came not without sending, no more must any.

2 The Angel being sent in matters of the Gospel, did not disdain: men
should not think their sons too good to be Ministers.

3 Men may presume they are sent, when they have a gift, and their use thereof
is required by lawful authority.

The message was to speak, and to tell these glad tidings.

The Angel would not speak without Gods direction, we must do nothing
without the same.

Even speech is a good mercy of God.

Our hearts must needs be dull, when they will not believe glad tidings for
themselves.

Hitherto that Zacharias had no cause to doubt, now follows touching his
demanding a sign, which in some sort is granted. For, himself is the sign.

Where we see, that a man in some sort may have his desire, and be never the
better, as Lot, Genesis, 13. Baruch, Judge, 4.

So as that it is not good, to let our selves loose to by and rouing desires:
but only to hang upon God.

Preface. Narration.


Preface, in the word, Behold. It is an usual word in the Hebrew tongue, in
turning the narration, to show some presently certain thing, not always a
wonder.

So as God can presently convince.

The narration is in the rest, and tells Zachary of a correction which he is
like to have. So as,

The godly are subiest to the cross. Not to discharge punishments otherwise to
be suffered afterward: but,

1 To bring them to see their sins: 2 To seek forgiveness of them in
Christ. 3 To take heed of them for afterward. 4 To exercise their faith, and
repentance, stir them up to prayer, humiliation, compassion, etc.

So as that when we have any cross, we should use it to these ends.

Of this cross are noted the kind, dumnesse. continuance. cause.


Kind, in that it is told him he shall be dumb, and not able to speak.

1 So as we must acknowledge speech to be the gift of GOD.

2 That God can punish like fault with like correction. He that belieueth not
the word, shall not speak, he that harkneth not to Gods word, shall speak
none of his own. etc. Take heed then of sin, for as every sin has his
bait, so has it a whip.

3 That God in the midst of punishments is merciful. He leaves to Zachary his
hearing, seeing, understanding, etc.

There is none of us, but in our greatest crosses, we may observe many mercies
of God toward us, so as we ought to forbear murmuring, and exaggerating our
griefs.

The continuance is, until the day that, etc. This was over or under ten
months.

So as the cross continues sometimes somewhile upon Gods children, this could
not be but great, that Zacharias speech, which was wont to be used in
profitable matters, for teaching his household, for prayer, for conference,
should be restrained: yet so it is.

1 The longer crosses continue, the better should we be by them.

2 And get more spiritual provision for the bearing of them.

Now God limiteth this time, to make Zachary as desirous of a son, as he was
distrustful, when one was promised.

The cause remains, because. etc.

Not to believe, is not to believe the truth.

It is a fault, not to believe Gods word, how improbable soever it seem.

1 An Angel is not to be believed, if he speak otherwise then is written.

2 Angels and Ministers words from God must be believed.

3 Every parcel of Gods word, in time shall be performed.

Thus far the Angels speech alone: now follow certain events with it, and upon
it. verse 21, 22, 23. And those are three, 1 Zacharias tarying in the Temple,
ver, 21, 2 His dumbness, verse 22. 3 His going home, ver, 23.

Zacharias tarrying is first set down, in that it is said, he tarried in the
Temple. Secondly, it is set out, 1 by the peoples waiting, 2 by their
admiration.

In the setting down, are the person, place, of both which we have spoken
before.

The thing is tarrying, that is continuance of time, more then usual. The
usual time was, while the incense was burnt. This when God otherwise would,
Zacharias did exceed.

So as it may justly fall out, that holy assemblies may longer then ordinary,
be continued, namely, when just occasions warrantable by the word require.

So as men must not at all times, tie such exercise to the same stint of time.

Nor blame their Zachariasses, if they sometimes continue longer then at other
times.

Mark also that sometimes good customs may be ouerruled, by an higher
commandment of God.

Zacharias tarrying, is first set out, by that the people waited.

The people, as before, many together.

Waiting, was their tarrying till he came.

Which they ought to have done, for that Zacharias was busy with God for them.

So as though all must be diligent, yet if there should be any waiting, people
(in matters of divine worship) should wait for Ministers, rather the^
Ministers for people. Look Cornelius his fact, Acts, 10, 24.

And indeed for people that have not prepared themselves at home, timely
repayring to the assemblies, may supply domestical wanting preparation.

Men attend upon Lawyers and Physicians, though they pray and pay.

Note besides, that the people departed not, though Zacharias tarried longer
then ordinary.

It is a fault in people, when Ministers at set times are feign to attend upon
the people, till they come.

As also when the people depart, before the assembly be orderly dismissed.

The peoples wondering notes, 1 That they thought it a strange thing. So as
Zacharias did not use to break good customs, no more should we.

2 As that the people did not hastily blame Zacharias for long tarrying, no
more should we.

The second is his dumnesse,

Shortly in two degrees, 1 That he was dumb. 2 Continued dumb. And of both
these, somewhat was spoken before.

The larger setting down of these, is in three points: 1 From the presentnes.
2 The occasion. 3 The effect.

The presentnesse, that as soon as ever he came out, he could not speak.

So as we must be persuaded of Gods almighty power, who can say, and do, and
fear his threatenings, least they fall presently upon us.

Quest. Why is his dumbness at his coming out noted?

Aun. For that either he should have used some speech of edification unto them,
or made some defense for his long tarrying, or dissolved the assembly with the
blessing. Numb. 6, 23.

The occasion is seeing a vision. And this is noted to be known by the people,
and to have been in the Temple.

Vision is a sight, one of the means whereby God opened himself unto his
people.

This was sometimes to the mind, sometimes to the body and eyes. As here in
this place. For it is most probable, that the Angel appeared in some visible
shape.

Now these visions were of special favor, and not ordinary.

So does God grace his children, bewraying himself more familiarly to his
children then others, if not by such visions, yet by the word and work of the
holy Ghost.

So as the godly should comfort themselves in their estate, and the wicked have
no cause to contemn them.

Quest. Are we now to look for such visions?

Aun. No. For Christ is he in whom God has spoken to us. Only the visions we
are to look at, are in the word and Sacraments.

Luther says notably, that if God should offer him a vision to confirm him in
the truth of his doctrine, he would refuse it, he had such evidence for it in
the word.

This vision the people perceived that Zacharias saw.

The word perceiving, in the Greek is, knew.

To know is without dieceit to perceive. This perceiving is infallible,
probable.


Probable is here understood; for the people might have been deceived.

Ob. Zachary might have seen some evil sight, which might thus have affected
him.

Aun. True: yet Zacharias godliness made them think the best of him. So as,

Godliness purchases credit where it is.

Men ought to presume the best of godly men.

This vision was in the Temple. Which may encourage us to serve God in our
places, for then God will one way or other show himself favorable unto us.

Now follows the effect whereby is proved Zacharias dumnesse.

For proferring to speak he could not, but was feign to use signs.

Ob. One may think that Zacharias finding his inability to speak, was
unadvised to use signs, to his own discredit, which could not otherwise be in
some of the people, and did not rather withdraw himself.

Aun. Men must not when God is to be glorified, though it be to their own
shame seek shifts, and cloakes.

The third and last remains, when the days of his office were fulfilled. And
here first mark the words, then the matter.

Days, signify time, fulfilled, accomplished; or continued.

That which is here translated office, and so by the vulgar, is Act, 13, 2,
interpreted saying or singing mass, by the Papists. And yet one would marvel
why they should so take it there, and not here, or refusing it here, should
understand it there.

Leturgie, signifies any public service: look Rom: 13, 6.

The matter is behind.

It may be demanded, how many days his office lasted?

Aun. I think seven, as may be gathered 2, King, 11, 9.

Sure it is, that Zacharias did not depart, before they were run out.

Ob. How could Zacharias discharge the Priests office, lacking speech?

Aun. Others supplied the duties of speech, he did that he could, to look to
the lights, incense, etc.

So as we must be willing to do what we can, when we cannot do as we should.

As sure it is when the days were over, that then he went as to refresh
himself after his labors, so to fit himself by study for afterward, as also
to do the duties in his private family.

So as that Magistrates, Ministers, and others in place, are to have convenient
refreshings.

Now for the better understanding of his going home we must know, that,

1 The public worship of God, was to be performed at Jerusalem.

2 The Priests did not all dwell there.

3 They came from their own houses, and had chambers about the Temple, that
they might be nearer to their business, Neh: 13.

So have our termers toward Westminster.

The Papists gather from hence that Priests should have no wives, as well might
they say no houses, and say the like of our Lawyers, who go to London to the
term.

Zacharias house was in the hill country of Judea, a mile from Emaus.

For better understanding heerof, know that, the Leuits had 48 cities: the
suburbs, 2000 cubits, which is a good mile on every side, so as they might
keep cattle, plant, have gardens, walks, etc.

Hence appears that they had sufficient, certain, and such maintenance,
wherewith some few were not charged, nor the Priests beholding to some, but it
was the common charge, so were the Priests freer. Thus should it be also among
us.

Hitherto have been such things, as the Spirit of God thought good to set
down before the conception of John, And after those days his wife Elisabet
conceived. And here is nothing hard: the person his wife Elisabet, has been
spoken of before.

The thing, conceived, few are ignorant of: the meaning is, she had the
material beginnings of John in her. This indeed was the more strange for her
age.

Yet no word with God is impossible.

The last is the noting of time, after those days.

Days in scripture are usually put for time, as before, verse, 5.

These days are noted by those.

Quest. Which days may some body say? Aun. Of the fulfilling of his office.
The time is not precisely noted, and the longer it had been after, the greater
had the miracle been.

Some guess at the time, thinking it was. September: 24, or there abouts, in the
year of the world, 3965.

Yet the scripture has not curiously set this down, no more has it many
other such things, to teach us, that,

The ignorance heerof shall not hinder our salvation, and how we should bestow
most pains about the cheifest things and of greatest worth.

Thus much for the conception, the third and last about the conception that
remains, is here noted to be in things which fell out thereupon.

And they are the effects of Elisabet, in deed, verse, 24, 25, speech.


In deed, that she hid her self five months.

And here the person need not be spoken of. The thing is her hiding of her
self. The word in the original signifies very secret hiding as round about.

Hiding is coming in less company then ordinary.

All women should less come in company then men, they must not gad, but keep
house. She now kept more close then women, and then her self was wont.

It is like she did not this without liking of her housband.

Only the time may a little be thought of, five months.

A month is here to be taken as women in their matters use to count a month.

Quest. But why five? Aun. Diverse answer diuerslly. Piscator thinks it hard
to be told why: Beza alleges three causes, either for that all Jewish women
used to do so, or did misdoubt whether it would fall so yea or no, or hiding
her self so long, and then coming abroad on the sudden, the wonder might
seem the greater.

Chemnicius, for that she was ashamed to be thought to have lust now in her
old age, as Sara, Gen: 18, 12.

I may crave leave to speak my mind. It was, I take, it that she might at her
first coming abroad, be able to convince that she was with child.

Diverse do mark other men's wives.

Some have showed to others and seemed to others to have been with child, and
were not, as Queen Mary. This is by a timpany or mole.

Now it is and was more a blemish among the Jews to count of children before
they had them.

It is received that at five months end (though indeed it be before) the child
is quick. Therefore she tarried till then, according to the opinion of women,
that the child being quick, might evidently confirm to her that she was
with child. A month after, it sprang strangely.

And here have we example of good discretion and humane weakness.

Discretion, in that she was willing to prevent foolish speeches and iestes,
so should we do, and look warily to our selves.

Of weakness, for that it seemed she feared more then she needed, having
Gods promise, and having done no fault. This must we take heed of. Many for
want of finer apparel, come not to Church. This is a fault.

Her speech is, that she said, and what.

It may be questioned. Whether she spoke in her own heart, or other folks
ears?

Aun. Yet she came not abroad, it was but therefore to herself, or in her
house.

Sure it is she marked Gods favorable dealing toward her: so must we.

That which she says is, her acknowledging of Gods goodness to her, ver, 25.
Where she noted the kind of the benefit received, the giver, the time.

The kind of benefit in two degrees thus, taking away rebuke.


Thus: seems to note distinct remembrance of Gods kind dealing toward her,
even in many particulars, so have other of Gods children done, so should we.

The giver is the Lord, that is God. Who indeed gives all good things, and is
to be acknowledged the Author thereof, and the stranger the thing is, the
more. Men must not therefore only marvel, or jest at a strange thing, but
give God the praise.

She increases the benefit, by saying, he has taken away my rebuke.

Rebuke, is any thing to ones discredit.

Gods children take to heart such things.

God when pleases him, relieueth his children even in these things, so as we
must wait upon him.

And seeing that the world lays that, as a shame to a man which is not his
fault, it may be borne the better.

This rebuke was among men or women, who in this kind most rebuke one another.

The time, in the days God looked on me. Gods looking is a borrowed kind of
speech.

God looks to all his creatures by his providence, to his children in
special love.

She ascribes this benefit to Gods favor, not to any desert of her own.

Thus much of the conception of John.
Now follows an other part of the story of the Gospel, to wit, the
conception of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ.



Now all that Luke writes touching the conception, is either the Annunciation,
or the execution of it.

The Annunciation, is from verse 26, to the end of verse 37.

Now this Annunciation is of Christ, though it be to Mary, so as a man would
marvel, why this feast should be kept to the Church in honor of the Virgin,
and not of Christ, but that the Romish sinagogue is thus given over. Which is
the more to be thought of for that there is among them a feast of the
conception of the Virgin, and not of Christ, but this which is to his mother.

This anunciation tells, that there shall be such a conception: and it shows
the time, persons, place.

The time was in the sixth month. The person one sent, to whom he was sent.


The place Nazareth, a city of Galilee.

The time is noted to show (if any man list to try) that this agrees with the
prophecies, especially of Daniels weeks, which now begane to be expired.

To be curious to search times we must not, Act: 1, 7, but God bewraying times,
we must take knowledge of them, and even of less matters.

So as the Jews, and whosoever not believing this, do sin grievously.

This time is the sixth month.

Month is to be understood according to the mind of the writer, and the order
of the country which he means.

Luke speaks here, after the account of Jews.

The Jews had in a year months (thought otherwise differing from the Julian)
in number, 12. The first Nisan, answering to March, and so forward. Though the
order of the number of days be not alike.

So that a month here is the twelft part of the Suns year, month is of the
Moons motion, so as we may see that verified, Gen: 1, 14. Gods people can use
the stars aright for times and not for judicial Astrology.

This month is said to be the sixth. Sixth is a note of order, for as the
beginning from whence one accounts is diverse, so may be the sixth month.

It may be demanded, whence one should begin to account to number this month
the sixth?

Aun. Sure it is that among the Jews, there were two manners of reckning the
month of the year. For, for religious uses and festival times they counted
Nisan the first, and so forward, but for civil, they counted the seventh the
first. Look Tremellius on Exodus, 2, at the third verse.

But I take it, that in neither of these respects the Evangelist thus writes,
but only in respect of the former narration. Meaning that it was six months
after that the like message had been brought to Zachary.

Indeed it was in the first month of the year, so to be accounted for
religious uses. For six months before to Zachary in the other beginning was
that message done.

Now then counting from the annunciation to this, it appears to have been in
Abib or Nisan, answering partly our March, so as yet Christians keep this
feast, 25. Martij.

Now surely it is worth the marking, that the Annunciation to Zachary, was in
the beginning of the civil, and this to Mary of the religious or
ecclesiastical year.

Quest. But why was it just six months after?

Aun. I think, that not only in preaching, but in being borne, and even
conceived, John might appear to be a forerunner of Christ: as that there
might be thought no confederacy, the one coming so near the other in time.

Que. Was the sixth month ending or beginning?

Aun. Ending.

Learn by the former that one may go before in time, and come behind in
grace, as John did in respect of Christ.

So as that none of us should prefer our selves above others, only in respect
of age.

2 And that John though he were Christ's elder in bodily conception, yet
seeing greater graces of GOD in him then in himself, preferred Christ before
himself, teaching what we should do likewise.

The person sent, was the Angel Gabriell sent from God. Where is his nature,
name, and calling.

Nature, Angel, as before in the 11. verse.

Que. Why was an Angel sent, whereas the preaching of the word being a
greater matter, is by men?

Aun. The preaching of the Word is ordinary, and must be by ordinary means,
this is extraordinary: as also for that Isaacks, Sampsons birthes, were
foretold by Angels, good reason then it was, that this much more should be so,
as from the beginning to strike into the considerers minds greater reverence.

1 Shall God send his Angels, shall not we be willing to send our children
about Gods business?

2 Or shall Angels be willing to go, and we unwilling?

3 Neither can it be chosen, but God loves us dearly who sends his Angels.

4 And makes high account of these matters, whereabouts his Angels go.

So as if we do not heed them with all reverence, we sin.

5 Gods sending an Angel notes his own mighty power, who is even over
Angels, so as he can send them, and none but he. No creature has authority to
command an Angel good or bad, but God.

So as that even Witches can not send evil spirits, but by the sufferance of
God.

The Fathers often write this Angel, Archangell, without any great warrant.

The Angels name is Gabriell, as before, verse, 19.

Tremellius notes on the 1 Luck: that Angels are not named in the old
testament before the peoples coming out of captivity, yea, before, though
they were asked of their names, they concealed.

After the captivity they are called by names.

We must take heed of curiosity, to search no further then God has made
known. The Rabbis have diverse names for Angels good and bad, they say, he who
tempted Eve was called Samaell, etc. Munst: on Math:

These things are needless.

Let us know that Angels though they be never so many, are known a sunder of
God; and are but servants of God, not our Lords to be worshipped.

The calling follows, sent of God, as is before, verse, 19. Where is noted
the person, and thing: Person, God sending: God, the whole Trinity.

This which is said of the Angel, is true of any rightly doing his duty.

So as men had need take heed how they refuse such as are sent, the contempt
redoundeth to the sender. Men sent, must make conscience, as coming from God,
and withal, not doubt of good success.

This made the Galathians so well to think of Paul.

The thing is sent, Sent implies furnished with a gift, called upon to use the
gift.

Gift is ability to do a duty. One is called upon, when ones heart is stirred
up to use this gift, and others for whose use it is, require the same.

So as none must presume themselves to be sent in whom these are not.

In whom these are, they may have comfort that they are sent.

The Angel presently sent was able to do his duty. So should we all be
furnished, not to learn when we should practice our duties.

The place follows, and first generally, afterward specially.

The general place is a city of Galilee, called Nazareth.

Where is the province, Galilee city, Nazareth.


In Asia the less, is Syria, in Syria is Judea, in Judea is Galilee, having on
the North, Tyrus, on the South, Samaria, on the West, mount Carmell.

It is so called for the near lying.

There are two Galilees higher. lower.


The higher, is called Galilee of the Gentiles, not only as Tremellius
thinks, popular, but for that till Solomon's time Gentiles dwelt in it, or for
that Solomon gave 20 cities in it, to Hiram a Gentile 1 King, 9, 11, or for
that it was utmost of Palestine, and nearest the Gentiles.

In this did Christ much preach, as Esaias, 9, 1, Math: 4, 15.

In the lower was Nazareth.

Not much is written of Galilee, for that the people of God had not much to do
with others, we may see there was a Tetrarch of it. Luk: 3, 1.

One might have thought, that Italy, or some other country, might have been
chosen, especially considering Ioh: 7, 52, and that one writes, Ortel:
that the other Jews were wont to mock the Galileans, as we may partly see in
that speech, Thou art a Galilean.

And indeed so said Julian the Apostata, Thou have overcome me O Galilean, to
Christ.

Learn, that even Pharisees, and learned men may be deceived.

2 T^^ God is not tied to any place, but is free as pleases him to do, so as
in respect only of place, we should think our selves neither better nor worser.

3 Never judge of a man by his country, as to say borne here, therefore of
this or that disposition, grace works wonders.

4 Good people in not the best places are the same.

5 There is use even of Geographie, and such knowledge.

6 Use often is not sufficient to gather for ever.

The city is Nazareth, in the tribe of Zabulon. Heerevpon was he called a
Nazarite, and all that believe in him, Act: 24, 5.

The Papists tell strange things of Mary's house, the translation whereof,
erected the Lady of Lauretto. See Adrichom.

Nathaniell thought that no good thing could come out of Nazareth, Ioh, 1, 46,
and yet Christ was conceived there.

No doubt the town in former time had been so euilly disposed, as that it had
discredited it self for afterward.

One would have thought that Jerusalem had been a fit place for the mother of
Christ to dwell. But mark,

1 God sees not, and judges not as man sees.

2 People who dwell in towns, had need to look to themselves, not only for
themselves, but for others and after, least they hurt and discredit.

3 What a credit it was to whole Nazareth, that Mary lived there, so are good
persons to their places.

4 Gods Angels can find out any of Gods children in what corners soever they
lie.

5 Gods children are not given to affect greatness of place, to forsake
Nazareth to get them to Jerusalem.

6 In any case to take heed that we put no holiness in Mary's house, as the
Papists. God is not tied to the walls.

7 Nazareth now being possessed by Arabians, teaches that there is no
privilege for places.

The person to whom the Angel was sent, a Virgin, affianced to a man whose
name was Joseph, of the house of David, and the Virgins name was Mary.

The first mark is, that she is a Virgin. A Virgin is of verginitie,
Virginity is chastity in neuer-maried life.

Though it be meant she was a Virgin, before this her being with child, yet is
it very probably to be thought, that she was so afterward for ever, in that it
is to be thought that so chosen a vessel for such a purpose, was kept holy
for ever unto the Lord.

Ob. 1 Christ is said to have brothers and sisters. Aun. That is according to
the Hebrew phrase, kinsfolk.

2 Until may seem to note knowledge for afterward. Aun. Until is many times
put for, for ever Math: 28, 20.

Some enquire whether she were a vowed Virgin or no, and Papists think that
she was vowed. But it is not likely, for that no such vows were in use among
the Jews, and she was betrothed, with purpose to have solemnized marriage.
Math, 1, 18. It was a blemish to Jewish Virgins not to marry. Therefore is it
noted there Virgins were not praised, Iepthes daughter was mourned for being a
Virgin, and a woman was not thought to have rest, till she had an husband. The
Jews did highly magnify marriage.

Others set down her age, about 15 or 16 years: that is not sure, certain it
is she was not old.

And that she was a virgin, Esaias notes, 7, 14, which the Jews with all their
glosses cannot deface. It is noted as a wonder, it has the letter He of
notice, etc.

And very expedient was it that she should be a Virgin. 1 That Christ might not
be gotten by sinful man, 2 and might not have two fathers.

1 Now whatsoever be here noted of Mary for virginity, none must fondly
affect virginity, she was extraordinary, and had a gift, others with whom it
is not so, ought to marry.

2 She being young, we may note a pattern of rare grace and godliness in
corrupted times.

3 We shall never spiritually conceive Christ in our hearts, unless we be pure
virgins to God, having nothing to do with love of sin.

The second mark is, that she was affianced to a man whose name was Joseph.
etc. Where is noted her disposition to marriage, and the party to whom.

Her disposition is, affianced. Affianced is, as we speak, betrothed or
contracted.

Some make two sorts of affiancing: 1 Promised barely for marriage: 2 Given to
marriage, but not known.

The Papists understand the latter here, though only the former be meant, as
may appear, Math, 1, 18.

Quest. Why was she betrothed?

Aun. 1 For the honor of marriage: 2 to avoid all just blame among the Jews:
3 that she might have safeguard and succor in flying to Egypt: 4 that none by
her example might have color of unchastity: 5 Some say, that the devil might
not know the conception of Christ.

This her being affianced, was according to the word of God, as may appear in
the old Testament, and according to the order in the Church of God, and is very
requisite, not only, 1 for the further increasing of love: 2 and preparing to
matrimonial duties: 3 but that such a strait knot, might be leysurely tied: 4
So as if any thing were to be altered, it might in time be prevented before
consummation: 5 as also that men and women might with the more gravity and
reverence come together, not as Beasts, or birds, which choose their makes,
and company presently.

Quest. What is affiancing? Aun. It is a promise lawful, mutual, voluntary,
of marriage, between a man and a woman marrageable.

A promise, I take, to be a manifest present bewraying of the mind to do a
thing, by words, writing, or deeds, or signs present: so as that it is not
enough to have a purpose or intent, wish, etc.

A form whereof may be this, I promise to take thee in marriage, or I take
thee for my espoused, or promised, or betrothed.

It must be lawful, by Gods laws, and men's laws. This stretches very far.

Marriage by Gods law must be: 1 in the Lord: 2 approved by consent of
Parents, if there be any.

Man's good laws must be kept.

Mutual, is of each to other.

Voluntary, requires that it be not compelled, each party must be willing,
and cheerful with it.

The thing that affiancing respects, is marriage. It is only betwixt two
persons. Marrageable, are such as for age, religion, kindred, etc. may lawfully
marry.

Now this affiancing should be. 1 with reverence in the presence of God, and
calling upon his name: 2 and before godly and faithful witnesses.

There is no time appointed in the word between affiancing and marrying: only
good orders in Churches require thrice publishing.

Two sorts are here to be blamed, 1 Who neglect to be affianced, whereas the
practice is in the word of GOD. 2 Who closely without due reverence or
witness, contract themselves.

The party to whom she was affianced for sex, a man, for name was Joseph, for
blood of the house of David.

It is needless to speak of the signification of the name, whereof look
Gene, 30, 24, or to show that names of good men are recorded in scriptures, to
teach us that they are not forgotten with God, and that such names should be
given, which may put in mind some good thing.

This Joseph is noted for a good man, of an honest trade of life, though poor.
With such, according to our places, should we be willing in marriage to match.

His blood, of David's house, that is, line. This is added to note the stock of
Mary. For the Tribes were kept distinct, and married within themselves, save
that of Leui, and to show the fulfilling of Gods promise to David.

But mark how God fulfilleth his promise, he keeps and performs the
spiritual and best of it, the other is not material.

David's kingly outward estate, does not here appear. Joseph was but poor.

Mark 1 that houses decay: 2 and that Joseph of a great house, being in
poverty, stands not upon his blood, but falls to some honest labor, so
should we in like case.

The third mark is her name. Mary, the same with Miriam in Hebrew, and the old
Testament. The signification and cause of giving are not hard to be found.

There were diverse Mary's. Here no difference is made, for that she was very
well known, and need not further to be spoken of.

Now the Angel is further made known, by his going in to Mary, by his speech,
by that which fell out therevppon, namely, her fear.

Going in to her, notes the place, and the Angels being where she was.

Quest. Where is it likely that was? An. Within the house, in some private
Chamber or closet. For women are willed, 2, Tim, 5, to keep house: so is Sarah
said to have been in the Tent, Gene, 18, 9. And one who is often in the
street, is noted in the Proverbs of lightness.

Mary therefore being a virtuous woman, sure it is she was within, and no
doubt praying, reading, or doing some good thing.

Here note, that Parents should keep in their virgins. 2 That virgins
themselves should be no gadders abroad: 3 That young men should not intrude
into Virgins company. 4 That when virgins are in the house, they should spend
the time about some profitable business, not only be tricking up themselves,
etc. 5 Lastly, that bestowing our selves well at home, Gods Angels will find us
out, and we shall be sure not to want the presence of the holy Ghost.

Thus much of the Angels going to Mary, now follows his speech, and is to
verse 37. and is of salvation, of comfort, of particular message, of answer.

That of salutation,

The abuse among the Papists of this place is great.

Luther said, the Lords prayer was a great Martyr, it is much more true of the
Hatle Mary.

The abuses which we will note, are,

1 That it is patched up together, by fetching from other places, as blessed is
the fruit of thy womb, by adding the name Mary, Jesus, Amen.

2 That the simple are abused by the translation of full of grace.

3 That contrary to all warrant it is appointed in such sort, as is among the
Papists, to be used.

4 That it is appointed as a prayer. Whereas we should no otherwise use it
then the Angel, who used it in salutation, as also for that the words
themselves are of salutation.

It is said, it is of thanksgiving, and so may be in kind of a prayer.

Aun. It is not. And if it should be of thanks, it should be to God.

Stapleton adds, it may be a prayer by way of insinuation, as that, Behold,
he whom thou love is sick: and, If thou will, thou can make me clean.

Aun. If it be a prayer, it must have commandment, and promise, it has
neither. And if it insinuate, it must insinuate somewhat: here is nothing.

Ob. It may be used as a salutation. Aun. No. A salutation is civil, the
Romanists appoint this to be used religiously. Again salutations be to persons
present, the Virgin is absent.

Ob. Why may not she as well be present in spirit, as Elizeus and Paul?

Aun. Paul's presence was his allowance, Elizeus was an extraordinary sight,
which when they show in Mary, we will believe.

5 That it is so often repeated, especially in their Rosaries and penances.
That their should be ten Auemaries to one Paternoster, and that 150 Auemaries,
with 15, Paternosters make a Ladies Psalter.

This is mere babbling and lip-labor, not needing further confuration.

The Papists are impious that abuse Christ's practice of thrice repeating the
same, for theirs in this.

As weak are the Rhemists and Stapletons reasons, from the honor of the
Virgin, for that this is the first message of the incarnation, and is a sum
of the Gospel. All is false.

Thus much for remouall of the abuse: now follows to consider what we must
learn thereby, which will appear when we know the meaning thereof.

This first branch has, 1 Forms of salutations, to wit, Hail: The Lord with
thee. 2 Titles in saluting, as, Freely beloved: Blessed among women.

And that both are double, it teaches that these things are not to be
neglected.

The former form of salutation translated Hail, might better be, rejoice, not
only for agreeing with the original, but to prevent superstitious curiosity,
arising out of the Latin Aue, for Eua and sine-vae.

Salutations have been diverse, health, peace, joy, prosperity, etc.

Hail, is as much as health, as being a good gift of God: but here it might
more fitly be turned joy or rejoice, and the Angels speech, the giving of the
joy, which no doubt but he meant most heartily.

1 Mark the servants of God are not rude and uncivil, they neglect not so
much as salutations.

2 They perform them heartily, not only in show, as the greatest part in the
world now do.

3 They have good forms of salutation, not profane as many have.

4 And since the Angel wishes joy, we should labor for true joy, and even
holy rejoicing in the favor of God.

The former title is, freely beloved, according to the Greek, as also Sa and
Iansenius judge, whatsoever other Papists think of fullness of grace, whereas
in Christ only is fullness.

And sure this was very fit, least Mary might be puffed up with conceit of her
own holiness.

Now if Mary were freely beloved, who can deserve? and if the Angel admonished
her thereof, it is good for us to admonish one an other, and surely there is
good use hereof.

To teach us humility, and to make great account of the gifts of God.

The latter form of salutation is, the Lord with thee, is, or be. It was an
usual manner of salutation among the Jews. Judges, 6, 12, Ruth: 2, 4, Psalm:
129, 8.

And wishes all good. Now mark wherein is good, in that the Lord is with us,
that is, in every sort favors us.

So as our selves must labor for this, must endeavor one to an other.

And if this be wished to Mary, much more had every one of us need thereof.

This is said of living, and to present, not of the dead.

Even our ordinary salutations should savor of grace.

The other title is blessed among women. The like is Judge: 5, 24, that is, in
comparison, or above other women.

This being blessed, signifies that God does favor her in special sort. And
that men do praise and shall praise her. For so blessing and being blessed in
diverse respects does signify.

Blessed of God, is favored of men, is praised.

Now God did favor her, not in giving her only saving grace, but in choosing
her to be the mother of God.

The like favors of God are we to acknowledge in our selves, and others.

And though we do not bodily bear Christ, yet if we plant him or bear him
in our hearts by faith, it is a great mercy, which we must acknowledge in
others, and in our selves.

2 God when it pleases him, even bestows upon his children true praise in
the judgment of his Church, so as we may know we shall have it, if God think
it good for us. Otherwise, let us not look for it.

3 This acknowledging hereof in the Angel, shows that there is a time when
one may be put in mind of the true praise he has: 1 True praise. For false, I
take it, he is not to be acquainted with.

That is, when the party told has such grace, as to ascribe the glory to God.
2 When the thing praised, is a most excellent and manifest gift of God.

3 When the party praised, had need to be hartened, and encouraged in God.

4 When the party praising, does it, that GOD may have the glory, not to
flatter. etc.

4 Women may learn what is their true praise. To have favor with GOD, and to
conceive Christ in their hearts by faith, not their gay coats, and other tricks.

The speech of comfort follows, 29, 30, ver:

Occasion, verse 29. Her being troubled. This is set out by two, means thereof
and the effect.

The means are, the sight of the Angel, and his speech.

She saw him, for that he assumed some body, wherein likewise glory appeared.

This is extraordinary, and must not be looked for now. The best apparitions
are in the Word and Sacraments.

So as to them must we run, and not to revelations.

She was troubled. Troubling as before in Zacharias, it is taken from stirred
water, and signifies perplexity of thoughts, when one cannot tell what
resolutely to think. Where mark,

1 To what pass and perplexity Gods children sometime may come.

2 As that they do not slightly consider great things.

3 But consider Gods works with fear.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION upon the 1. of Peter.
1, Peter, 1, 13. Trust perfectly on the grace that is brought unto you by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.


AMong the sundry duties in this Epistle, and other Scriptures, enjoined
Christians, this in this place is not least, and should not be last: which for
that the several words do signify diversely, is not all understood alike of
all, and had need in general to be cleared that way, before we can in due sort
profit thereby.

Trust, in the Greek word is hope, and is taken sometimes properly, and other
times improperly.

Properly, it signifies to look or wait for a thing to come.

Improperly, it is the same with believe, trust in a word, promise, or speech:
and the doubt here is, which way we should take it.

Also grace, for sound is a Latin word, of gratia, and signifies favor or
liking, and is put, sometimes for the welspring of all good things from God to
us, as in the beginning of diverse Epistles, Grace and peace: otherwhiles for
some particular love token that comes from thence.

And that not yet after one sort, for often it signifies such a love token
which we have here, which usually is called grace: and more sildome, for that
which is afterward in the life to come, as in 1, Pet, 3, 7, it seems to be.

Now, though it be certain, that some special love token be here most
chiefly intented, yet all do not agree, whether such as is in this life, or
afterward.

Again, brought, may be said to be that which now is brought at the instant,
and present time, or that which shortly shall be.

So Math, 3, 10, every tree is said to be hewed down, for shall be hewed down.
And Revel: 22, 20. I come quickly, for I will come quickly, because he will
certainly come, and it will not be long ere he come: so for grace brought,
either now or afterward.

Last of all, revelation of Christ, when Christ is revealed, that is,
gloriously at the last day, or when Christ reuealeth himself by his word or
Spirit, now in this life.

The sundry senses of these words, have caused that diverse learned men have
thought diverse ways of this Scripture, and taken the meaning to be not the
same.

Some thus: Look for the glory that shall shortly be brought unto you, at the
glorious appearing of Jesus Christ.

Others thus: Trust on that present grace, that now is brought unto you, by
Jesus Christ himself, revealing and opening the same.

Both are good, and agreeable to Scripture, and each have the countenance of
learned men. Yet one place can have but one proper meaning. Neither must we
only care that interpretations be true, but that they be fit, and stand on
their own bottom.

I judge that the latter is the better.

1 Because it more agrees with the plainness of the words, so as that scarce
one is taken out of the own proper signification.

2 It is very rare, not twice (that I know) that grace is put for glory, as it
should be here by some men's judgments.

3 Seeing Peter had mentioned the last end before, verse 4, 5, it is most
likely that now here he should set down the way and means that bring
thereto.

4 If the former should be meant, then must the Apostle repeat that here,
which he had set down above, verse 7, which is not likely so soon,
considering how short and press Peter in his writing is, without needless
tantologies.

5 It seems that the order of his writing should point to the later, for
being afterward to entreat of obedience, he here lays a golden foundation of
faith before, from whence the building of all good works is to be reared.

6 And lastly, the latter is the more fuller, for thorough, belief in grace,
is a certain pledge of glory: a man may look for glory, and have little
grace, and if nothing else hinder we are to take scriptures in the largest
meanings.

The general meaning thus being cleared, the drift and intent of all, is to
set out the excellency and necessity of trust.

And here are two things to be considered: the one that, whereas endeavor is
to be bestowed, (for it must needs in nature be first, howsoever in words it be
not so) and the endeavor it self.

That where about endeavor is to be bestowed, is grace brought unto you, by
the revelation of Jesus Christ.

The endeavor is, trust perfectly in or upon it.

That where-about the endeavor is to be, is barely set down, or further set
out.

Barely set down, in that it is said to be grace brought, further set out by
the persons to whom, you, by the manner how, by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

The bare setting down has the kind of the thing, grace communicating of it
in the word brought.

Grace is as before, flowing from the fountain of all favor and liking, and
is some special love token from God to us, as in sundry other places of
scriptures. Ioh, 1, 16.

Now this grace or favor is not every one, but some choice and special, and
is indeed that which Paul calls to Tit: 2, 11, saving, or bringing
salvation, neither can it be any other, for then would not the Apostle wish us
to trust perfectly upon it; for so should we be deceived, if we could not be
saved.

Now this grace of salvation is nothing but whereby we are recovered out of
wretchedness, and thraldom, to sin, hell, and damnation, and restored into
the favor of God, in this life and for ever. Which now is not one only grace,
but has a storehouse indeed and treasury of all good graces in it.

The choicest Jewel of all, is Christ, God and man our Savior. For so is he
called, John, 3, 16, so God loved the world that he gave his son, not only
as a gift, but (as the saying is, give the best) the gift of gifts, in whom are
hid all treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col, 2, 3, the spirit without
measure, Ioh, 1, 14, not only for himself but for his Church. For of his
fullness we have received grace for grace.

And here is first Christ's office to be considered, our Prophet to teach us
the way to salvation, our Priest and sacrifice to bring us into the favor of
God, and to keep us therein, our King to keep us from all enemies, and
always to rule and order us, that nothing hurt us.

Secondly, the making known of this Christ by preaching. Which as a special
favor, Christ gave after his Ascension: look Ephesians: 4, 8, 9, 10, the which
likewise Paul acknowledges. Rom: 1, 5, and when God will show his displeasure
to a pleople, he will not afford it.

Thirdly, the wonderful effects of this doctrine, where it is graciously
blessed. As that we are reconciled to God, sanctified in our selves, die to
sin, live to righteousness, etc.

These things are so to be understood here, as all and only, for any thing
besides this grace marreth all, or any part wasting, defaceth all.

Quest. Are these only grace and not desert?

Aun. As we only respect our selves, the excellency of the things, the great
bounty of God, they are mere grace, yet if we respect Christ to Godward, so
are thy deserts on Christ's behalf, and even for us.

Hitherto the meaning, now a little for use.

First, where the Apostle wishes us to trust in grace, let us know that it is
our part to abandon all other things, which are very many, that many trust
upon, riches, wisdom, nature, outward profession, good laws, good Magistrates,
and such like.

Secondly, that everlasting salvation, and every gift tending thereto, is a
mere grace and favor, so as that whosoever wants any, must seek to God,
and who so has, must praise him.

Thirdly, so are they to be understood to be favors, as not only beginning
them, but to continuing, otherwise then some teach, that the beginning is only
from God, somewhat for going forward, is from our selves and free will.

Fourthly, that Christ and salvation, is the greatest favor which God can
bestow upon us, if we regard the party giving, the thing given, the parties to
whom, and the fruit there with.

Fifthly, that so we must judge of these favors, that we know they must be with
the means of preaching and likewise virtue and efficacy. They cannot be alone.

Sixthly, that seeing these are only of favor, we had need take heed least we
displease not God, that he take this grace from us.

Thus much for the kind of the thing, the communicating or tendering of it
follows, in that it is said to be brought, so is it said else where in the
scripture, Act: 13, 26, to you is the word of this salvation sent. Christ is he
whom the father has sent, Ioh, 3, 17. Christ came among his own.

And indeed Christ only did not thus but it was necessary, if he meant his
people should be saved, that he should so do. For neither, 1 did his people
seek, 2 neither could they, being dead in sin seek, 3 and it was impossible
that grace should come of it self. For afterward when once Gods people is
converted, then they seek, not before.

The bringing here spoken of was only by God.

That which was brought, was in some part received.

Mark then 1 that grace comes not by chance.

2 Not of it self, 3 a man cannot seek for it but by especial grace.

4 God only can give it what soever the means are.

5 God offering, we must not be so unmannerly as to refuse.

6 And if God tender grace unto us, why should not we, one to another.

This may suffice likewise for the communicating or tendering, the further
setting out hereof follows, and first from the parties to whom it was
brought, and they are those to whom this Epistle was wrote, to wit, Jews,

1 To whom by way of inheritance the promises of God might seem to belong, not
only for earthly, but also heavenly things, as being sometime the only people
of God. 2 Among whom no doubt, the old Testament was often read and expounded,
and as it might seem, things of Christ known.

3 Besides, they were scattered far and wide from Jerusalem, and their own
country. 4 And tasted no doubt of sundry crosses: and yet these both have need
of this grace, and it is brought unto them. Learn therefore, that,

1 All outward prerogatives of visible Church, of reputation to be the people
of God, or any such thing, without special grace brought, are nothing to
salvation.

2 Even some competent, and tolerable means, unless God graciously bless,
are little or nothing.

3 No calamities whatsoever, if God please to show favor shall hinder us from
it, no though we were cast into the utmost coasts of the world, and had all
afflictions in the world, as of Job, or Lazarus, or whosoever.

4 Nay, grace coming to us in this estate, shall uphold us, teach us to bear
all, and make them sweet, and fruitful to us.

Now follows the special manner how: By the revelation of Jesus Christ. That
is, as was showed before, by Jesus Christ revealing. In which sense, God (that
is the Father) is likewise said to reveal. Gala, 1, 15, 16. The Spirit also,
2, Cor, 3, 16, 17, and Christ himself called a light, for the revelation of
the Gentiles. Luke 2, 32. But most clearly Paul speaks, Gala, 1, 12. that
he received the Gospel not by man, neither was taught it, but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ, that is, Christ Jesus revealing, as we are to
understand it here.

And in this special manner, we are to consider the name and nature of this
matter, with the enlarging of it.

The name and nature is, that it is revelation, the enlarging, of Jesus Christ.

Revelation, is of a Latin word, and signifies as much as vncombering, or
taking away that which hinders the sight, as a curtain, scarffe, or mask,
or any such thing. So that here it is a borrowed kind of speech, from things
in some such sort covered.

Peter in writing this, might think of the sundry couerings in the Tabernacle
and Temple, and of the veil there, or of that which covered Moses face, Exodus,
34, in the end, whereof Paul writes, 2, Cor, 3.15.

Howsoever, certain it is, that things before Christ, were not so revealed or
uncovered, as afterward.

The Leuiticall ministry was most in shows and shadows, some of the ancient
Fathers have a pretty resemblance to set this out.

When Thamar should be delivered, Gene, 39, she had twins, and the elder
first put out his hand, afterward drew it in again, then was his younger
brother borne, then the elder: so say they, there was a little show of Christ,
and the New Testament, as the putting out of a finger or hand, but presently it
was hid, then prevailed a great while the Jewish polity, in the end though
followed Christ fully exhibited.

Nevertheless, from hence we must know, 1 that howsoever these things
heretofore were hid, yet for substance they always were in the Church, for
indeed God never left the Church without means of salvation, immediately from
the fall and afterward: darkly I confess, yet truly, none must deny.
Wherefore, while this world lasts, men living may be saved.

2 Indeed it is true, things before had many couerings, yet the godly and
chosen of God, pierced thorough them all, that hindered not their salvation. So
should we, never by the hardness, or hidnesse of things, be discouraged from
seeking, till we find, and even salvation.

3 Since now things are cleerer, if we have not a greater measure of saving
grace, our fault is the greater.

4 Nay surely, things are so evident, that if we be damned, we can allege
nothing but we may iustle so be.

Hitherto the name, and nature, now follows the enlarging of it, it is the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Jesus, is a broken Hebrew word, and signifies as much as Savior, and is the
name of the son of God, and the virgin Mary, implying the virtue and effect
of his office, to whomsoever he is thoroughly revealed, for indeed he
perfectly faueth them.

Christ, is Greek, and signifies anointed, that is, fulfilled with the holy
Ghost, to be the Prophet to teach the Church. The Priest to make reconciliation
to bring into the favor of God, and intercession to keep in his favor. The
King continually to rule, and is that which in Hebrew Messiah is. So as that
we might read it thus, of Jesus the Messiah.

These names show two things, 1 that Jesus reuealeth: 2 that he reuealeth
himself.

He reuealeth himself, as the Author of this revelation, as to the woman,
John 7. To Paul, Acts, 9, 3, 4, 5. To the Disciples going to Emaus. To Paul,
Gala, 1, 12.

This he does by himself, 1 personally, as in the former, ministerially by
others, as to the Eunuch by Philip, to Cornelius by Peter, to Paul by Ananias.

I take it, this latter way is chiefly meant here, though the other may be
true.

And Christ is said to reveal this, 1 for that he himself began first to
reveal: 2 for that he sends other reuealers. 3 And he it is who blesses
all revealing.

Must not then this thing, which so great a personage by himself, and others,
takes care to reveal, be of great importance?

It was most necessary he only should reveal, as being able, and being of
credit.

Or can a man not make much of Reuealers, since they come from Christ. Pharao
honored Joseph greatly for less revelations. Gene, 41, 45.

He reuealeth himself as the chiefest favor. Any thing from him is excellent,
himself above all, in him are all, without him all things are nothing.

Forget not then, that Christ is the pith and substance of all the Bible.

2 And that we can never here to much and to often of him.

3 Neither can we know him, but by himself, light makes me see light.

4 When he is revealed, you have the greatest favor in the world, God in great
love let Moses see Canaan a far of, one day of the son of man a great good,
how much then his whole self?

Hitherto has been that where-about endeavor is to be bestowed, now
follows the endeavor it self. Trust perfectly on the grace.

The which we may consider, as it is in it self, trust perfectly, and as it is
applied to the thing, for so must the trust be, as that it be upon the grace.

The endeavor in it self has two things. The virtue or affection of
trusting, and the quality of it, perfectly.

The word which is translated trust, is in the Greek hope. Thus hope perfectly.

To hope, is taken in scripture two ways, properly, somewhat improperly.
Properly, it signifies to look for a thing to come, which yet one has not,
as was showed before.

Improperly, it signifies to believe or trust. As in this place, so is it
taken, Math: 12, 21. Philip, 2, 91, 1. Tim: 4, 10, and, 5, 5.1, Pet: 3, 5.
Where howsoever in English it be read trust, the word in Greek is hope. Which
the learned have thought good to English trust. And not without just cause: for
such consanguinitie is there between faith and hope, as that often the one is
taken for the other. They are like the blood and spirits in the body, never a
sunder: like the two cherubims, always the one looking upon the other: indeed
to speak as it is, hope is a fruit of faith, but for the like nature and use
of both they are confounded, our English word of trust will fit either hope or
belief.

Well then do we read it trust: which is the action or practice of faith.
Which before we well can understand, we must learn to know what faith is: that
may we do by a short setting out of the nature of faith, and some other
truths tending thereto.

Faith is a gift of God, wrought by the holy Ghost in the heart of a party
regenerate, whereby he or she takes knowledge of the doctrine of salvation,
is persuaded it is true, and that it belongs to him or herself, and wholely
relieth there-upon.

First, that it is a gift, appears, Ephesians: 2, 8, not of nature, for all have it
not.

Neither is it a common or base gift, but most excellent: better then gold: as
before in this chapter.

It is from God, for so is every good and perfect gift, I am: 1, 17, and so of
God, as from the whole Trinity: from the father.

From Christ, for so the Apostles prayed to him to increase their faith: and
the man in Mark, 9, 14, Help my unbelief.

Therefore is it not an easy matter to have it wrought in us.

The holy Ghost works it.

Not without the other persons as before, but rather to implie the other two
persons from the which the holy Ghost proceeds.

But it is ascribed to the holy Ghost, to show that no creature nor all
together, can work it.

The spirit works it powerfully, though secretly, no man can perceive how.
Ioh: 3, 8.

And not without means of the word and Sacraments.

No party has faith but the regenerate, so Ioh: 1, 12, 13.

And yet not to every regenerate, but such as are of discretion and have
knowledge, without the which no faith can be.

Besides, this faith is in heart, that is, the soul, to wit, the mind and
will: so is it Rom: 10, 9, and Act, 8, 37.

This draws all others parts and powers after.

That which faith regards is truth to salvation, this truth is the word of
God. To wit, the body of Canonical Scriptures, as far as it is revealed unto
us, and more particularly, that truth which is concerning Christ.

For as men make much of some Jewel, yet is it especially for some workmanship
or stone in it, so do all believers like of all truth divine, but especially
of Christ.

Beyond all this, faith takes knowledge of the doctrine of salvation. I mean
not such knowledge as the Philosophers speak of, by causes without all
ignorance, which is able subtillie to dispute and dissolve all doubts, but
that which has for all that light and understanding.

Hence it is, that knowledge is often in scripture for belief.

This knowledge we speak of, is first notice that there is a truth to be
believed.

Secondly, it always has some ground of scripture.

Thirdly, it understands the meaning of that ground.

Fourthly, it can distinguish between truth and falsehood.

Again, faith is persuaded that, that which it believes is true. Hence is it
called the ground of things hoped for, Heb: 11, 1.

So as that by the evidence, men can not do but as that directs. Act, 4, 20.
Nay Paul could be contented in assurance thereof to die: so did they Heb: 11,
37, 38.39.

So will the Saints of God always do, die rather then deny the truth of God.

Lastly, faith applies all saving truth unto it self; that is, that which it
knows in general, it is persuaded is true in special, and in the party
where faith is. So Thomas called Christ my Lord my God, Paul says Christ
loved him, and have himself for him. So David, my God my God, etc.

This application is the opening of the heart to attend unto the truth, Act: 16,
14.

When the mind judges all to be true in it self, and the will makes much of
them in it self, wisely; therefore was the Creed so framed, as that every one
must profess, I believe. Abraham particularly believed, so says Saint Paul
is every man justified. Rom: 4.

Christ compares himself to bread, Ioh: 6, so as if he be not applied, he is
not ours.

This made the word unprofitable to the ancient Jews, because it was not imped
with faith, Heb: 4, 2, that is application. Besides, how comes that near
coniunctio^ between Christ and us, he to be the head, we the members, he the
stock, we the branches, he the foundation, we the building, not by
application? true it is, God takes hold of us, so do we of God, that it is
hand in hand.

So as nothing can separate, Rom: 8, 38, Job, and others.

Of, or to this application, there be some special works of the soul
necessary.

The first is approbation of that which we apply, for unless we like it, we
will not apprehend it, like it we do when we judge our selves happy if we
could get it, wretched while we want it, look Philip: 3, 8, 9, 10, verse.

The second is expetition or desire thereof. To this belongs the hungering
and thristing mentioned in the scriptures. Zacheus climed into a tree but to
see Christ with his eyes.

The third is apprehension, whereby so soon as grace approaches, we lay hold
of it presently, not letting it go as the lame held Peter and Ioh: Act, 3, 11,
and the Canaanitish women, would not give over Christ in the Gospel.

The fourth, is oblectation or delight, whereby we make this grace apprehended
our chief treasure, comforting our selves therein more then in all other.

Lastly, faith relieth it self upon all saving doctrine.

Thus much for the setting out the nature of faith: some other things may serve
also heereunto. And first we must know that,

Though sundry times faith and feeling go together, yet are they several in
nature, feeling is a fruit of faith. But is not always with faith.

Feeling I call a manifest work upon the affections, whereby one has
experience in himself of that which he believes.

Secondly, a man may have faith though he do not know that he has it, as a
sleeping man life, and a drunken man reason.

Thirdly, all have not faith in the same measure, some more, some less, the
least is faith.

Fourthly, the greatest faith in any of the Saints, has sometimes been
shaken, as in Abraham, Paul, David.

Which God of purpose does, to make us wholely hang upon him, that we should
not be secure, but have exercise of our gifts.

Fifthly, in the greatest shaking of faith, it is faith for all that, that does
uphold, and perceives the want of faith, as a party having a light on his
head, and forgetting where it is, seeks the light by the light. Or as in an
eclipse, the light remaining in the Moon, bewrays the light shadowed.

So is it in one who has dim sight, he perceives by the dim sight he
has, that he cannot see clearly.

By all this, we may somewhat see what faith is, now the Apostle requires the
practice hereof.

Some learned men think, that faith once given, always continues in
presence, though not practice. But I think it continues in both, so as that
it is not only present, but always working: closely I confess as life in
sleep, or Apoplexy, or some such. For Paul says, that faith is one of those
gifts which do continue. 1, Cor, 13, 13.

Besides all the former, the Apostle speaking in general, trust ye, means
that every one should for their parts so do, as at the table, those only are
refreshed who take to themselves.

Furthermore, no time being limited, it notes the present time, so as if we
defer, we hurt our selves.

Thus much for the virtue or action, now follows the quality, perfectly,
perfectly comes of perfect.

Perfect is that which has all it should have, or which wants nothing.

It is taken two ways, accurately. tolerably.


Accurate, is when every thing is so absolute that no exception can be taken,
so only is GOD perfect, and his works in their kind. This perfection is not
here meant.

Tolerable perfection, is that which it pleases GOD to accept of for Christ,
though there be some blemish. This perfection has,

First truth, so as perfect faith must be true, in the witness of our own heart,
and the presence of God. Simon Magus and other hypocrites could counterfeit.

Secondly, fullness, fullness is in two things, number. degree.


Fullness for number, is when the parts of faith are perfect, which are three,
whereof was spoken before. And this fullness is meant here.

Fullness in degree, is when every part is in the greatest measure, which we
must rather endeavor unto, then shall attain in this life.

Thirdly, constancy.

Thus much for the endeavor it self, now follows the application thereof,
trust on the grace.

General trust, without application to grace in Christ, is not sufficient.

Many have as they say, a good hope and trust, but not knowing why, or wherein,
they were as good not to trust, as to trust to nothing.

Nay, trusting to God himself, unless by Christ, yields no comfort. Neither
without grace can a man conceive the least hope of any good.

First, seeing that we must trust upon grace, as we have heard before
particularly, it appears: That one may know his particular being in grace.
Else would not Christ bid his rejoice that their names were written in the
heavens.

The which Paul shows to be general to all justified by faith, to have
peace with God, and joy in the holy Ghost, wherein is the kingdom of God,
whereto in this life we enter.

Why should Paul bid us prove our selves, whether we be in the faith, if we
might not, and should not endeavor to find our selves therein?

Now this must be understood, 1 of such as are called: for till one be so, he
cannot know himself: so as that infants, and such as have not the use of
sanctified reason, must here be excepted.

2 Again, one may be under a tentation, and exercise of conscience, whereby at
the instant he shall be unfit to judge of the former.

3 Beginning grace is not so easily perceived as grown grace.

Secondly, that seeing we must trust to grace, it cannot be but sufficient.
Gods grace is as great as himself, by the which being justified, we have all
with it. Thus God answered Paul, 2, Cor, 1, 29, in case of resisting
temptations, that his grace was sufficient, as Paul did find it to be. So as
that we must join no other thing for our repose.

Thirdly, that grace is most certain, it is as constant as God himself,
resting upon his nature, his promise, so as that trusting thereto, we never
shall or can be deceived.

Hitherto has been the doctrine, the use follows, and that manifold.

First to consider, that seeing the Apostle requires faith, it is not a
common, or thing that is every where, then needed no exhortation to be made for
the promise of it. Nay Christ himself finds want of faith even in Israel,
Math, 8, 10. In so much as he is feign to say to his own Disciples, Luke 8,
25. Where is your faith? And elsewhere, Luke 17, 6, notes that they had not so
much faith as was a grain of Mustard-seede in bigness.

Neither was this only at that time when himself lived in the world, but he
shows it will be a hard thing to find faith upon the earth when the son
of man comes. Luke 18, 8.

And how can it be otherwise, but charity waxing cold, Math, 24, 12. but
iniquity must abound? and that from the dried root of faith? whence charity
cannot spring.

Besides, so many are the things that set against faith, as that if it were
possible, the very elect would be overcome.

All this, as it is true in general, so may every one find it by experience
in himself. How does a small sin quell faith? much more then, the greater
and viler.

So as that we had all need to remember Paul's charge, 2, Cor, 13, 5, to try
our selves whether we are in the faith, or faith in us.

Secondly, Peter wishing us to trust perfectly, and gives us to know that
there is just cause, why we should so do, Gods commandment were sufficient,
Mar: 11, 22, Have faith in God. And Ioh: 14, 1, You believe in God (that is,
the father) believe in me, the son Christ.

But besides, this that we should believe is the end, for the which scriptures
were penned, Ioh: 20, 31.

Why sermons are preached.

For confirmation whereof, Sacraments were ordained, and are to be used.

Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb: 11, 6 and what soever is
not of faith is sin, Rom: 14, 23.

Faith is the salt of the soul keeping it from corruption.

It enableth us to do things pleasing to God, and without it is their no
sanctification.

It makes all your deeds done by it to please God.

It embracing Christ, has with him all things, and first the favor of God.

Gods favor brings with it, 1 reconciliation, whereby God and we are made
friends, we have our sins forgiven, Christ's righteousness counted unto us,
peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost: boldness to make prayers with
trust to be heard, recovery of right to the creatures, so as that in good
conscience, with prayer and thanks giueing, we may use them, where as
otherwise before God we are but as usurpers.

2 Perfection and defense whereby God keeps us safe and sound.

3 Government, when Gods word and spirit continually rules us.

4 That all things shall work together for our good, afflictions, infirmities,
scandals, whatsoever.

Now, as our life without these cannot be but most wretched, so with them is it
most blessed, so as faith which brings all these by getting of Christ only,
is diligently to be labored for.

Thirdly, it shall be profitable to know what means were the meetest to use for
attaining of faith.

True it is that God only gives and works it, but not without some other
things, which in so great a matter as faith is, had not need either to be
small, or few; seeing no excellent thing, is otherwise wrought.

And here we speak not of the first seed of faith, for that God alone gives
without any work of ours, but of the grows and increase thereof, which
though God give it is not while we are idle.

1 It shall be good to mark when any sensible motion of Gods Spirit, stirs
our hearts to hearken to the Word to believe it, in the commandments and
promises of it, and in no case to defer to do thereafter at the instant, so is
it Revel: 3, 20, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in, else not.

In no case must such opportunities be forslowed, nor the Spirit quenched, 1,
Thessa: 5, 19, but all deligence must be used, for that these motions or
stirrings are not, 1 continual.

2 They are not always very sensible and apparent, and if we mark not well,
we may miss of them though they knock, they are like the first stirrings of
the infant in the womb, faint and weak.

3 A little thing will overcome them.

These are many times joined with the sight and feeling of our sins, which
being directed by Gods spirit, will turn us to Christ, so as always any
feeling of sin should drive us to seek to Christ by faith.

Thus can we never seek but by instance of prayer.

2 After this, be always about the word of God, which is the word of faith,
where Gods free promises must cheefely be looked unto.

3 Then Gods favors heertofore bestowed upon us, must always be renewed,
where if we find any of salvation, let us know, that in all others God will be
like unto himself.

4 Never give over for some doubtings of faith. But be striving against them.

5 Thank God for the faith you have. Thanked-for grace, will increase.

Fourthly, in that we are wished to trust, and no measure of faith is set
down, never should we be discouraged though our faith be never so small, if it
be true, for Christ does not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised
reed.

Faith is little, 1 when one has no feeling of it in himself.

2 When he is tossed much with doubtings.

3 When many slipes fall out, and in the same kind.

And yet this faith never so weak is true, 1 If it never give over nor yield
to any assaults.

2 If it endeavor to increase.

3 If for the measure it be working, and leave not the party idle: working, is
endeavor in the duties of godliness and private calling.

Fifthly, every one is to try his faith.

True faith is wrought by the Word: counterfeit otherwise.

True faith sees the misery of the party by reason of sin where it is:
counterfeit faith never feels sin to any purpose.

True faith appears in afflictions, to make us wait upon God, to be patient,
to comfort our selves in God in tentations, to resist them.

In prosperity, that we still cleave to God.

True faith, knows the worth of it self, and appriseth it self above all
other things.

It desires to increase and continue.

It would bring others to it.

It is the better by any thing that does befall it.

FINIS.

