To the worshipful and his very good Friend Master H.S.
WHereas your worship (at my last being with you) desired me to let you have
knowledge of the manner of the end and confessions of BODY and SLADE, two
notorious Traitors: I have, according to my promise, sent you the true
Discourse thereof: For, I being present thereat (as you know) upon some
especial occasions, have set down so near as memory would serve me, the
certainty thereof, which you may be bold to declare to your Friends for a very
truth: notwithstanding the sundry flying tales rumored abroad by the Papists,
according to their accustomed manner, as their affection serves them: I have
sent you the truth, and nothing but the truth, and thereof you may assuredly
persuade your self. Thus with the continual desire of your welfare, with all
yours, I commit you to the heavenly protection.

From Winchester, by your Friend to use. R. B.

These Gentlemen and Justices of Peace, were present at these Executions.
M. Robert White, High Sheriff of the Shiere. S. William Kingsmell, Knight. M.
John Fisher, Justice of Peace. M. William Saint-Iohn, Justice of peace. M.
Thomas west, Son to the Lord Delaware. M. Frauncis Cotton, Justice of peace.
M. William Wright, Justice of peace. M. Benjamin Touchbourne, Justice of peace.
Beside many other Gentlemen of countenance and credit.
THE EXECVTION AND Confession of John Slade, an obstinate and notorious
Traitor, who was drawn hanged, and quartered for high treason against her
Majesty, at Winchester, on Wednesday, the xxx. day of October. 1583.
ON Wednesdaye being the 30, of October, John Slade, sometime a Scholemaister,
was drawn upon a Hurdell from the prison in Winchester, to the market place
where the execution was appointed: and being come to the aforesaid place, and
taken off the Hurdell, he came and kneeled down by the gallows, making a
cross with his hand upon one of the poastes thereof, and kissed it, using
silent Prayers in latin to him self. Afterward, being come upon the ladder,
he began in this manner. I am come hither this day to suffer death for my
faith, what faith? no rare faith, but even the faith that has continued from
all posterities: Whereupon Sir William Kingsmell Knight, spoke to him, as thus:
Slade, do not thus delude the People with plausible speeches, you are come
hither to suffer death for high treason against her Majesty, you have been
lawfully and sufficiently co^uicted thereof, and therefore you are brought to
endure ye punishment that Law has assigned you. You have denied her majesty
to have any supremacy over the Church of Christ in England, both in causes
Ecclesiastical and temporal, which fact is high treason: and therefore you are
worthy to suffer death, in that you will not give her majesty her duty and
your allegeaunce. Oh Sir William (quoth he) I will give her majesty as mutche
as ever has been given to any Prince in this Realm, and will show her as much
duty, as he that is her most obedient Subject. That do you not (answered Sir
William Kingsmell) for you rob her of her Ecclesiastical and temporal
government, which all Princes has enjoyed, and you traitorously take from
her: therefore how do you give her as much as any Prince has had, and how do
you show your self a subject, in this unnatural dealing, to prefer a
foreign government, before your own lawful Queen, Sir (said Slade the
supremacy has and does belong to the Pope by right, even as from Peter, and
the Pope has received it by divine providence: therefore we must not give those
things belonging to god, to any other then him alone: and because I will not do
otherwise, I may say with the three Children in the fiery Oven, and the first
of the Widows seven Sons in the Maccabees. Parati sumus mori, magis qua^
patrias Dei leges praeuaticari. Then M. Robert White (high Sheriff of the
Shiere) said to him, that he showed himself very undutiful to her Majesty:
and therefore willed him to ask her forgiveness: O Master Sherif (quoth he)
you know if Paul and Peter would have obeyed their Princes, they had not
suffered death. At these words, M. Doctor Bennet, one of the Chaplains to the
right honorable the Lord Treasourer, came to him and said: Slade, do not abuse
the people thus, with these words: Paul and Peter were put to death for
religion, they were commanded not to preach in the name of Jesus, are you
commanded any such thing? Oh Sir (answered Slade) I would wish you to behave
your self after ye manner of a Trewant, whose nature is to forget, and so would
I have you forget your wicked life, and begin a new. Slade (said M. Bennet) I
come as one that wishes well to thy soul, thou art now at ye pits brink,
consider how highly thou offendest God, and likewise how thou have trangressed
against her Majesty: I desire thee in the bowelles of Christ be not so
wilful, loose not that so lightly, which he has bought with his most precious
blood. And if my words may not prevail with thee, yet for ye love of thine
own soul, forsake this damnable opinion, let not that unworthy Priest be
preferred before thine own natural Princess, who is the lawful supreme head of
the church, next under Christ. Thou know how he has deprived her of her
government by his exco^municatio^, and will thou be so wicked as lean to him
and forsake her: Sir (answered Slade) you are very busy in words, if the Pope
has done so, I think he has done no more the^ he may, and then he ought to
do, for I will acknowledge no other head of the church, but only the Pope, and
her Majesty has no authority in te^porall causes (likewise) but only what
he shall think good to allow her. At these words, the people cried, away with
the Traitor, hang him, ha^g him. Master Sheriff willed him again to ask her
Majesty forgiveness. Why should I ask her forgiveness (quoth he) wherein have
I offended her? Then M. Bennet desired him to commend his soul to God, and
desire the people to pray for him, but he said, they and he were not of one
faith, and therefore they should not pray for him, and I desire al blessed
people (quoth he) to pray for me, and all the Saints and blessed Company of
Heaven. So after he had stayed so long as it pleased himself and had mumbled a
many latin prayers silently to himself, he was cast beside the ladder, and
afterward was cut down and quartered, according to his Judgment.

Finis.
The Execution and Confession, of another Notorious Traitor, named John Body
sometime a master of Art in Oxeforde, who was likewise (for high treason
against her Majesty) drawn, hang^ and quartered at Andouer, on Saturday, the.
2. of November. 1583.
John Body, a Master of Art (sometime in Oxford, and companion to this Slade)
was carried from Winchester to Andouer, a town ten miles from Winchester, where
the Assizes were holden, and where they were condemned. There was he on the
Saturday following, drawn on a Hurdell to (...) place of execution, and being
laid on the Hurdell, he spoke thus. O sweet Bed, the happiest Bed that ever
man lay in thou art welcome to me. Then being taken from the Hurdell, he
spoke to master Sheriff, as concerning a disputation which had passed between
him and Doctor Humfrey, about Constantine the emperor, and he had written in a
sheet of paper certain Articles, in answer to Doctor Hu^frey, which he would
have read before ye people, but because ye time was short, he could not read
them, but gave them to M. high Sheriff, that Doctor Humfrey might see the^*
When ye Hangma^ put the halter about his neck, he said; Oh blessed Chain, the
sweetest: Chain, and richest that ever came about any man's neck, and so
kissing it, he suffered the hangman to put it about his neck. There was also
present Master Bennet, who labored very Godly and earnestly to dissuade him
from his evil opinion, but all was (...) vain, he was so obstinat and
wilful. He likewise appealed upon his faith (which he said) was the cause of
his death: but S. William Kingsmel, told him, he died for high treason against
her Majesty, whereof he had been sufficiently co^uicted. Indeed (quoth he) I
have been sufficiently convicted, for I have been condemned twice, and you may
make the hearing of a blessed Mass treason, or the saying of an Aue Maria,
treason, you may make what you please, treason: but, I have committed no
treason, although indeed, I suffer the punishment due to treason. Why (quod M.
high Sheriff) you know ye Pope has excommunicated her Majesty, and you
forsake her and cleave to him: what say you to this: you deny her, her
special authority, and will not acknowledge her for your lawful Queen. Yes
(quod he) in those causes that pertain unto her, I acknowledge her my lawful
Sovereign and Queen: but for ye special cause, I will abide a thousand
deaths before I consent to it: and if the Pope have done well, let him answer
it, if he have done ill, let him likewise answer it: I acknowledge her my
lawful Queen in all temporal causes, and none other: You shall do well the^
(said S. William Kingsmell) to satisfy the people in the cause of your death,
because (otherwise) they may be deluded by your fair speeches. You shall
understand (quoth he) good people all, yt I suffer death for not granting her
M. to be supreme head of Christ's Church in England, which I may not, and will
not grant. Well the^, quoth Master Sheriff, ask her majesty forgiveness, and
then desire the People to pray for you. In troth quoth he, I must needs ask
her Majesty forgiveness, for I have offended her many ways, as in using
unlawful games, excess of apparel, and other offenses to her laws: but in
this matter you shall pardon me. And (for the People) because they and I are
different in religion, I will not have the^ pray for me: But I pray God long to
preserve her Majesty in tra^quility over you, even Queen Elizabeth, your
Queen and mine, and I desire you to obey none other. At length, saying: Jesus,
Jesus, esto mihi Jesus, three times, he was put beside the ladder, and
quartered, according to his judgment.

FINIS.

