To the right honorable and right worshipful the Nobility and Gentry of
Great Britain.
WHereas the testimonies of learned Philosophers and Physicians have given
sufficient assurance, that the Infusion of the Antimoniall Cup is an Universal
and perpetual Medicine, and that the Experiments of Honorable and worthy
Persons have confirmed the same to be a wholesome and Prevalent Medicine against
many dangerous and desperate Diseases, as by their several Certificats may
appear: And that (without unthankfulnes to the alone Giver of all good gifts,
Injury to the Common wealth, and offense against Christian charity) it may not
be concealed: my humble suit therefore is, to all (to whom these presents shall
come) that they would be pleased to peruse the Authorities by me alleged in my
book called the Universal Medicine, and to afford me their friendly
assistance for the better communication and declaration thereof for the health
and common benefit of mankind. And if any receive harm by the use thereof
(following the directions of my book) or if I report fraudulently of the
Medicinal virtues thereof, let it be required at my hands both in this life
and in that to come.

The Antimoniall Cups herein mentioned are made and sold by John Evans Minister
of Gods word dwelling in Gunpowder-Alley near fetter lane.

THE Universal Medicine: OR THE VERTVES OF THE Antimoniall Cup.

Collected out of the Experiments, and Observations of the most famous,
learned, and best approved Philosophers, and Physicians, that have written of
that Subject.

By John Evans Minister, and Preacher of Gods Word.

Jos. Quer. cap. 31. page 386. In hoc unico Antimonio videndam exhibebimus
Vniversalem Medicinam, Medicinarum Medicinam, and admirandorum aut miraculorum
ipsum miraculum, seu mirabile mirabilium.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland, 1634.

To the Reader.
WHat the Lord has sanctified, and communicated for the health and profit of
many, ought not to be concealed for the Envy and displeasure of a few: Gods
candle must not be put under a bushel, neither must his Talent be wrapped up,
and buried in the ground: his endowments are communicative, and every real
Christian may vendicate his part and portion therein. To you therefore
belongs this Medicinal Iemme, whosoever that desire to prevent contagious,
and infectious maladies, to preserve your bodies in health, strength, and vigor
of Nature, or to restore such as are already infirmed with desperate and
dangerous diseases. Accept then this excellent Jewel as the singular gift of
God, and the Medicinal virtues thereof herein mentioned, for the approved
experiments, of Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful Personages, many of
them for their Eminency, and height of Honor, wherewith they are rightfully
ennobled, not here to be mentioned: And the rest of such worth and dignity,
that for their piety, and learning, they are not inferior to many in the
Kingdom. And although this might give sufficient satisfaction to all
reasonable minds: Nevertheless, for that an undoubted Truth, fears not to
be exposed to all examinations, whosoever pleases, shall have a months trial
of them before they buy them: To the end that by the certainty of their own
knowledge, practice, and experience, they may be fully confirmed, that the one
half of the medicinal virtues of this Antimoniall Cup, is not herein reported
unto them.

A Declaration of the most admirable virtues of the Antimoniall Cup.
1. It keeps the body from repletion and fullness of humors. 2. It helps
against all evil affects of the Stomach. 3. It cures all intermitting Agues,
and burning Fevers. 4. It helps the swimming in the head, Madness, and
Frenzy. 5. It cures the Green Sickness, and helps against all
Obstructions. 6. It prevents the Stone, the Gout, and the Sciatica, and other
Aches. 7. It is a good Preservative against all contagious and infectious
Diseases. 8. It cures perfectly Morbus Gallious, and Lues Venerea. 9. It
asswageth the Falling Sickness, and all Convulsions. 10. It destroys worms,
and makes complexion fair, 11. It emptieth the Stomach of ill humors: the
Liver of Choler: the Spleen of Melancholy: the Pectorall parts of all hurtful
humors: The Head and the throat of phlegm and rheum, and all distillations.
12. It restores appetite lost: it causes rest to the senses aend sleep, and
loses not his virtue through use. 13. It cures wounds, and stancheth blood.
14. It takes away Wens, and other Excrescenses. 15. It cleanses, and heals
ulcerous Sores, and Fistulaes. 16. It consumes rotten, and putrified dead
flesh. 17. It purifieth the sight, and consumes the Web and Pearl. 18. It is
excellent against all Diseases used in Clysters. 19. It asswageth the pain of
the Gout, or any other Ach, by bathing and external application.
See the Use in the Latter end.

Made, and are to be sold by John Evans, Minister and Preacher of Gods (...)
Word, dwelling near Fetter-Lane, in Gunpowder Alley.

A CONFIRMATION of the Medicinal Virtues of the Antimoniall Cup Collected out
of the most famous, learned, and best approved Philosophers and Physicians,
that have written thereof.
OF all the Minerals contained within the bowels of the Earth, Antimonium
deserves the greatest praise, for the most excellent medicinal virtues, it
contains for the health and benefit of mankind.

It is a Mineral of a dark color, interveined with glistering streakes,
consisting according to Paracelsus, of Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt. Antimonium
corpus suum ex Mercurio assumit, est que natura Mercurii crassissima, postquam
expurgatur, vir^s and virtutes Mercurii omnes retinet, nihilque est aliud* quam
coagulatus Mercurius per spiritum Salis and Sulphur. And therefore it is
generally by all the Spagiricks called the Balsame, Restorer, and Preserver of
Nature.

It was first discovered by Geber King of Arab^^, and by him called Magnesia,
for as the Magnes draws iron unto it with the one point, and expels it
with the other; so this magnetically extracteth to, and expels from the
Stomach whatsoever within the whole body of man, i^ found to be offensive to
Nature, or contrary to the health and good constitution of the body.

It is also called Lupus, for that it devoureth and destroys all metal-except
the Lion, which is gold: and that it refineth and purifieth above all other
things, so does it also destroy all the corrupt humor, that are within the
body of man, leaving no impuritie to remain in the same.

Basilius Valentinus Monachus, compares it to a Ring without beginning,
without ending, for that his medicinal and natural virtues are inscrutable
and past finding out.

Many are the Medicines that are prepared of this Mineral, both against inward
and outward infirmities, but I freely and willingly disclaim from them all,
(especially for Inward causes) saving only the Regulus, and what may be
conveniently prepared out of the same, saying with learned and conscionable
Duncanus, Caetera sciens omitto, tanquam pernitiosa medicamenta, Iatroch. Born.
page 91. contenting my self with that, which by the authority and testimony
of the learned, and the experiments of my worthy friends, and by common
practice and experience shall be (by Gods grace) invincibly confirmed. The
first cornerstone of my building shall be that of Duncanus, confirmed also by
laborious and learned Milius, Hic Regulus est summum au^i examen, ac vera
omnium florum, and tincturarum medicinalium, in Antimonio existentium materia,
that is, this Regulus is the chiefest examination of gold* and the true subject
and matter of all medicinal virtues, contained within the body of Antimony. To
this agrees the testimony of Basilius Valentinus Monachus, calling it Regulus,
sive Dominus medicinae.

Divine Authority, Nature, and Experience confirms this truth, for as life
is hid in man, so in all things whether Animal, Vegitable, or Mineral, it is
invisibly incentred, and so punctually indiscernable, that according to the
learned Philosopher Mich. Sengivodius Polonus, the living spark is only the
8200. part of any subject, admire then the effectual power of that spark of
life mentioned in the resembled mustard seed, and this to the understanding
Reader, may give some touch, both for the universalitie, penetration, and
perpetuation of this divine medicine.

And now having discovered my Materia prima, I will produce such workmen for
the erection of this little Fabric, so well experienced in their profound
knowledge, that though by malice and ignorance, they have been often blamed,
they could never be shamed, nor justly reproved, and the first shall be that
Oriental Star of Natural, Spagiricall, and Magnetica^l light and knowledge,
Theophrastus Paracelsus. He in the sixth Book, tit. De vita longa, page 167.
says as follows. Quemadmodum Antimonium purgat Aurum, ita purgat etiam
corpus, continet enim essentiam eam* quae nihilimpuri, relinquit in puro, nec
ullus est usque adeo, in scriptis Archidoxeos peritus, aut tam insignis
Spagyrus, qui vires and facultates Antimonii, plene indagare queat. In prima
enim Isle, Antimonium adeo exaltatum, and inter Miner as Elementi Aquae
praedestinatum est, ut facultas, and virtus ejus nullo disuvio, instar
caeterorum aquaeorum crescentium imminuta, aut absorpta sit, adeoque his
omnibus Antimonium long praestat. In praede stinatione illud ita se habet, ut
se influentiae accommodet, nulla facultate, aut dote ejus diminuta, aut
infirmata, itaque ex omnibus mineralibus summi Arcani laudem optinet, hoc
seipsum purgat, and una secum etiam alia, quod si nihil boni in subjecto
reperitur, impurum corpus transmutat in purum, sicut de Lepra notum est, etc.
Paracels. lib. 6. De vitae ^onga, page 167. Like as Antimony purifieth Gold, so
does it also cleanse ^r purify the body of man, it contains that essence
which will permit ^^o uncleanness to remain in that which is pure: neither is
there any ^^ne found so skillful in the chief secrets of Nature, or so
excellent a Spagyrick, that can find out fully the virtues and medicinal
properties of Antimony; It is so much exalted in his first Being, and appointed
from the beginning to excel all other Minerals that are of the element of
water, that his virtues should be and remain without waste, or dimunition for
ever: and that it should sympathize and apply to the celestial influence, so
to be perpetually sustained in full efficacy, virtue, and effect. Therefore of
all Minerals it obtains the praise of the greatest secret, It purges it
self, and together with him all other bodies, and although it finds but
little which is clean or pure: it purifieth, cleanses, and changes that
unclean body to be most pure and clean, as it is well known by practice and
experience made upon leprous persons.

And again, in the sixth book, page 22. Quinta essentia Antimonii venenum
adimit, pulmonem enim and cor and membra laeprae subjecta mundat, cutem and
corpus totum purificat, and renovat mirum in modum: The essence of Antimony
expels poison, comfort the heart, and wonderfully restores and purifieth
the lights, and other parts of the body apt to be infected therewith. Moreover
in the 7. book, page 73.

Tanta vis and virtus est in Antimonio, ut restaurat enim and renovat universas
in corpore vires, ac facultates mirifice: Such and so great is the virtue of
Antimony, that it wonderfully restores and renews all the strength and
vigor of the whole body.

And in the eighth book he declares at large the several virtues and
medicinal operations of many other excellent Vegitables and Minerals, and in
the end concludes, Haec junctim uno in Antimonio latent; These that we have
severally spoken of are all inclusively contained in Antimony alone.

In the sixth Book: page 22. He teaches how by their excellency in virtue
and operation, to distinguish of the pre-eminence, and degrees of dignities of
simples, the one above the other, saying that those that perform the more
difficult and desperate cures, ought to bear away the glory of their
excelling virtue, concluding thus: Hoc videmus accidere Antimonio, curat
Leprosos, Morpheam, Alopeciam and similia, Scabies omnes, and cicatrices,
Leoninam, Elephantiam, Tiriam, etc. Et iterum, Antimonium lepram expectit,
magis quam de i^so credibile sit, non secus etiam de aliis intelligendum. This
we see to happen in Antimony, it cures leprosy, cleereth the complexion,
stays the falling of the hair, cures ring-wormes, tetters, and scurvinesse
of the skin, all scabs and spreading sores, and all contagious and infectious
diseases. And again afterward, Antimony expels the leprosy more
effectually than would be believed, the like operation it has against other
desperate diseases.

And in the third Boake, page 343. Antimonium nihil finit putrescere: Antimony
suffers nothing to corrupt or putrify within the body of man. And in the
fourth Book, page 265. Ita Antimonium per transmutationes rerum preparatum
est, eoque reductum ut in dulcedinem abierit, haec ab infantibus lincta,
Caducum sanavit, in Antimonio vis ac tam potens Arcanumlatet, ut paroxysmum
etiam vehementissimum tollit: Antimony is so to be prepared, and brought to
that sweetness that it may be taken of infants, and have been thereby cured
of the falling sickness, there is so great virtue and power in Antimony, that
it takes away and preventeth the most extremest fits of the falling sickness,
Paracels. lib. 4. page 265.

Furthermore, he in the sixth Book, page 146. says; Sicut Antimonium finit
Aurum, sie eadem ratione ac forma finit corpus: In illo enim est essentia, quae
nihil impuri cum puro confundi sinit, atque adeo virtus permanserit, ita ut
sese ex influentia semper dirigat, neque aliud de vi; ac virtute nativa unquam
decesserit. Merito igitur omnia, quae mineralium sunt, quorum summum, ac
potissimum Arcanum in se claudit Antimonium, huic uni tribuimus, mundat feipfum
una cum reliquis quae immunda sunt, porro si nihil omnino sani adest, immundum
corpus in mundum transformat: Lib. 6. De vitalonga, page 146.

Like as Antimony refineth Gold, so also by the same reason and manner it
purifieth the body of man: In it there is that essence that suffers no
impuritie nor uncleanness to remain confusedly intermingled amongst the pure
and good, and his virtues so constantly remains, directing himself always
according to the heavenly influence, that of his natural virtue and power, he
shall at no time suffer loss or diminution thereof. Worthily therefore do we
attribute to this alone, the power and virtue of all Minerals, whose chief and
most powerful secret effect, Antimony comprehends in it self alone, he
refineth himself, and purifieth together with it self, what he finds
unclean: moreover, though he find little or nothing sound, he alters and
changes that impure body to a clean and sound constitution: Lib. 6. And to
conclude, Essentia Antimonii est purgatio vera, quae purgat hominem
excellentissime superalia quaevis Arcana, radicitus evellit auferendum, ac omne
quod immundum est: huma number corpus in supremum usque sanationis gradum purum
efficit, ac ab omnibus aegritudinibus mundat, etiam illis ex quibus oriuntur
ulcera; quicquid penes hominem fuerit impuri delet.

The essence of Antimony is a true and natural purge, which purges man most
excellently above all other secrets, it utterly takes away by ^e root
whatsoever is foul, unwholesome, and ought to be removed, and ^^duceth the body
of man to the highest degree of perfect health, and ^eanseth from all manner
infirmities and diseases, even from those that ^^e the original and fountain
of ulcerous and dangerous diseases, it ^^lly and freely removes all corrupt
and impure humors, that might ^^e lurking within any part of the body of man.
Thus far Paracelsus (...) his lesser Chyrurgerie, page 323.

My second testimony shall be Martinus Rulandus, a man of sound ^^dgement,
great practice and experience, he called the infusion of this Cup his Aqua
Benedicta, In the 5. Cent. and the 95. Cure he says thus. Communi opinione
Hermeticorum receptum est, Magnesiam Saturni, quam ^iunt esse Antimonium,
existere Ens, and raedicem omnium metallorum, ex Regulo hujus Antimonii
vasculum formetur ad usum medicinale satis aptum, mirabile and idoncum semper
permanens citra ponderis sui viriumque amissionem.

It is received by the consent and common opinion of all Hermeticall
Philosophers, that the Magnesia of Saturn, which they call Antimony, ^s the
original and beginning of all metals. Of the Regulus of this Antimony there is
made a little vessel or cup very admirable, fit and effectual for his
medicinal virtues, always remaining in force without loss of weight and
virtue: the Infusion of this Cup he calls his Aqua benedicta, which he
always, (cum maxima aegrotorum salute, in omnibus morbis vulgo etiam
incurabilibus,) used with good success, and the restitution of the health of
his patients, yea also in such diseases as were commonly reputed to be
incurable. And in another place he says; Mirisicas possidet virtutes in tota
been medendi ratione, etc. It contains admirable virtues fit to be used in
all sound and perfect medicinal cures, 1. It cleanses the stomach: 2. Purges
the head: 3. Preventeth the Lethargy, Swimming, and Vertigo: 4. Cures frenzy
and madness: 5. Preventeth, and many times cures the falling sickness. 6. It
cures an inveterated cough and hoarsnesse, although it be of long
continuance: 7. Clears the winde-pipe and passage from the lungs and so
helps such as are short-winded: 8. It cures the Squinancie or stopping in
the throat: 9. It opens, purges, and heals all Impostumes in the lungs:
10. Restores the stomach, and expels all evil affects of the same: 11.
Preventeth and cures the Pleurisy: 12. Cures deep melancholy and madness,
cheeres up the heart and vital spirits: 13. Cures the Hypochondriaca or windy
melancholy: 14. And is of excelling virtue against all manner of Fevers and
Agues: 15. It prevents the infection of the plague, or other contagious
diseases: 16. It preserves from the Gout, and every kind and species
thereof: 17. It purifie^^ the blood, cleanses the whole body: 18. Dissipateth
and brings (...) way tongealed or clotted blood, or any other corrupt matter:
19. D^^^ stroyeth and expels all manner of worms: 20. Cures Morbus
Ga^^licus, and Lues venerea: 21. It prevails against the yellow Jaundis^^ and
all overflowings of the gall: 22. It opens and cleanses all manner of
obstructions, it is says Rulandus, Medicina medicinarum, the Medicine of
Medicines, good, healthful, and profitable to be used against all manner of
diseases and infirmities whatsoever, this much and much more Mar. Rulandus
affirms upon his experience and knowledge whereof read more, Ruland. Cent. 5.
Cur. 95. and Cent 9. cap. 51. Qu^^citan confirms every particular hereof,
and recites many other ex^periments of his own practice. See Pharm.
restitutae Quercitani, pag^* 345. and again page 238.

Martinus Rulandus affirmavit se, sua aqua benedicta. i. Infusione Regul^^
Antimonii, centies saelicissimo successu, luem veneream curasse: that is,
Rulandus affirms, that he (with his blessed water which is the infused liquor
in the Antimoniall Cup) has perfectly cured the French Pox* and running of the
reins an hundred times, with happy and good success. This recites
Quercitan, out of Martinus Rulandus.

In the third place I will produce Quercitan himself, Aqua benedicta^^
Antimonii, Insigues enim, and mirandas edit effectus, blande provocat vomi^tum,
and quatuor vel quinque seeds, evacuando persuperiora and inferiora s^mul, quod
vix praestabit alind remedium, usurpatur etiam foelicissime, ad^omnis generis
febres, etiam pestiferas: pleuritides item, aliosque de ploratissimos affectus,
qui ob radices profundius, validiusque infixas, vix subigi^^ and
edom^ripossunt: Vid. Quer. Pharm. rest. 238.

The blessed water or infusion of the Antimoniall Cup, performs most
excellent and wonderful effects, it gently procures vomit, and four or five
stools, purging both upwards and downwards together, which hardly any other
medicine will do: it is administered very successefully against all kind of
Fevers, although they be pestilent and infectious, also against the Pleurisy,
and against all other deplored and desperate diseases, which are so strongly
confirmed, and deeply rooted, that they cannot be over-mastered any other way,
or by any other medicines. Thus far Quercitan in his Pharmacop. rest. page 238.

Fourthly, this truth shall be further confirmed by the testimonies of that
excellent and learned Doctor of Physic and Philosophy, that wrote out of his
own experience and manual practice, Basilica Antimonii, in the 22. and 23.
page he says.

Antimonium est laudabile, and singular Pestis preservativum, in Hydrope, Lue
pestifera, and gallica, in Obstructionibus hepatis, and Lyenis, Ictero, Lepra
^^^que speciebus omnibus, medicamen est speciale, and admirabile, ad arti^rum
gravitatem a Podagra vel Lue venerea relictam commendatur, in ^psa
sanguificatione in Cache^ia, and Lepralaudatur, Catarybos cor, and ^^ones
ferientes, cum summo successu exhaurit, and ex hoc celeberrima aqu^ ^almica
paratur, ad nubeculas and suffusiones commendatur, and ad pur^tia Enemeta cum
bono, and foelici successu recipitur, curat omnes obstru^nes viscerum, a
quartana and tertiana liberat, in Anasarca commendabi^xistit, sanguinis est
depurativum, Leproe, Epilepsiae, and Podagrae unicum ^servativum That is,

Antimony is a laudable and singular preservative against the plague, (...) a
special and an admirable medicine against the Dropsy, the run^^ng of the
Reins, and the French Pox, against all obstructions of the ^ver or the
Spleen, against the intolerable pain of the Arteries and (...) Joints,
proceeding from the infection of the Pox, it is much com^^nded and praised to
purify and cleanse the blood against the Lepro^and the evil estate of the
body: It dries up all rheumes and distilla^ns that offend the heart or corrupt
the lungs: and of this infusion is ^^de a most excellent medicine for the eyes:
it is also administered with ^^od and happy success for purging Clisters, it
cures all obstructions (...) the inward parts; it delivers from the tertian
and quartan fevers, it (...) commended against the Dropsy Anasarca, it is the
best purifier of the ^oud, and is the chiefest, and only preservative against
the Leprosy, the ^^ilepsie, and the Gout. Page 22, 23. usque ad 30.

And again, the same Author in his Basilica Antimonii, page 39, 40, etc. ^^^th
thus; Antimonium, Naturam confortando, sudores movendo, sangui^mque depurando,
tantum inimicissimis humanae vitae hostibus bellum in^xit, ut neque Hydrops,
neque Podagra, Arthritis, Gallica Lues. Lepra, and ^^sce affines morbi, contra
talem medicinam quicquid moliri ausint: Anti^ony by comforting Nature, by
procuring sweat, and by purifying of ^he blood, wageth such war against the
most cruel enemies of man's ^fe, that neither the Dropsy, nor the Gout, nor
the Morbus, nor the ^eprosie, can any thing at all withstand the effectual
virtue of his me^icine, page 39. And again, Antimonium, diaphoreticum est
utilissimum, ^^od vires conservando sudores movet, in peste and febribus sursum
and deorsum ^ovendo purgat, in Hydrope maxim Arcanum: Antimony is a most
pro^^table sweat-procuring medicine, which by preserving the natural ^^rength
procures sweat, and purges away the infection of the plague and pestilentiall
fever by purging the body both upwards and downwards. Ad capit is affectus
singular remedium: It is a singular remedy against all evil affects of the
head Moreover, in the 43. page he says, Antimonium per vomitum, ven^num
recenter assumptum, citissime ejicitur, ^n febribus, and capitis doloribus
utiliter exhibitur, omnem Epileps^ae fomitem externit, and horribilem istum
affectum, and hostem vitaeque humanae tortor^^ omnino expellit, and eradicat,
omnem vitiosam colluviem per vomitum, (...) alvum expellit: page 43.

Antimony by vomit expels poison speedily, if lately taken, it (...) given
very profitably against all fevers and infirmities of the head, (...) sifteth
out the unwholesome matter of the falling sickness; and utter^^ expels this
cruel torture, and adverse enemy to the life and heal^^ of mankind, also it
drives out by vomit and siedge all filthy corrup^tion and impuritie out of the
body of man.

Furthermore in the 46. page, he says, Antimonium febres curat, a p^^tredine
praeservat, ciborum appetentiam excitat, ventriculum constringe^^ confortat,
omnemque calorem praeter Naturam, in corpore humano ortum ^^tinguit, epilepsiam
curat, calculum frangit, lumbricos enecat, menses and u^^nam nam movet, dolores
etiam podagricos exerinsecus adhibita mulcet, and mul^^ alia in medicina
praestat, dentium dolorem sistit, Balsamum vitae instaura^^ sanguinem
purificat, obstructiones reserat, nunquam anbelosos and asthmatic^ deserit,
summum sanguinis mun dificativum, calculum renum and vesicae fra^^git and
expellit, urinam and sudores movet, ulcera, fistulas, and vulnera a pu^tredine
conservat and sanat.

Antimony cures fevers, preserves from putrefaction, procures ap^petite,
comfort the stomach, allayeth all immoderate, and unnatural heat, cures the
falling sickness, breaks the stone, kills worme^ procures urine, and the
monthly flowers, asswageth the pains of the Gout by bathing with the infusion
and external application, and has many other medicinal virtues, stays the
pain of the teeth, restores the Balsame and strength of Nature, purifieth the
blood, opens ob^structions, forsakes not to comfort and help the
Asthmaticall, and such as are short-winded, is the chief cleanser and purifier
of the blood, it breaks and expels the stone, whether it be of the Reins
or of the Bladder, it procures urine and sweat, cures perfectly ulcers,
fistula's; and wounds, and preserves them from corruption and putrefaction.
Basilic^ Antimonii, page 47, 48, 49.

I may not omit the testimony of that excellent Physician Oswaldu^^ Cr^llius
Physician to the Prince of Anhalt, who in his Basilica Chimica^ page 214. says
thus: Antimonium operatur mirabilia in peste, in febribut^ acutis, in Mania, in
desirio, in dementiis, fascinationibus, morbis omnibu^ in univers^m opit
ulatur, epilepsiis and aliis quamplurimis morbit adjuvat per alvum, per
superiora, per poros, per insensibilem transpirationem, noxi^ c^piose expurgat.
Antimony does wonderful things in the preservation from the plague, in sharp
fevers, against madness, forgetfulness, distractions, witchcrafts, it helps
in general against all diseases, comfort against the falling evil, and
many other desperate diseases.

And again in the 216. page he says; Mirabilia operatur in Peste, quar^^na,
hydrope, longis obsir matis morbis, diuturnis putridis febribus, cache^^a,
melancholia, insania, delirio venenorum haustorum symptomatibus; It ^orketh
wonderful effects against the Plague, the Quartan Ague, the ^ropsie, and
against inveterate and confirmed diseases, and against con^^nuall, rotten, and
corrupt fevers, against the leprosy, and foul spots ^f the skin, against
melancholy, madness, dotage, forgetfulness, and ^ll evil qualities of
poisons and venomous things: And concludes in ^^e 219. page, Non datur melius
catharticum: A better purging medi^ine cannot be given.

I will conclude this Discourse with the authority and testimony of Mylius,
and Duncanus Bornetus Iatrochimia, Dun. p. 93.

Antimonium est praestantissimum, and nunquam satis laudatum medice^entum, ad
restaurationem and renovationem corporis humani, tinctur^ enim ^la expurgat
atrum sanguinem, and vitiosos quosque humores, idque cum eva^uatione manifesta,
and pravorum humorum correctione, hepatis obstructio^ibus opitulatur, hydropem
discutit, icteritiam curat, laeticiam generat, le^r^sis sanitatem restituit,
and est praestantissimus adpulmones Balsamus: est^ue efficax ad Luem veneream
curandam, medicamentum. Maximum enim ^rolepra Arcanum est, quo nibil fere in
hoc morbo praestantius inveniri po^est: Lieuem rectificat, matricis dolorem
sedat, menses movet, ejusque vigo^em conservat, Mo^phaeam curat, Scorbuto
medetur, bilem utramque ex^ellit ex toto corpore, calculos frangit, caput and
cerebrum expurgat, epilepsiae and convulsionibus omnibus medetur: and ut
brevibus dicam in deploratissi^is morbis fere omnibus summum est remedium: That
is,

Antimony is a most excellent and never-sufficiently praised medicine: for the
restoration and renovation of the body of man, the infusion or tincture
thereof purges black blood and choler, and every corrupt humor, and that
both by manifest evacuation and correction of evil humors: it helps against
all obstructions of the Liver, and of the Spleen, disperseth the Dropsy,
cures the Jaundise, procures cheerfulness and gladness of the heart,
restores the Leprous to perfect health, and is the best preservative of the
lungs: it is a perfect and an effectual cure for Morbus Gallicus, and the
chiefest secret against Leprosy, for that no thing is found to be more
excellent against that soul disease, it rectifieth the Spleen, asswageth the
griefs of the Mother, procures the monthly terms, preserves and
increases Nature in strength, cures the Morphew, heals the Scurvie,
expels both black and yellow choler out of the body, breaks and expels
the stone: purges the head and brain, helps against the falling sickness
and all convulsions: and to conclude, it is a chief and an excellent medicine
against all desperate and dangerous diseases. Thus far Duncanus.

To the end that it may apparently, and without contradiction be ^^nifest to
all, that these collections and testimonies grounded upon knowledge, practice
and experience, and all the aforementioned Medicina^ virtues, are truly and
really appropriate to the use and virtue of the Antimoniall Cup, being rightly
prepared and made of the pure Essen^^ and Regulus of Antimony, I will conclude
with the testimony of Mili^^ and Duncanus in these words: Regulus Antimonii,
est summum Auri ex^^^enae vera omnium florum, and tincturarum medicinalium, in
Antimonie e^stentium materia Iatrochim. Dunc. page 91. The Regulus of Antimony
(...) the best and chiefest examination of gold, it is the true matter and
subject of all medicinal virtues, properties, and qualities contained within
the body of Antimony.

Such as desire to be further satisfied may read,
Basilica Antimonii. Basilica Chimica Mylii. Anatomia Antimonii. Basilica
Chymica Crollii. Rulandus at large. Quercitanus. Iatrochimica Duncan. Tyr. Chapter
Beguin. Curriculum Chymicum.
The manner how to make use of the Antimoniall Cup.
TAke a well-glased earthen pot, and put this Cup therein, and power within and
round about it, as much Claret wine, or White ^ne. Muscadell (or Malmesey if it
may be gotten, for it is best of all) or ^se Ale, and let it stand so warm as
you may well endure your finger (...) one hour or more, and let it be kept
reasonable warm, at the same (...) near the same degree of warmness by the
fire close covered in the ^hole, by the space of twelve hours: and afterward
a Cupfull or ^ore taken fasting in the morning, purges the body from
whatsoever (...) offensive to Nature: the operation is gentle and without any
violence (...) danger, as has been oftentimes proved: let them govern
them^^lves as after other Physic.

By the quantity and proportion of Wine or Ale (a pint for two, or for ^ree)
you may prepare for as many as you please at one time: but pre^are no more than
you will spend that morning, for by standing it alte^eth his quality and
nature.

For the manner of the operation, it is difficult to foreknow, for it
^perateth according as it is most convenient and necessary for the pre^ent
estate and constitution of the body, sometimes and in some consti^utions, it
operateth by Vomit alone, in some others by Siedge alone, in others by urine
and sweat, but most commonly it works all these ways, ^et without violence
or danger.

If you desire it should operate rather by Siedge, you must use Ale, or
Malmesey which is best, or else Muscadell: for white and Claret wines, ^re more
apt for vomits of their own self natural properties: Some ^se to drink
posset drink, to hasten and facilitate the operation which you may do, but I
rather approve the operation of it alone, for then you shall better see and
judge what offends your body, by that which Nature will expel; if you find
not your self afterward more hungry, ^ively, and cheerful, believe me not.

You are to observe that according to the quality of the heat, the continuance
of the infusion, and the quantity you give, you may make it fit for any, from
the tender infant, to the strongest constitution.

Give to women and children half a cupfull or a cupfull according to the age
and strength: if it work not effectually to your liking, you must make it
hotter, and drink more the next time.

To prevent sickness, once or twice in the Spring and Autumn, or once in a
month will be sufficient, for ordinary infirmities, take it three times,
leaving a day or two betwixt, but for confirmed diseases it should be taken as
often as it works, for when it has vanquished and expelled the enemies of
Nature, and prevailed against all the impurities of the body, it is at peace
with all that is pure and good, and then will in work no more, and thereby you
may be well assured that you are perfe^^ well, and this I do affirm upon mine
own knowledge, practice and experience to be true, and if any man make doubt
of the waste and diminuti^^ of the medicinal virtues of this Cup through use,
let them be assured they will never decay; for testimony whereof I have made
continual use of one Cup for above three years past, and I find it more
effectual every time than other: and the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas
Middleton Knight has made more experience hereof, and I am certain will be
ready and forward to confirm the same. When you have made use of this Cup:
dry it with a fair cloth, and so put it up safe into his bo^ for by washing
it unheedfully or scouring it you may waste the metal, or break the Cup: for
it is brittle like glass, but if any such mischance do happen let them reserve
the metal, and bring it to me in weight, and without any commixture, and for
ten shillings I will give them a new Cup.

And if any through ignorance, or malice, or such others that regard their
particular lucre and profit more than the health and general good of their
Christian brethren, shall unjustly report that this Antimoniall Cup is either
counterfeit, and of very little or no virtue at all, or otherwise dangerous,
pernicious, and hurtful, as being composed of Mercuries and Poisons, and the
like; as for the virtue and continuance, it has been already sufficiently
proved: To prevent the calumny of the slanderer though it be an Herculean
labor, yet to preserve my reputation immaculate, as much as in me lies, I do
confess unto you really, it is made of the Mercury of Antimony, which is the
pure spirit, soul, and life of the Mineral, refined, separated, and prepared
from all impurities with much diligence, care, labor, and charges, but that it
contains any of that Mercury which is common Quicksilver, or Mercury
sublimate, which is made of Quicksilver and poysonfull Arsenick, or else
Mercury precipitate, which is also made of Quicksilver, and the Corrosive
Aquafortis or Regis: I do sincerely and truly protest in the faithful word
of a Minister and Preacher of the sacred Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ,
there is none of these contained in any that I make, neither any thing else,
but what I am persuaded in my conscience, and have found by experience upon my
self, my friends, my neighbors, and mine own children, to be for the
health, good, and benefit of the body of man, and this I confirm to be the
sincere truth, as I shall answer to the Lord Jesus at the latter day: And so I
conclude, and commend it and you to the blessing of our Great, Glorious, and
Eternal God, to whom together with his true and only Son, and the most holy
and blessed (...) three powerful Persons, but one immortal God, be given and
(...) creatures, all honor, praise, and glory, world with (...)


