A brieue Admonition unto the now made Ministers of England: Wherein is
showed some of the fruiete of this their late framed faith: Made by Lewys Euans
student in Louain. 24. Aug. 1565.

JOAN. 8. Vos ex patre Diabolo estis, and desideriis patris vestri vultis
obsequi. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father you
will do. ANTVERPIAE TYPIS AE. DIE. M.D.LXV.



The heretics endeavor is, by all the means they may,
The memory of Christ his death, to we and put away:
And therefore his Cross, and how he did dye
To take out of sight, all shameless, they try.
But thowe that art Christian, of Christ his death see
The passion here printed, as picture to thee.
An Admonicion unto the now made Ministers of England.
WHEREAS if I had now set furthe (according as in my last translacion I
promised) to the vewe and sight of all men, the many and sundry misdemeanour
and enormities, wherewith I can and may most justly accuse and charge you: If
I had (I say) therewith set furthe your names, then I neaded not to dowbte,
but that your own doings, had fully enforced any true meaning or
indifferent man, to marvel at your more then shameful outerage, to dowbte
your doctrine, to mystruste your teachinges, and at the leangth (not without a
just cause) to follow the perfect faith of Christ his Catholyke church.
But, notwithstanding that I did understand and see, this way to be both sure
and ready, to raze out from men's hearts the horrible bloattes, and infection
of heresies, which in this our unhappy time, to the consusion of many,
raygneth with fury and rage througheout the Realm and countries of England:
(For, what can sooner deface untrue doctrine, then the detecting of the
teachers tyrannous intent, perverse purposse, most lewd life, and more then
past impudent an arrogancy?) Fox his martyrs were such fylthie lyuers: as
one of their now preachers was moved to say this of them: that onles they
recanted their sin at the very stake, he was sure they were in hell.
Yet, because the factes of some of you, be so dishonest, so detestable, and
so to be hated, as if your names were noted in deed, and that they people did
once perceive yt: enough were yt to drive you (if you be subject to any
shamefastenes) in desperacion all lewdelye to lead and end the remnaunte of
your wreached most woeful lyfes. for this cause, I will omytte at this time
your names. I will not much speak of your private deeds and offenses.

Only in this brief treatise will I travail (like a friend) to pulle you
out of the clammye claye: wherein your feet be found of so long a time thus
fast. I will endeavor with gentle doings to deliver you from this poreblinde
disease, which so dreadefullye does cumber you. And I will try, whether any
of you recanting from his cursed doctrine, will in time wyselie beware the
everlasting shame, which otherwise you must of necessity sustain, to your
utter and most woorthye defacing forever. For, in case I perceive you still to
stand in your self will wanton new fond faith and way: I shall be then
forced (for some further admonicion unto the people) to set furthe your names,
your habitacions, the faults and heinous crimes, wherewyth I will but all
truly accuse you, and also the time, the place, and the persons, which
shall make for the manifest testimonial and proof of the trothe: which thing
(I am sure) you would be right sorye to see in printe, and so published to
your perpetual deserved reproache. But, there be of you peradventure, which
do little think, that I can be pryevie to any poincte of your perverse life
and behavior: or at the least do suppose yt impossible, that I should have
the full understanding of all your unbridled beastlynes and follye. In deed,
although that much of your illaudable life must needs be unto me unknown:
Yeat, so much thereof I am pryevie unto, as (trust unto yt) is hable to move
and bring any honest hearted man, to abhor and myslyke all your licencious,
lewd, and ouerstreached learning. And if you will know, how I came unto the
knowlaige thereof: yt was by them of your own side, of your own sects,
counsel, and profession, it was they which wroughte you this woe, vtterered
you outerage, declared your cou^sailles, and betrayde the whole effect of your
ungodly tryckes and noughtynes. Now then, if that unto me (who should know
least the fruicte of your long labored for licencious liberty) such and so
much of your disordered dealinges is made manifest and detected: how think
you of others? how much knows other men? what say you unto those which dwell
in the other parties of England? do not they likewise perceive the unlawful
living of your brethern there? yeas no dowbte. For whether you go or ride,
trauaill or reast, what company soever you keep, you shall here nothing but
of the noughtynes of these new Ministers. All folks will straight fall to
complain on the ryotte, ambicio^, avarice, and mere cruel desire of
Ministers. so that if you which be Ministers would trauayll by land or by
sea, your selves should surely here your own sinful trespasses all truly
told and uttered. For, whereas sometimes men trauayling accustomed by telling
of hystories and tales, to avoid the weariness of their long ways and
journey: in these days they have none other news, nor any other history,
then the telling of the mad touches of Ministers, in so much, that whether
he be a child, a young man, of middle age, or aged: he is sure able to say,
that this Minister, or that Minister, has committed this vile deed, or that,
and one michiefeous fact, or an other. Move further to any man the misfortune
and calamitye of this present age, wherein, if we confess the trothe, we do
rather linger then live, express the imperfection of men, complain upon the
want of unity and peace, set furthe the fail and decay of charity, honest
love, and true freindship, tell the vntrothe, vnfaythefulnes, and uncharitable
shifts now used, yea, bewraye the whole woe of this wreached and unfortunate
time: And then if you inquire for the cause of all such our vncompfortable
estate, yt will be answered, that this wrye wicked and false religion has
fettered us in the myddest of all these miseries, that these here and there
new folyshe professed opinions have imprisoned us in such sundry puddells of
painful distress, and that the new fatched from Geneua faith has mingled
our quiet estate and safety, with these sought out sects of war,
rebellion, schisms, sedicion, and disobedience. Is such therefore (o
preachers) the credyte, which you have purchased? and is such the shameful
lowse life, which your preaching imperfect maintayneth? Yea, yea, such is
the holiness of all your whole professed protestancie, and such is the shame,
which of necessytie must ensue and follow you for the same. This your feigned
religion is not yet full seven years of age, and for all that, see what a
defourmed babe already it is, behold what wickedness yt committeh, and mark
what detestable doings yt practyzeth. yt persuades the people against their
Prince, the youth against their parents, servants against their superiors
and masters, one realm against an other, and whole Chrystendome against
Christ. But in this, our made Ministers can rejoice and triumph, tearming yt
most ungodly, to be the Gospel: whereas in deed, there neaded no better
argument to prove yt to be, as yt is, high minded pestiferous pleasante
heresye: then the readynes of selfewill youth, and delicate vnpainefull
persons to run so rashelie to embrace yt: for from labor unto lust, from
prayer unto contempt and pride, and from fasting unto lowse liberty and
feasting, we see the perverse nature of man to be over prone and read. I
remember the talk (as it is written) between Socrates the famous philosophier
and Theodota the bewtiefull queen, she told him that she was able at any
time to allure unto her al his scholars and stude^tes in philosophy:
affirming, that Socrates cold not with all his learning, persuade any one of
her companions and lovers unto him. It is truth, said Socrates, and no
meruail, seeing thowe do draw them in a down hill pathe into pleasure: and
I compel them to clyme unto virtue, whereunto the way and clyming is high
and full of difficulty in likewise what wonder is it, if many a thowsande do
now thick and threefolde, fall from virtue the teaching of the Catholyke
church, into vice the very whyrlepoole of the protestacio^ of heretykes? The
Apostle of Christ S. Pieter, 2. Pet. 2.
did him self long sythence, in most plain words express the same, saing:
Superba enim vanitatis loquentes* pelliciunt in desideriis carnis luxuriae, eos
qui paululum effugiunt, qui in errore conuersantur: libertatem illis
promittentes, cum ipsi serui sint corruptionis, etc. that is to say, For when
they have spoken the swelling words of vanity, they beguyle through
wanto^nes, through the lusts of the fleashe, them which were clean
eskaped: but now are wrapped in errors, they promise them liberty, and are
them selfs the bond servants of corrupcion, etc. So now in these later
days, when you (which usurp preaching) have prated and set furthe your own
foolish and (as God does know) inconstante fancies: the^ you provoke and
allure others into the self same pit of death and damnacion: this draws a
number of doting old heads, and young boys to be of their damnable doctrine.
offering them the like fruicion of the lust of the filthy fleashe. And
promysing unto Priests, Moonkes, and many others, who sometimes lived in
sincerity and godliness, an open gate into all ungodly desire and vanity: and
that in such wise, as what poor Priest soever does at this time live within
the lurche of your injunctions and tyra^nie, the same is not compted honest
zealous, nor earnest in faith, onles he be clogged with a queen, to carry him
all headlong into hell. So that the poor man, which lived of a long time in
chastity and perfection, is now compelled to compass the love of some light
damsel, to lead with her a loytering detestable life, and so to bid farewell
unto all his former faith, promise, and fidelity. Wherefore, may we not most
justly with Seneca say? Vincit sanctos dira libido. Vengible or cruel lust
overcomes the holy men. Forther, may we not adiudge by this our time, the
sayng of Marcus Antoninus Emperor of the Romans, to be all ryghtlie spoken
for truth? who alleged it over hard for any man, having immoderate
liberty, to rule the brydell and rain of his raging appetites and lusts. But
here some of you will say, Why? and were not many of the Priest yuell in the
old time? Admytte (if any to your knowelaige were) some so to be, and yet,
that shall make nothing to maintain your noughtines. For in those days to
punish such lewd lyuers as you, there were straight and laudable laws
established, as the books thereof, if you would impudentlie deny yt, can yet
testify. So that fear then forced foul life to fly into corners, and to
forsake the face of the streates and howses: but now purity of living is
clean put away, chastity is shaken in sunder, the laws to punish
leacherie is laid under foot, virtue is cou^pted but a varlat, inco^tinencie
is creapte up and mayntayned in married Moonkes, Priests, and Ministers howses.
Also then the spirituality were spiritual and shamefast, now they be lay men
and shameless. Then they were learned and laudablie instructed in liberal
sciences, now they are rude unlearned, and for the most part but poor
laborers of handie crafts. Then they were devout and divines, but now they
have neither devotion nor divinity. You your selfs (o Ministers) do know,
that the most part of you be only through mere poverty thus compelled to
putt your selfs so rashelie in these disordered orders, and you which have
consumed and riotouselie wasted your welthe and goods, are now glad to
profess a perverse doctrine, thereby to draw into some ability for to wade
with the world again. If that in any paryshe (a pietiefull thing to hear)
there was any pastthrifte and rash mate which cold but read, such an unruly
runneagate is now, not only, in the church a reader, but also (which thing
passes all impudency) a preacher and a pulpitte possessor in the holy house
of God. (I mean in the house which once was holy, and rightly reverenced
through out the Realm of England, but now defaced, and against all godlynes
profaned.) I know my self such as, having forsaken their handieworke and
former trade of living, have afterward labored to read, that then they
might be Ministers, and readers. I know them who, having some skyll in
reading, have rashelie forsaken their masters services, and so that have not
only sought thus vnorderlie for orders, but also which have obtained the
same. I know them who, (being delivered out of the Bushoppes prison, and whose
hands, before the temporal Judge, of the iron and fire have sufficientlye
fealte.) have notwithstanding straight passed into the next Diocese, and there
desyryng orders, were furthe with there charged with the cure and charge of
souls.

Again, if you mark the young sort of new made Ministers, you shall find in
them such follye and pride, such wilfullnes and wantonness, that woeful yt
is to hear yt. they be in their attire and apparaill so rooffed, welted,
iagged and stytched, as meeter to be ministrels then of the ministry. These
do no sooner attain this one new only order, but then busylie seek they
for some bassing gyrle to make up their new godlynes: Mete yo^g men, for
such amadde faith.
they labor so hardly to get them a huswife, as be she good or bad,
vertous or a varlat: they pass not, this is the end of their study, this is
it which they seek, and this is their summum bonum, their chief felicity.
Seek further, what your grauest fathers and new named Bushoppes have been,
these new Bushoppes were the basyste sort of the whole clergy.
and you shall find, that they were the inferior sort of the whole clergy,
that they were for their learning meater to be compared with the laity, then
with the learned: that they were the most wantonne lyuers (as by their light,
unadvised, and unlucky made maraiges appears) amongst the spirituality:
that they were those, for who^ the whose clergy were accused of
incontinencie, that they were but the riffe raffe amongst the religious: that
they were but truantes in comparison of the true Catholyke teachers: that they
were the very worste of all those which professed Priestehoode and sanctity,
and that they were but the very Dregs of the Divines and Doctors of our
days. Behold of them some, who having lived this long time without any
matching in marriage, do now in their old age fall to such follye and
doting, as their mere mad doings must well declare, what kind of faith
they seek to maintain, and also what manner of life they heretofore have
leadde. their grave fathers be drowned in dotage and dead lie sin.
These be not of their simple sorts, for they be of their Bushopes, and they
be of their new godly, devout, and (as the Protestants can call them) most
grave fathers. But is it gravity for a Bushop with a graye bearde in his
extreme age to wax wanto^ne, and to wade in love with a light maid of his
hoaste his kytchynne, with whom he has made such have to marye? I shall not
need to trouble your with his name, for the cyttie and country do well know
yt. Yet, if any far dweller hereof do dowbte, let him trust, that it is as
true: as that BATHE and WELLS be within one Bushopryke. Such wantonness in
the yowth is wicked: but in such old men, yt is more then detestable.
Is it gravity again for a man in years more the^ fowrscore, a man being a
Preacher, and once as well as the best a mock Bushoppe, after the buryeng of
his late bedfellowe and wife, to fall to lasciuire of fresh, to seek a young
woman to woe, and to marye one who for her years, were meter to be his niece
or maid, then wife and mate? And is it also gravity, for one taken to be the
profoundest clearke of their company, who lead his life hethervnto in study,
and (as some do think) in chastity, now having through heresy heaped
together great store of welthe in a Bushopryke, to be as busye in wantonness as
the best, to get him a young dame to stand at his study door, and so in the
myddest of his new godlynes to marye? Is this a sign that they seek for the
Kingdom of God? does this prove that they pray, fast, mourn, and lament for
their offenses? shall we gather by this, that they be devout, holy, chaste,
sighing, and sorowyng for their fynnes? No, no, for if they did perfectlye
either pray or fast, He is counted to be none of their says, which will use
oftentimes to fast.
their minds should not be upon such lasciuous madness, and if they did play
the part of true Apostles, they cold not be lead so soon, by such
pestiferous mocions, from godlynes. For wantonne Venus passes not for the
company of mourners, she flyethe from the headdes which fast and pray, and
she puts no affiaunce in such, who by weeping, sorrow and heauynes of
mind, do make so little of the lusts of the fleashe as the true Catholykes
do. But on the other part, concerning the fathers of this late framed faith,
if you will ask what they do, then believe the words of the Apostle, who of
such, says thus: They count it pleasure to live deliciouselye for a season,
2. Piet. 2.
spots they are and fylthynes living at pleasure, and in disceaueable ways,
feastyng with you, having eyes full of aduoutrie and that can not cease to
sin, beguyling unstable souls. etc. Judge thowe then, whether our Ministers
be not they in deed, who^ S. Pieter in these words does plainelye paynte
out and blame. All their intent is, to wallowe in the filthy lusts of the
fleashe.
mark (as he terms yt) the fylthynes and living at pleasure of our
preachers, understand (as by experience thowe may) whether though he be
never so old, and ready to be received into his grave, that yet he would
greadelye go into the world again, a while to live with his love and mate in
most wantonne way. Such is the perfection, that springs from this
imperfect faith, which their own fancies, and none else, has now made and
devised. I would learn of them, and namely of him, whose last maraige I made
mention of, what should now move him to marye? seeing he draws nere to fyftie
years of age, and has ever until this time without a wife lived (as men do
think) well inoughe: yet his late doings do declare some dowbte in the
matter. I do urge him the more in this, for that his own freindes have found
fault with him for the same. Let him therefore tell, what did rather move him
now, the^ at other times heretofore, to fancy and make suit for a minion and
sweet heart? Is it proper to his protestancie, or belonging to his Bushopryke?
he will say, nay. what then? It was the spirit that moved him. O spightefull
spirit, cursed, detestable, and a most dangerous enemy unto the best part
and portion of man. This spirit is he, which the Poets named Cupido, and you
the English Ministers will neades make it the spirit of God: but tell the
people, of what God? of the God (as the Poets feign) of fylthie lust, love,
and lothesome leacherie. of whom Seneca says thus: Deum esse amorem, turpiter
vitio sauent,
Finxit libido, quoque liberior foret,
Titulum furori numinis falsi addidit.
Which has this sense: A God lewd love to be, men fylthlye favor vice,
Uyle lust did faygne and that, he might me^ more entice
Unto his rage a title her, of false God did devise.


With this spirit an other of their captains was so chased, as no other
remedy remained, but neades he must in the myddest of his new mystery be
married: of whom I had LEVER leave further to speak, then to trouble the reader
with to many of their rash made maraiges. But is yt not more then maruayll
(all their follye considered) with what face these men dare profess any
perfection at all? may not therefore their impude^cie in pulpittes be wondered
at? which promyseth the people health and salvation, if they fly from the
Catholykes, and follow them. Ah las, where shall they follow you but to the
fyerye lake of hell? and where will you bring them but to the bottomeles pytte
of dreadeful darkness? these men would have us to defye our forefathers, not to
lead their lyfes, nor to walk in their virtue and godlynes: not ceasing in
their prating sermones most ungodly and unnaturally to say, our fathers be
in hell, our fathers be in hell. Here I ca^ not suffer, but must neade say, O
you beasts unnatural, Who can write to vehement against such varlates?
why will you to your power deface our holy forefathers, who dyed in the
faith and true religion of Christ his Church? why will you so peruerselye
pronounce this shameless sentence against so many thowsandes of good men, of
Christian vertous and godly Kings? of whom we may surely with the Prophet
say: In te sperauerunt patres nostri: sperauerunt, and liberasti eos. Ad te
clamauerunt, Psalm. 21.
and salui facti sunt: in te sperauerunt, and non sunt confusi. That is, In
thee have our fathers trusted: in thee have they hoped, and thowe have
delivered them. Unto the have they cryede, and they are made safe: in the they
have trusted, and are not confounded. I read, that noble Solon one of the.
vij. wise men of Greece, being on a time demanded: why he had not established
laws, to punish those which had beaten their fathers. Because (says he) I
adjudged not any such to be, You may hereby see, how that Solon thought yt
impossible, that any should be so pastgrace as his father to beat or in any
wise to greve.

But our new noughtie false preachers will not stick so to storm against
their fathers: We are unnatural children, if we forsake not the company of
such enemies to our forefathers.
as from heaven (if they cold) to hale them down, into the dark resteles
doungeon of hell. I trow, if Solon were now lyving, he would surely ordain
laws, to punish such lewd unnatural persons. For is it not more then
unnatural and lewd, to allege that their forefathers and ours, that the
Saints, Martyrs, and all holy men be holden in torments in hell? which
thing they be either dryven to affirm: or else to deface the chiefest poinctes
of their new bastardly painted faith. For it is against their fancied faith
to maintain, that any man dyeng in the belefe of the Catholyke church (as
all our forefathers have done) can obtain heaven, or any salvation of soul.
Wherefore (o Protestante) if any piety be planted in thy breast, thou will
bewail the misery of so many, as these monstrous Ministers be rulers over, if
any grace and mercy may move thee, thowe will all hartelie lament the loasse
and danger, which the people of Christ be in, And also if there be but one
jot of any gentleness or justice in thine heart, thowe will have some
indifferency to deal with and to judge these things. Play therefore now
the worthy part of Pericles the noble and valiaunte Captain of the
Athenienses, use here his justice, and with him say, Oportet me amicis
accommodare, sed vsque ad aras. say thou, I must incline unto my friends, the
Protestants, saving my conscience. Let now thy conscience cause in the some
consideracion of honesty, and then no dowbte the pleasante pestiferous
doctrine of heresye must needs displease thee: which doctrine the elder that
yt is, the more rotten and fylthie fruicte yt bearethe. Yt is a doctrine by the
dyvel devised to snare and delude the corrupt company of youth and others,
who willingelie would walk in the overlarge, wicked, and pleasant way of
their most poisoned appetites. For as Satan sometimes on the high mountain
and hill top, did assaye to tempte our Savior Christ: saing, (after that he
had showed him the whole dominion of the world) Haec omnia tibi dabo, si
cadens adoraueris me, etc. that is, All these things will I give the, if thou
will fall down and worshipp me, etc. So now in this valey or dale of
misery, he mischievouselye with the like intycementes compasses, also to
tempte the Christians, saing: The pomp of the world, the freedom of the
fleashe, riches, power, welthe, wyves, Bushopprykes, deanries, beneficies, and
authority: al these things will I give you, if you embrace and set furthe my
faith, fancy, and commandments: and if you will be my disciples, fall down
and worship me. Well, a great company of good Cathokes have forsaken al
these baytes, Bushop prykes, benefices, welthe and wyves, and they have said
with our Savior Christ, Abi Sathana, avoid Satan. But a few perverse
English preachers, they will pray him to make that offer again, and then more
heed shall they give unto his words and promise. They can say, Mane Sathana,
tarry a while Satan. Let us hear more of thy mind, and what thou would
feign have us to fullfyl: so that at the leangth, with the sweet singing of
Sirenes, they be soon drawn to perform the work and desire of the dyvel. O
wicked man and Minister: see what a foolish marquete thou haste made, thou
have loaste by this bargayne (without great repentance) the best substance that
thou had: And if thou wilt beleve the very words of Christ, so that they
may have the company of their queanes: hell is as fytte for them, as heaven.
then shalt thou sure find yt to be so. he says, Quid enim profuerit, etc.
that is, For what shall yt profit a man, if he should win all the whole
world, and lowse his own soul? Now, what have thowe gained by this giwe
gawe wealth and pleasure of the world, if after a day or twoe, thou must for
ever in hell remain with weeping and gnashing of teathe, where thy worm dies
not, nor the fire at any time goethe out? And therefore, thou which lie in
the horrible lake of heresy, turn unto God, and forsake thine offenses* I
wish unto them, as unto my self.
let us go boldelye unto the seat of grace, that we may receive mercy, and
find grace to help in time of neade. This is the malice now, (Ministers)
that I owe you: that I would wish you, to putt away your iniquities, and crave
pardon at the hands of God, for this your swarving from the true faith, that
your souls may lyve, and that we may then together enjoy the gladsome light,
and eternal reaste in heaven: else, you shall herein earth sustain most
worthy infamye and shame for your offenses, and in hell a just plague and
punishment for the same.

Here have I passed over briefelye some piece of your perverse practice and
behavior, and that the more to make you myndefull of your ungodly estate and
degree, wherein I have yeat used such modesty, as willinglye I named not one of
you. but now this comes last into my mind, that many of you beholding this
book, will bragginglie say: If that he cold name us, he would. hereat I
stay, and do somewhat dowbte, whether it were best to begin of new or not,
and of freashe to set furthe your names, fylthie factes and dwellinges. Well,
you shall see that I can do it, and yeat will not: hoping that when you have
forsaken this your fond faith, you may lead a godly life again. But to
prevent your bragg, you drive me to utter the doings of one or twoe for
example sake: whose proper names notwithstanding I will (according unto my
promysse) omit. There is one now a preacher, who, being married, and his wife
the^ in the town five or six miles westwarde from London, was taken
nevertheless by a gentle man, with an other man's wife, and so brought before the
justice, who bound him to appear before M. Grindall, they leave them
unpunished: least yt should else deface their doctrine.
at whose hands he received none other punishment, the^ to be banished out of
his diocese. This perfect Preacher now dwells four miles from Windsor:
where he has gotten for his excellent virtue a vicarage. There is an other,
who (according unto the saing of Theodorus the Atheman) received divinity in
his right hand: but which delyuereth it unto the people again with the
leafte. I ca^ not well leave out his name, and yet I am loathe to name him. But,
Chrsman is sent to preach this new Gospel into the country / where he is
not known, which is a shifte now commonly used.
inquire for the Archedeaco^ of West mynster, learn the cause of his departure
thence, ask with what favor the laws went forward, when he eskaped the
carte, which he had deserved, for ventring like a Hardye man so far with
Venus. Thus, being loathe further towade with your faults, onles I be by you
pricked and compelled: I wish unto you such heart, as may hate all heinous
pleasau^te heresies, unto the people such perfection and pure judgments, as
may contemn your ungodly shameless sermones: wherein you compass most
craftelie to kill and slay their souls, And I wish finally unto us all,
perfect unity, charity, and true love, that at the leangth we may like
breathren live in the everlasting joy which never shall end. Amen.

fol. 5. pro read, lege, ready. fol. 3. pro you outerage, read, your
outerage.


