VERBA DIERVM. OR, THE DAYS REPORT, OF GODS GLORY.

As it has been delivered some years since, at Four Sermons, or Lectures
upon one Text, in the Famous University of OXFORD; And since that time somewhat
Augmented; And is now commended unto All Times to be Augmented and Amended.

By EDWARD EVANS, Priest and Minister of The Lord Our God.

PSALM 8. ver. 2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, etc.

HAS. 2. 24. The Earth shall be (or, is) filled, with the Knowledge of the
Glory of God, as the Waters cover the Sea.

BERNARD. Siquis torpet de Dei Laud, certissimum vabetin se experimentum, quod
non habeat in se Spiritum Sanctum.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1615.

TO THE HONOR AND GLORY OF THE HOLIEST OF ALL, THE ALMIGHTY AND MOST HIGH
KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS, SVPREAME HEAD OVER ALL, EMPEROVR OF HEAVEN,
LIGHTS FATHER, DAYS PROGENITOR, AND THE INVISIBLE FOVNTAINE OF ALL GLORY:
In Endeavored Return^ of Thankfulness, For All His Glory Conferred, Revealed,
Exhibited, Declared, Proffered, Promised, and Expected by, to, or upon Any of
his (reatures: Particularly, for the Knowledge of Salvation, by and through the
Day-Springs Visitation from on High, The Divine Words Mediation, conveyed
from Divine to Humane Enunciation, and by the Instruments of All kind of
Words, and of any Speech or Language derived unto people of All Tongues and
Languages: Especially, to the Gentiles, and to the Poor People of the Yles and
of the North: and among the rest, to us Britains, English-Saxons, Scots, and
Irish:

HIS MOST UNWORTHY AND UNPROFITABLE SERVANT, POOR WORM OF HIS CREATION, SLAVE
OF HIS REDEMPTION, BABE OF HIS INSTRVCTION, EARTH OF HIS EXALTATION, AND DVST
AND ASHES OF HIS GLORY. FICATION,

BY HIS ASSISTANCE MOST HVMBLY CRAVING MERCIFVLL ACCESS AND ACCEPTANCE,

DOES DEDICATE AND CONSECRATE THIS DAYS REPORT AND DECLARATION.

Faults of Omission and Commission.
Page 31. lin. 1. For, tations which may not, etc: Read: tations, which are
brought upon these few words. Because I see none of them, which may not etc. p.
32. l. vlt. and p. 33. l. 1. blot out these words: Et quod visum est in vna
aestate, principiu^ est ad sciendum in alia. p. 33. l. 25. For, their; read,
the. p. 71. l. 15. 20 for, That which we falsely call, etc: read: That which
foolish Io, in Plato, soon confuted by wise Socrates, would have to be the
Subject of his Rapsodian Art: and that which we falsely call etc. p. 82. l. 9.
for, (...) in some copies: read, (...). p. 84. l, 6. for, Nomanclator: read;
Nomenclator. p. 87. l. 26. for, who as: read; who, as p. 89. l. 1. for, thee:
read; the. p. 92. l. 26. for, persectio^: read, perfection* p. 126. l. 1. for,
And: read, As. p. 129. l. 24. for, Christ Crucified: read, Christ was
Crucified. p. 135. l. 9. blot out, such. ib. l. 10. for, Light-Angels: read,
Light Angels. p. 162. l. 3. for, acquinted: read, acquainted. p. 169. l. 23.
for, then: read, even. p. 30. l. 11. for, Night, Issue: read, Night-Issue.

THE DAYS REPORT OF GODS GLORY.
PSALM. 19. VERSH 2. One Day Tells another, etc.


IT is GOD (says the Prophet David Psalm 94. 10.
) that teaches man knowledge, knowledge of GOD, and of himself.

This lesson of Knowledge did man then first begin to take, when he was first
taken out of the dust of the earth, and began to be a Living Soul. Siquidem a
primordio reram conditor earum cum ipsis pariter compertus est; ipsis ad hoc
prolatis, vt Deus cognosceretur, says Tertullian Advers. Mar. cion. lib. 1.
and Chrysest. (on Rom 1) (...). And Athanasius also (on Rom 1) veri^as ipsa
sieve Dei cognitio ^uere homi^ibus ab initi^ ^indita.
.For that which was forbidden man in the beginning, was not knowledge simply,
but Knowledge of Good and Evil; that which was a privation rather of his
knowledge, in causing a deprivation of his happy estate.

This lesson of Knowledge, begun to be taught man in the beginning, and yet
not as yet ended, when the end of all things is at hand, has been by GOD
diverse and sundry ways delivered unto man; as he that knows all things, and
knows all things best, knew it to be most convenient for that Scholar, whom
he had made by his word and his commandment, and yet has much ado to make
him a Scholar, for all his word, and all his commandments.

First GOD dealt with man, as with a child of small capacity. (...) (as S.
Chrysostom speaks Ad pop Antioch homil. (...)
(...). First GOD spoke unto us by the world, by The Book of the world Which
Chrysostom (...). ad pop. Antioch. 1) calls (...) etc. The Greatest Book or
Bible: of as Great a Volu ne as the whole world Clem Alex. calls the
creation, or creature of the world a kind of GODS Scripture See Gualther in
his preface to this Psalm, there terming it, Libru^ Naturae. Note the second
word in the Psalm. Whence (...) a Book See also Bartas his Elegancy in the
First Day of the First Week, vetse. 151. Tripartit. Hist. lib 8 etc.
,or, The Book of Nature, by all the works which he had made. This manner of
GODS teaching of us, and speaking unto us, the Prophet David here declares in
the six first verses of this Psalm.

So then these words of my Text are some part of The Book of the World, where
Nights are as it were the Black Inkie Lines of learning, Days the White
Lightsome Spaces between the Lines: where GOD has Imprinted a very legible
Delineation of his Glory. And whereby GOD teaches man knowledge: eve^ now too,
after that Knowledge (Cognitio Sancta Iun and Trem. ib.
, the Knowledge, the Holy Knowledge of the Lord) is increased, according to the
prophecy of Daniel (Dan. 12. 4.) and that Act. 2. the seaventeenth and the
eighteenth verses, alleged out of the Prophet Joel. Yea even very now does GOD
teach man knowledge by the Book of the World, when as the Book of his Word
lies before us. This book directing us unto that book, and that book
leading us unto to this: and all to make Good Scholars of us, if such rare and
excellent Books may beget any learning in us. It is written then in the book
of GOD, and wrought by GOD in the book of the world, One Day Tells another.

So that whether we will learn it by A^. rote.
wrote, or else by the Book; the book of GOD, or the book of the world: we
have our choice.

Think not then (my dear Brethren) either this, or the knowledge of GOD to
be any hard lesson for you to learn, and take it not for any Eleophuge So is
the sift proposition of Euclids first Book of Elements called* because of the
hardness thereof to young beginners.
,or Brick wall. For (as ye have heard) it is written not only in the Bible;
but in the book of the world too; where are no Turkish Characters, no Hebrew
points, no Greek manuscript Abbreviations to trouble you: much less any
multitude of Lines, or Angles to disharten you. Only, One Day Tells another.

Of which that we may the better be informed, and our lives thereby (if it
please GOD to dispense unto us so large a measure of his grace) amended and
reformed: May it please you to observe with me, but two or three things.

First, what is The meaning of these words, One Day Tells another. where ye
shall perceive what is meant by The Days, and what by their Telling one
another. Or if ye list to divide this First General Part into two: The First
shall be of the Meaning of the words. The Second, The Manner of the Days
Telling one another, The Manner of their Speech.

The Third, how ever the last General part shall be, The Matter, The Subject,
or, The Substance of their Speech.

The word of Exhortation shall not lie in an heap together: but, like unto
salt, shall here and there be sprinkled, as need shall seem most to require;
that so the whole may the better be seasoned.

The Last General part, because this time will not be sufficient to treat
of, and yet it behooves you to have some precognition thereof: It shall suffice
(besides that which has been said of The Knowledge of GOD) to tell you that
it is, The Glory of GOD; That which The Heavens are said to declare in the
first verse of this Psalm: And The Handy work of GOD; That which The
Firmament is there said to Show. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handy work.

And so much the less need shall there be of saying any more unto you hereof
at this time, because we shall often make mention of it, by occasion of that,
which (if GOD will) now, and hereafter ere long be; shall be said of the other
two parts. Such being The Glory of GOD, as that it cannot but show it self in
all things, and is indeed the maine intendment of this whole design.

Part. 1.
Now then first, as concerning the first General part, The Meaning of these
words, One Day Tells another.

Where first, I think it convenient to deliver unto you three or four
Literal Expositions of these words.

The first whereof (unless you think it to appertain to an Allegorical, or
else a Mixed Sense) is collected out of the 9, 10, and 11. Chapters of the
Epistle to the Romans, conferred especially with the four first verses of
this Psalm. The last whereof is expreslie cited in the 18. verse of the tenth
Chapter: the second (where the words of my Text) is (according to this
Exposition) employed in the 21. verse, in those words (...), etc: according to
Isaiah, (...) All Day long, or, Every Day, From Day to Day, During a long Day,
or Time, or, a Day of Many Days and Nights: Lyra, ibid.
Ab Antiquo vsque ad praesens, From a Long Time ago unto This present. And so,
in especial Application thereof unto The Jews, The Meaning of my Text may be:
One Day] of GODS calling the Israelites, of Stretching out his hands unto them,
of Sending Prophets Early and Late without ceasing unto them, of working
wonders among them, of preserving them, of heaping his Benefits upon them, and
the like, Telleth] The Glory of GOD, unto Another Day] of like sort: and that
Continually, until the coming of the Messiah, the End of the Law, the End of
their Desires, the Consolation, the Hope, and Hoped for Redeemer of Israel, and
their Chief Felicity.

But in a more universal sitting of it both to Jews and Gentiles (whose happy
union in the Divine Election and vocation, and in the Riches of GODS Glory the
Apostle there diverse times very Notably urges.) The Meaning may receive this
Augmentation: Namely, One Day] of Salvation, whether of Jews or Gentiles,
jointly or severally: One Accepted Time, One Day] of Hearing GODS voice: One
Day] whether of the wild, or Natural Branches: One Day] of their partaking of
the Root, and Fatness of the Olive tree: One Day] of their Election,
Vocation, Engraffing, Admittance into the number of GODS people, His Beloved,
Children of the Living GOD, vessels of Honor and of Glory. Again, One Day] of
Casting away the one or the other, through their Unbelief and Disobedience:
One Day] of their Reiection, their being Blinded and Enslumbered, that they
should not See nor Hear unto This Day (Romans 11. 8.) One Day] of Bowing down
their Backs Always, of their Fall, and of their Loss. Yet again: One Day] of
their Recovery, if they abide not still in unbelief. One Day] of their
Reelection, or Recollection, Recalling, Reconciling, Reengraffing, Readmitting,
Reuniting, and Replenishing: until in process Ioh. 10. 16.
of many Days, there come to be One Sheepfold^, and one Shepherd. Finally:
One Day] of any of GODS Mercies, or Judgments, toward Jews or Gentiles,
toward Jews and Gentiles, toward All people of the world: One Day] of The
Goodness and Severity of GOD (Romans 11. 22.) Whether jointly or severally,
toward this or that people, in all and every respect, considered: until we
come to, O the Depth of the Riches of the wisdom and Knowledge of God, etc:
Telleth] to make That Depth the Greater, Psalm. 42. 9.
and as it were One Deep calling another; unto Another Day] of like condition,
The Glory of GOD: concluding as S. Paul does the 11. Chapter to the Romans,
and as we do this Exposition, To whom be Glory for Ever. Amen.

Exposition is gathered out of the Title, Inscription of this Psalm. The Third
out of the first and second Chapters of Genesis compared with Austins.

For the Second; I am not ignorant, that (what with prefixes in Hebrew, (...)
and (...), and of the Hebrew word (...), and what with something in this Psalm
contained seeming to sound to the advancement of each Sense) this Psalm has
his Title much like unto the Text that I have read unto you; that is, much
diversified with variety of Senses, and of Interpretations. But the best of all
(for the Title) I take to be that of Iunius and Tremellius; (which they have
from Abraham Ezra, and David Kimbi, the two See Bucers Preface upon the Psalms
best of all the Rabbis) and it is, Magistro Symphoniae Psalmus Davidis, The
Psalm of David to the master of the singing, or, the master of the quire. That
which Avenarius In Lexic. in verbo, (...)
also, but with more explication, has delivered: Continuanti in Canticis
Psalmus Davidis, the Psalm of David to him that continues on the singing in
the church, that is, Hic Psalmus (says he) exhibitus est praefecto cantorum,
qui continuabat and vrgebat, vt is assidue suo tempore and ordine decantaretur,
This Psalm was exhibited, or, tendered to the master of the singers, who did
urge the continual singing of it from day to day in his due time and order.
And this too is most agreeable to the Greek, (...), if it be rightly understood.

This I needed not perchance to have spoken unto you; but that, as our Savior
by the image and superscription of the money showed to whom the tribute
belonged, and as the Rubricke does something avail to the better understanding
of the Black (as they call it:) so the Title and Inscription of this Psalm
may some thing help us to a good sense and meaning of these words, which out
of the Psalm I have read unto you. For according to the Title in that best
interpretation, one meaning of these words may be. That One Day in the Church,
One Day of singing in the Church, One Day of reading in the Church, yea and of
reading too these Psalms of David in the Church, according as they are divided
by some Itain Psalter. Arabic.
into 20. by others Ita Ecclesia nostra instituit legendos, iuxta numerum dierum
mensis.
into 30. Days of reading them. One Day of praying in the Church, One Day of
Gods service in the Church, recounteth unto another day of like sort, or
otherwise, the Glory of GOD. The service and worship of GOD being by this
means continued still in the Church, his name continually magnified, and the
glory of his name spread far and near, by the report of what is done every
day in the Church.

So (not to speak of Hiram king of Tyrus 1 King. 57.
, and others) so came unto the Queen of Sheba the fame of Solomon, concerning
the name of the Lord, as it is expressed 1. King. 10. 1. And hereupon she came,
and blessed the Lord GOD of Solomon, as it is said in the ninth verse. So, I
pray GOD, may the fame of King JAMES concerning the name of the Lord, be
conveyed to the Turks and Infidels, and to the utmost parts of the world, that
so (if GOD will) they may be won to bless the Lord God of our godly King and
Sovereign. So King David made such great and royal provision for the service
of GOD, 1. Chr. 25. And in the two and fortieth Psalm, and else where so
often, he expresses his fervent desire to have the worship and service of GOD
daily observed in the Church. Nay, so king Solomon built a house for the Name
of the Lord GOD of Israel, 1. King. 8. 20. Which too to build (as it is in the
18. ver.) was in the heart of king David, And he did dwell, that he was so
minded. So minded: That so from day to day, as it were by One Days Report unto
anrther, the worship and Glory of GOD might be as far, as far may be,
dilated and extended, even unto the ends of the world.

This, (what say I this?) the daily service of GOD in Churches, the rites and
ceremonies, the riches and solemnities, the royalty and magnificence therein
used, to have been always very singular means of the advancement of the Glory
of the most glorious, and the holy worship of the holiest? Yea truly, Beloved;
and that in Christianity, and when it fared but hard with Christians, nor had
they such peace and plenty, so many well munited kingdoms of their own, as
now they have. I report me but to the smallest insight in history. Let Titus be
excepted, for being so much moved, as Josephus De bello Iudaico lib. 7. c 4. 9.
10.
reports, with the Temple at Jerusalem. And let be vnreckoned in like case
Cosroe, Vide Gulielmum Tyrium, Bell. Sacrili. 1.
Aar, and Daber, kings of Persia. And let those who therewithal least of all
were moved, move forward this cause most of all. For Vide Gulielmum Tyrium,
Bell. Sacrili. 1.
Hequin of the Persians and the like, when they saw that Christianity
increased, as they thought, too fast; then began they to look more narrowly to
the Temples of the Christians, then to inhibite Vide Gulielmum Tyrium, Bell.
Sacrili. 1.
them the use of their accustomed solemnities, yea and to constrain them upon
those days, in which the worship and service of GOD should have been
celebrated with most magnisicence, to keep them within Vide Gulielmum Tyrium,
Belli Sacri li 1.
the doors of their houses, upon pain and peril of their lives. Lastly, when
all this would not serve then down tumbled they the Temples the^. selves, the
Temple of the Resurrection Vide Gulielmum Tyrium, Belli Sacri li 1.
, and the like; According to the old policy of Nabuchodonosor; Antiochus
Epiphanes Mac^abeor. lib. 1. and 2.
, and others. So labored they as mnch as in them lay, to bar the Days
telling one another, by this means, the Glory of GOD. So endeavored they to
make the Day more silent then the Night; the night, because they loved
darkness more then light.

Oh then, Beloved, if not the desire of the hallowing of GODS name (which ought
to be the first in our desires) may move you to provide diligently, yea and (as
much as in you lies) magnificently too, for the daily service of GOD, and your
every days freque^ting of it: yet let the Day your daily Orator, and (if you
will) your Orator too, either persuade you thereunto, or else beg so much at
your hands: that you would be so good as to countenance his Report with your
presence, enrich it with your presents unto GOD, beautify Phys. lib. 2. c. 6
context. 59.
it with your holiness, and make it happy by your serving of GOD. For if
Protarchus (as Aristotle relates) said that the Altar-stones were happy; may
I not much more account that Day happy, wherein GOD himself is honored? And
if the fervent desire of the creature waits, when the sons of GOD shall be
revealed (Romans 8. 19.) has it not a fervent desire also of his own felicity?
And when is the Days best happiness, but when the true Diespiter (the true
GOD, whose is the Day and the Night) shall be most highly honored? Let then
your zeal and assiduitie in the worship and service of GOD, make that One Day
may make unto another the more ample and honorable Report of GODS glory. For
which purpose I exhort every one of you, as S. Paul does the Ephesians, and
the Colossians, that you Ephesians. 5. Col 3.
would speak unto one another, that you would teach one another, that you would
exhort and admonish one another, that you would stir up, put one another in
mind, ((...)) by Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, (...) (singing with,
and without Instruments) And (...), (singing with a comely and graceful kind of
thanksgiving) (...) (in your hearts, in your strongest affections) unto the
Lord. And let me say unto every soul, as Prudentius prudently says to his
own soul in the Preface of his book (...):

Saltem Voce Deum concelebret, si meritis nequit.
Hymnis continuet dies;
Nec nox vlla vacet, quin Dominum canat. At least wise let us bestow our
voices, sounds and voices, upon the Lord, and upon the celebration of his
praises, if we will afford him nothing else. Let us like Rectors of the quire
of the Days, continue on their Telling one another, their chaunting, and
recounting the Glory of GOD, by our Psalms, our Hymns, and spiritual songs.
And that so much the rather, because (as Theodoret notes on the words of my
Text, according as he is translated) we men are here taught, illi (Deo)
hymnorum catilenam afferre, to bring and offer unto God songs and hymns of
praises, and thankfulness; We, I say, are here taught it, even by this one
Days Telling another. One Day tells another.

The Third Meaning is such, as that (according to the Infinite variety of GODS
works, and of the Glory which he conferreth on them) it makes The Days so to
Multiply their words, That thereby The Report of Gods Glory Infinitely passes
through the Treasures of the Deep, does Infinitely Grow, and Spring, and
Creep, and Go, and Swim, and Fly: and Fly Under, and Above the Heavens: does
Infinitely Move, and Live, and Live for Ever. And this Meaning is, that every of
the Six days wherein GOD made the world, The Seventh day also wherein he
rested, do One declare unto another the Glory of GOD. Those, by all the Works
which in any of them were created; This, by GODS Resting in it and Sanctifying
of it. So have S. Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Basil, (in their (...).) And so
has that divine Poet, Seigneur du Bartas, with a gift of excellency, handled
each one of those Days; that well they have made it to appear that each of
them may lend to other, each and all of them may lend to us (though they lend
us too) infinite and unspeakable, though ever spoken, matter of GODS Glory. And
in this respect Bodin speaks very well* (toward the end of the first Chapter
of his first book De Republica) Deus Opt. Max. cum omnia sapienter, tum illud
potissimum, quod rebus agendis ac negotijs contrahe^dis sex omnino dies
definiit; diem vero septimu^ See the Lord de la Now, Discourse. 25
contemplationi and quieti sanctissimae consecra^it, quem vnu^ Genesis ^^p. 2 Deuteronomy
Exodus cap* 20.
ex omnibus beauit, and cuisoli benedixit; vt diem huncfestu^ hilariter ac
iucunde transigamus, and in pulcherrima Dei praepotentis opera, iudicia, iussa
intuentes, in eius laudibus acquiescamus. Where, besides the blessedness by GOD
himself bestowed on that Day, which is bestowed on his service, (that which
before we spoke of, and is expressly proved out of the beginning of the second
of Genesis) This is also a thing of very singular note, That not only the six
days of Gods working (I say not The Works only that GOD made in the six
days, but the six days of GODS Working*) have taught man (...) and (...) too;
(as Aristotle has distinguished them in his sixth book of Ethics, and the
fourth Chapter.) But the Seventh Day has learned him Vid. de la Now vb, suprd
Contemplation also; And this to be the Endc of all trades and occupations, of
all arts and sciences, of all affairs and negotiations, both civil and
domestical; Even upon the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy, to enjoy our rest
with rejoicing in the Lord, and in pulcherrima Dei praepotentis opera, iudicia,
iussa intuentes, in eius laudibus acquiescere: and by contemplating the
beautiful Works of GOD; his judgments, and his commandments, to rest and
reappose our selves wholly on the magnifying of GODS name; casting away from us
every thing that presses down (as the Apostle Heb. 12. 1.
speaks) and the sin that hangs so fast on us. That so at the least once in
the week, we may be found resting and residing in our proper Element without
any worldly gravitation.

This the Heathen men had some glimmering of: And therefore, how ever they
derided

Iuv. Sattyr. 14.
-- metuentem Sabbata patrem: yet they themselves, though all in darkness (as
they were busied themselves about such things as the Sabbath Day had taught
the^. Hence were they so prolixe in their Contemplation, and Contemplative
felicity. Hence had they their Days of vacation from civil affairs, even the
administration Ovid. de Fastis lib 1.
of justice it self.

Ille nefastus erit, per quem tria verba silentur:
Fastus erit per quem lege licebit agi. And all this learned they by the sound
of the Sabbath Day. The sound of the Sabbath Day, which had gone out into all
lands, according to that which is in the next verse save one unto my Text.

S. Chrysostom in the tenth Homily of his (...), speaking of GODS Resting the
Sabbath Day, and Hallowing it, (...), says he, (...).

If then, Beloved, it were one of the first Items that ever GOD gave us, if the
law of Nature has taught it us, if the Day it self, even this Day, so long
ago, and now so long time together, has told it us, if it be the Expetible
End of all our actions, the sovereign Felicity of this life, To dedicate some
Whole Day in the week to the worship and service of GOD, and to the works that
are spiritual; Ought we not, ought we not so to do? Though it had never been
expressly written in the ten commandments. For, One Day tells another.

The Fourth Exposition is S. Austins, in his eighteenth Sermon De Natali
Domini; That the Days which we in Christianity keep holy and festival; or
otherwise duly and reverently observe, in memory of any especial thing
concerning Christ, do one certify another. So the Day of Christ's Birth, the
Day of the Purification, the Day of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, the
Day of Christ's Resurrection, the Day of his Ascension, the Day of his Sending
the Holy Ghost; the Days which now we observe in toke^ that Christ fasted so
many Days and Nights for us, Et Christi merito quaeque notata Dies, do one
relate and recount unto Ovid. de. Fast.
another, the Glory of GOD and his unspeakable goodness toward us; in
calling to our memories, and witnessing to the world the gladsome tidings of
the Gospel. Dies Nativitatis diei passionis, and dies Passionis diei
Resurrectionis, etc: annunciat Verbum. Illic natum, hic passum: In illa
Angelorum gaudium, in ista totius mundi luctum; sed tamen omnium in
Resurrectione triumphu^, etc: as S. Austen vbi supra.
speaks. One Day tells, etc.

In the next place, it shall not be amiss, if we first of all examine the very
words themselves, what they may signify in the Original, conferred too with
other languages.

They are in the Hebrew, (...). Where all the difference is about the
signification of the prefixe (...), and of the word (...). for (...) being a
note either of the Genitive or Dative case, and sometimes too by the
preposition De, or, Ad to be expounded: Hence some have understood (...) in
this place, as if it were to be interpreted by the preposition De. So Kimhi
has taken it: as if we should read it thus, One Day tells of another. And
then the meaning is, That One Day shows another day in like sort to follow
after him, and that there shall be the same reason of the subsequent, as was of
the precedent day; The Sun still continuing on his goodly order and vicissitude
of rising and setting.

So has One Day told another the Glory of GOD, and has made him known, not
in Israel only, but unto all people. Hence Cicero De Not. Deorum lib. 2.
could say: Diet noctisque vicissitudo conservat animantes, tribuens aliud
agendi tempus, aliud quiescendi. Sic vndique omni ratione concluditur, mente
consilioque divino omnia in hoc mundo ad salute^ omnium conservationemque
admirabiliter administrari. See how the heathen man here speaks; Sic vndique
omni ratione concluditur: It is concluded every way, by every reason, The Glory
of God in his providence: every thing is a means, a Medius Terminus, to prove
and to Demonstrate it withal. Whether it be the vicissitude of the Day and of
the Night, or, the continual Suitte continuelle. French Annot. here.
suite, and following of one Day upon another; One Day Tells another.

So also, of the orderly succession of the Day and of the night, have S.
Chrysostom, and Theodoret, expounded the words of my Text, as in the second
General part shall farther be declared.

Others take (...) in the genitive case, as if we sound it thus: One Day
tells, or utters the word, or, the speech of another Day, ((...)) with like
meaning unto that of Kimhies; and, that One Day deriueth his knowledge unto
another Day, one Day makes report of another Days adventures, and look what
is done to day we shall hear of it another Day.

A third sort (and they the most, and the most approved) understand here the
Dative Case, or (which is all one in meaning) the Accusative with the
Preposition Ad. Dies die^, or, Dies ad Diem. One Day tells another, or,
tells to, or unto another.

Of this last sort, some are of opinion, that some thing ought here to be
supplied; as if by the Day telling another were strictly to be understood, The
Day succeeding the other Verum rectius sine subintellectione hic versus
accipitur, says Iansenius in his Annotations. And indeed, there is so much the
less need of subaudition; because there is a word here (...) (signifying a
word) expressed. And however This Day, declaring the Glory of his Maker, shall
so soon, as soon at night, leave of any more to be: yet shall not GODS Glory
therewith all leave off any more to be declared by it. For this day speaks a
Word to the succeeding day, (The Day tells Like to Page* nines Eloquitur,
hereafter ensuing, and Mollers Eloquitur and Testatur.
out to the Day a Word, as one English manuscript Translation In New College
Library.
very well has) and in a sort deriveth, transfuseth, transmiseth, yea dying
bequeatheth as a legacy to his successor, the ever succeeding predication of
GODS praises. No otherwise, then as by our late Queen of famous memory, though
she be dead, yet GOD is ever magnified, because of her Successor having as
great a care of the setting forth of GODS Glory as ever she had. One Day
Tells another.

And were it not more out of order, then it is out of due time; I would here
take occasion to exhort every one of you by the Days, even This Days,
example; to endeavor to leave behind you, when you be dead and gone, some
monument of your own, though it be but a good name; (and that is better then a
good ointment, Ecclesiastes, 7. 3. and to be chosen above great riches,, Prove.
22. 1.) I say, some monument or other, of GODS Glory. Even as yon see this Day
our late Sovereign, though she have left no monument behind her, as some
suppose: yet has she left a name and a famous memorial behind her, so that
her praise shall be spoken of, by One Days telling another. Yea and, for a
monument, she has left us a great emolument: I mention not the Statute of
Provision, but the free and golden current of the Gospel, and that great
monument of GODS Glory, her most honorable successor.

This might teach us to provide, at least in our last wills, for that which our
former wills so much neglect, and for which it was that GOD gave us any will at
all; even the setting forth of the honor, and Glory of his heavenly Majesty.
Considering that (besides the godly examples of holy men of old) the Day also,
as young as it is, takes all his care for bequeathing of this one and only
thing to his successor, and for admonishing his heir apparent of this thing,
even when he is nearest to the Night of his death. For Dies moritur in noctem,
and tenebris vsquequaque sepelitur, as Tertullia^ Lib. de Resurrectione carnis
speaks, The night is the days death, and darkness is the grave to bury him
in. Yet so, for all that, One Day Tells another.

One Day] The word in the Original is (...). Whence or else from the Chalde
(...), or the Arabian, Iaumi (which ye will) is, in all likelihood, made the
Latin word Iam, quafi (...), This Time, This Day, etc. Fr. Holyoke, annexed to
Riders Dictionary, in the third Edition.
Iam, now Ita etiam Italice, Hor significat and horam and Iam.
. (...), says Aristotle in his fourth Book of Physics, context 122, That
shall come now, which shall come to Day, And that is said to have come now,
which is said to have come to day. As if by One Days telling another, were
meant too, that Now tells Now; that is, One While tells another, one time
certifieth another: yea, not so much as the least Moment of time, but it
yields for the glory of GOD some matter of great moment. And if Aristotle
thought (...), and (...), worthy his ha^dling in his natural (...) Arist.
Phys. lib. 4. c. 13.
:ought all these to be overpassed by us in a Christian audience? when as not
one of them but is contained within the Days Report; not one of them but
shows the Glory of GOD, either Now, or else But Now, or else But lately; or
else Suddenly, by things Arist. vbi supra in (...). suddenly Ita (...)
Extant; or else a great while since; or else a great while hence; or else some
time or other. And all this by the wonderful works of the Almighty, which he
works in all the differences of Time. One Day tells another.

For our English Tells; the original has (...).

The word (...), The Chalde Paraphrase expounds by a word of theirs (...)
, signifying to show, or, to declare. One Day shows, or, declares unto
another. Agreeably to that in the first verse of this Psalm; The heavens
Declare the glory of GOD, and the Firmament Shows his handy work. And to the
Greek (...), in the sou^th verse of this Psalm. Like also unto that which
before you heard out of S. Austin, Dies diei Annunciat verbum. The Chalde
Translation (besides that which thereof afterward shall be said) expounds
it by the word (...). One Day Apponeth, or, Adds unto another. Of which: Non
video, says Bucer, quid sibi voluerit, quod Diei Appositionem tribuit, nisi
forsan intellexerit, Die^ nova Dei semper opera exh^bendo, animis nostris
materiam offerre de Deo, and tam magnifieis eius operibus diligentius
cogitandi. I see not, says he, what he means by one days Apponing, or,
Adding unto another; unless happily, that every day brings forth some new
work or other of the Almighties; gives us still farther matter and occasion
of more diligently perpending and considering the power, wisdom, and goodness
of GOD, in all his works.

But for the Hebrew and Arabian words: It is first to be noted, that according
to them both we may here read, One Day shall tell another. For (...) is here
the Future Tense of the third Conjugation. Which Conjugation Augmenteth, or
Increases the words Signification: by importing a Double Where the former of
that Double Action passes upon him that Tells, and the Later upon the thing
Told, as Cevallerius observes.
Action; by Adding, or Apponing to the verbs Former Action (which it had in the
first Where the former of that Double Action passes upon him that Tells, and
the Later upon the thing Told, as Cevallerius observes.
Conjugation) the Impost of the Efficient, or Impulsive cause Or, Designa^,
aliquem quidem agere, s^d aliero Sa^sore and Autore: as Calignius speaks.
. According to which; The Meaning of these words of my Text shall be, as
though we did read them, One Day shall Let, or Suffer to tell another] One Day
shall Bid, or Command to tell another] One Day shall Make, or, Cause to tell
another] One Day shall Urge, Persuade, Provoke, or Drive on to tell another:]
or, Shall Drive on another to tell, Shall put him to it, or push him on, -- velut
vnda impellitur vnda; as one wave is driven forward with another.] In a word:
One Day, besides his own Telling, shall Add, or Appone the Telling, or
Impulsive Cause of Telling of Another, or, unto Another. Which Adding, or
Apponing of the Impulsive Cause here employed, I take (to appone my conjecture
in a case so doubtful) to be the Cause of the word of Adding, or, Apponing
used in the Chalde Translation, as even now ye heard; Bucers Conjecture for the
Meaning being hereunto also consonant and agreeing.

(...)
The Arabian word, Twice In the Imprinted copy of Nebiensis.
Read in this verse, is likewise in the Future Tense; Although with the Arabians
the Future and the Present Tense be contained both in one (being otherwise
distinguished.) As also the Hebrew Future Tense is sometimes taken for, or, to
comprehend in it the Present Tense, or, Time: when as there is signified a
Continual Act. It is also put for the Preter perfect Tense, and somewhiles too
for the Optatiue, or Potentiall Mood. Yea the Hebrew Future Tense (as one
Bertram*
says) puts on the significations of All other Tenses, of what Mood and
Language soever they be: Showing it self herein a right Proteus, that is,
Heavenly Descended, and no Changling for his Cha^geablenes: as though it had
this Motto; Tempora muta^tur, and nos mutamur in Illa. Tenses, or Times are
Changed, and I the Future am changed into the habit of the Rest.

So that it, being Formed too from the Imperative As is also the Aramick.
Mood, is as it were a rich Paludame^t, or Coat Armor; in which The Days are
clad, and invested the Ambassadors, or Heraults at Arms, to Proclaim through
out Al Times The Report of the Glory of that great Commanding Lord and
Emperor of the Heavens; out of whose Imperative, All Times, together with All
their Manners and Differences are Formed and Created. For so, agreeably
hereunto, One Day] out of, upon, or, according unto Gods Commandment, Tells
another. One Day] May, and, God Grant that it may Tell another; yea, One Day]
Does Which I take to be the cause, why diverse here, in their Translating, do
as yet retain, with us, the present Tense. See hereafter the observation of
Iunius and Trem. and Moller, etc.
and that Which I take to be the cause, why diverse here, in their Translating,
do as yet retain, with us, the present Tense. See hereafter the observation of
Iunius and Trem. and Moller, etc.
Continually, Tell another.

Again: One Day not only Does, but Shall Tell another of GODS Glory; Shall,
and Does. Does, in that it Shall: and Shall, in that it Does: Does, and Shall:
and therefore Has told too. For, what is it that Has been? That that Shall
be; and what is it that has been done? That which Shall be done: and there is
no New thing under the Sun. Is there any thing whereof one may say, Behold
this, it is New? It Has been already in the old time before us. Eccles. 1.
ver. 9. 10. And ask we but of the Heathen men, concerning what One Day tells
another, (...) Iom le Iom, Arab. and vide Called. supra.
Iaumi Or, Li.
le laumin. They will say, Nullum est Iam dictum, quod non fit dictum Terent. in
Prolog. Eunuc.
prius. Seneca in his twelfth Epistle, expounding that same Of Heracletus.
, Vnus Dies par omni est, One Day is as good as every Day, or, One Day is
equal unto every Day; makes one meaning of it to be, Parem esse vnum diem
omnibus similitudine. Nihil enim habet longissimi temperis spatium, quod no^ in
vno die invenias, lucem and noctem, and alternas mundi vices. There is nothing
(says he) in the longest space of time, which you may not find couched within
the compass of one Day (he understands the Day Natural) light and night, and
the enterchangeable courses and alternities of worldly things. As if the
present Day, the present Time, did serve for nothing else, but to combine the
former. Glory of his Maker, with that that is to come, and so to make his
praise to be continual.

Hebrew, and Arabic, by their Roots.

The Root of the Hebrew is, (...), scaturivit, exvndavit, to issue or flow
forth. Whence is made the word here used, signifying, to speak fluently, or
currently. An ordinary Metaphore (as ye know) with Cicero, Quintilian, and
others the best for Elocution. One Day speaks Fluently unto another. Sine
haesitatione, (as Moller here speaks) without any stop or stay, without any
stuttering or stammering, with great celerity and volubility of speech. Even
like unto the Sun in the 5. and 6. verses of this Psalm, which comes forth
as a bridegroom out of his chamber, and Rejoices, as a Giant, to Run his
course.

Ier. 48. 10.
Here they that do the work of the Lord negligently, they that do it at
halues, may learn to do it more thoroughly, more readily, with greater
alacrity, and with greater industry. For (alas) may it not be applied even to
many a ones Preaching now a days, which the heathen Cic. de Orat. lib. 1.
Orator has of his own profession? Atqui vide in artificio per quam tenui; and
levi, quanto plus adhibeatur diligentiae, quam in ha^re, quam consta^esse
maximam. See how many times there is much more diligence used in some young
scholars declamation, then is in a whole and entire Sermon; so graund a
proclamation as it should be, of GODS praises. Yea many times there is much
more exactness and curiosity used in some vile and base artifice, then is in
this; which yet for sooth we hold to be the greatest exercise of all. One Day
tells another. And this Telling is a Preaching; (as directly out of the Rom 10
Apostle I could prove unto Et vide in se quentibus multa huc spectantia.
you.) And this Preaching is according to the laws of perfect Oratory. O how,
my thinks, the very law of nature, or rather the GOD of nature has instructed
the Days both natural and Artificial, to Preach the Glory of GOD; according
to the laws, natural shall I say or artificial, of perfect Oratory. For, as
if they were, ita ornati, vt non nati, sed a Deo ipso fictifactique esse
videantur; Ita fere Cic de Orat. lib. 1.
So, so, One Day tells another.

Many in this place have much affected to render the word (...) by some word
signifying Eructation, or Belching, or that which is more homely. Hence the
vulgar Latin has, Eructat verbum; the newer Spanish Translation, Reguelda
palabra; the French also, Desgorge propos. All these thinking that the
metaphore had bin here taken from a full stomach; (ex plenitudine ventris, as
Caietane here speaks) which indeed is taken from the gushing or flowing out
of water out of his source or fountain. And therefore it is but needful, which
to this effect the French Annotation here has upon the word, desgorge. So has
the prophet David elsewhere used the word (...): as Psalm. 119. the third verse
of the last letter, My lips shall speak of thy praise, or (according to the
Original) shall power forth plentifully thy praise. So here also, by One Days
telling another, is meant, That One Day powers forth Abundantly unto another.
Their Good meaning, who Translate by Eructation, being here also to be found:
namely, That Every Day is Superabundantly Full of GODS praise, a Full of words,
or Matter Job. 32. 18.
, and according to that Fullness, does plentifully utter and vent out his
Laudatorie Speech; And their Translating being so much the more laudable, and
concording with this other, if by Eructation there be understood, Fountain,
or, River-Eructation.

This is very well observed here by Bucer upon the word (...). Eructare vertere
solent (says he) and id nonnunquam significat: sed ad Sermonem significandum
inde Translatum est, quod proprie Scaturire significat, Sermo enim ex ore, vt
Rivus e Font ebullit.

Hence Munster comes near unto the Original, when he Translateth here
Influit. And so does Pagnine putting here, Eloquitur, instead of Eructat. Like
unto our English and Scottish, One Day Tells another: or, (as others
Translate) One Day Utters etc. Which conspiteth also with the Italian,
Raconta la parola, and with the Spanish, In the signification of Speaking: as
our English word (Tale) signifies with those of Saxony and Belgica: yea and
with us too, when, interrupting one in his Speech, we say: Saving your Tale,
Fabla dicho, in the Ferrariam Editio^; yea and with the Greek too. For so
also (...) sometimes signifies, especially if it have such a word as (...),
or (...), joined with it: as here, (...). Iunius and Tremellius observe here a
farther note (though not farther then before Where, among other things, of
Co^tinuation of Doing, gathered out of the Future tense, in which the Present
Tense is Involved.
has been intimated:) that which the French Annotations also have, and is
agreeable to that which is in the 5th and 6th verses of this Psalm. Eructat
(say they). i. indesinenter profundit, vt Fons perennis aquas profundit
largiter. Largiter, and Indesinenter. Both these are here also observed by
Moller. Eructat (says he) id est, Copiose and Assidue Eloquitur and Testatur,
etc. Where by the way we may lay hold on the word Testatur, to enrich and
countenance the Days Telling, with his Testifying, like unto the Nights
Certifying. One Day Tells, Certifieth, and Testifies unto another]
Abundantly and Indesinently.

To these two may be added a Third Observation. For Water does also Bubble, or
make some purling Noise even at the spring head. And so do the Days in their
parling one with another: as hereafter (GOD willing) shall more at large be
declared, when we shall come to speak of The Manner of their Speech. This is
that which the Greek too, (...), leads us unto, rather then to Translate it
by Eructuatio^. For (...) (as has been said) does not always signify
Eructuare, or, Eructare; but sometimes too, Fremere, Strepere, to keep a
Noise, or a Rustling. So that of Homer, (...), is interpreted by, (...). And
this signification is very agreeable to that which follows in the two next
verses unto my Text: There is neither Speech nor Language, but their voices are
Heard among them. Their sound is gone out into all Lands etc. Their Sound,
their Voices* or, the sound of Gods voices speaking by them. According to that
of Leo: Leo Sermon. 8. de Ieiun. X. mensis. cap 2.
Ipsius voces in Die, ipsius audiuntur in Nocte, etc: Gods voices are heard
speaking unto us by the Day, and by the Night.

So then, One Day Noyseth, and Sounds unto another, and that Indesinently,
and that too Plentifully, His Glory, who is plentiful in his Goodness
toward all his creatures.

Ought then our mouth either to be Silent in Gods praises, or else Sparefull,
or else ever weary of so well doing? for, One Day Tells another.

The Root of the Hebrew has also certain Cosens, or Allies, which will help
us to some Intelligence, touching the Ample Meaning of The Report, that by The
Days is made in this place. Two of them, and they the Nearest (for I will not
trouble you with any more of the Kindred) are (...) (To Draw, or cause to come
out, to get and come to the knowledge of a thing by some other:) and (...) (to
Foretell, to Prophecy, or Preach.) According to the first, The Meaning may be
also: One Day shall provoke, (as before you heard) One Day shall Draw, or get
Knowledge out of another: One Day shall pike, search, Sift, or fish out
something, out of another, or, more then another: One still to and of another
enterchangeably Giving and Taking, Adding and Receiving more and more Revealed
Knowledge and Information. According to the later, This also may be Meant: One
Day will Foretell, Preach, or Prophecy unto another; One Day will Evangelize,
will utter the Gospel, or Parables of God, unto another: According unto that,
Mat. 13 35 Psalm. 78. 2. and 49. 5.
I will open my Mouth, in Parables, I will utter the things which have been
kept secret, etc. Agreeably also to that preaching of the Gospel, mentioned,
Romans 10. v. 14, 15.

(...)
The Root, or Theme, of the Arabian, is parted into two Boughs, or Branches
of Signification. Which (for Upon the pointing or vowclling whereof, I dare not
as yet adventure, unless I should do it upon conjecture: as much else is in
the Arabian; The rather, because of the paucitie of pointed or vowelled Books:
and for want of a co^pleat punctuated Arabian Dictionary: with which that
Divine-Linguist, and most skillful in the Arabicke, M William Bedwell, is
richly furnished. It is to be wished, that the charges of the Imprinting of
that, or the like, and other good Arabian Books, and of forming Types and
Characters for that purpose, might by some Heroically minded be supported. It
would be an excellent means of the Advancement of the Common weal of Learning
and Christianity It would the rather cause the Kings of Arabia to bring Gifts
(Psalm. 72. 10.) not only Philosophical, Physical, and Rhetorical (with which
among others, E. vax, that learned King of Arabia was enriched) but of
Divinity and Christianity too, and of the Gold of Arabia, to wit, continual)
praying unto Christ, and daily praising of him (Psalm, 72. 15) In a word, It
would be a Mite, well befitting the Might of a King, to cast into the Earthly
Treasury of The Days Report of the Glory of The Almighty.
want of Garments, The Gold of Arabia, or Richer Matter, to spread in the way,)
we of the poorer sort of Christ's servants will use as the people did the
Branches, (Mat. 21. 8.) which they cut down from the trees, and strawed in the
way of our Savior. Thereby the better to deck and adorn, though with such
slight stuff, The Days Report of Gods Glory, and to Cry out to Him in the
End, Hosanna in the Highest.

One of those Branches of Signification, is like unto that of the Hebrew Root
it self before spoken of; namely, To Issue, or Flow out, as out of a Fountain,
to Spring, to Arise, to Sprout, and (that which perchance is from the Arabic)
to Bud forth. Also, to Show, or to Declare.

The other is: to Begin, to Arise, to take Arising, or Beginning; also, to Be
the Beginning, or Arising.

Now according hereunto; One Day Does, or Shall Flow out, Spring, or Arise, Bud
forth, Show and Declare To and Of Another.

Again: One Day Does Begin, takes Beginning, is a Beginning, Of and To
Another.

Here are Buds and Blossoms of Gods Glory. Here are Sweet Sources and
Arisings, Springs and Flowings, Shows and Declarations of Gods Glory:
proceeding from The Root of the Tongue of the Days Telling; Telling and
Teaching us, That our Tongues should be a Fountain of Sweet, and not of Bitter
Things. For you would also think, that The Day had a Licorish Tongue, or at
leastwise a Mellifluous, if ye knew how many Sweet Things it Tells of. His
Eructatio^ being not only of the Sweets of Creation, but of Most prudent and
provident Conservation, Preservation, Gubernation; yea and of the Choicest of
all others: Election, Vocation, Redemption, Sanctification, Justification,
Glorification. So many Sweet Verbals Derived from One Primitive Word of God, by
the Deep Channel of the Days Verbosity.

Where among other things Flowing out, the Days Tongue beiug Well Liquored,
are whole Seas and Rivers of Corporal, and of Spiritual Vid. Act. 2. and
Joel. 2.
Effusion.

Where among other Buds, are Bodies: among other Springs, are Spirits: among
other Arisings, are Rising and Raising up of Dead Bodies, (whereof hereafter:)
and among other things that shoot and spring forth, and that without stinting,
are, or is: The Root of Iesse, the Tree, and Water of Life.

But All, one among another, are (as hereafter in the Subject ye shall hear)
All Things.

But One Above All other Things, is: that Rising up of that Iesus-Root of
Iesse. Again: Here is that that Does Begin, That that Takes Beginning, and
That that Is Beginning to Another.

How the^ can he but be here, That is, the Beginning to All Other? How can His
Birth both Temporal and Eternal, but Sprout out of this fruitful Womb of the
Day, yea and of the Vid Psalm. 110 3.
Morning, the First and Chiefest part of the Day: especially that First and
Chiefest Eternal Birth of him, who is the First, and Chiefest, and Aeternall
Day?

When as here are so Many Generations, and Corruptions, Generating the praise
of his Incorruptible Generosity and Eternal Generation: So much, Light and
Night, Issue, as it were Male and Female, so much Offspring of the Day and of
the Darkness, by The spirit of God Moving upon the face of the Water (Genesis 1.
1.) So many spirits Flowing from the Father of All spirits: So many Beings
Arising from the Fountain of All Being: So many things, that of themselves Are
not that they Are, but in and through him, who of himself Is that He Is, and
Ever Is, and was, and shall be that He Is: when as nothing Is without Respect
of the Diffusion of His Goodness, without Reference to the Raising of His
power, and without Dependencie from Him, who Depends of no other but Himself:

Because we may not place Him in any Other, we must needs put him still in
the Predicament of Relation of his own praises.

Now (Right Worshipful, and all alike well Beloved in Christ Jesus) let it not
be, tedious unto you, a little more to make you acquainted* or else to renew
your acquaintance, with the variety of Interpretations which may not yield us
some good matter of Exhortation and Instruction. As also, that it may the
better appear, that we range not beyond all authority in the things we speak
unto you: as the manner of some is, whose wit (whilst you are glad to be
tickled with it) outrunneth their discretion. (...), as S. 2. Cor. 11. 19
Paul speaks) ye suffer them sweetly, it Delights you to hear them. Ye
ought also to hear willingly the Days Mercurian Report: (...), their goodly
and Godly Eloquence, whence Sc. ab eius Radice, per in ver sioncm.
(says Avenarius) (...) had his name: (...), their words, their words of
Excellency, their pleasing words at will, whence verbal Sc. reducend. ad Orig.
Hebr. potius quam inde quod C^cus suerit, vt quidam putavere. puto inde, quia
ingenii, verborum, and rci poeticae Choragus: Pre quo, and sine quo, ceteri
poeie, imo and philosophi, ^ordent and coecutiuat. Quem. inquit Velleius, (...)
siquis coecum genitum (...)
Homer, as is likely, had his name. (...).

Some understand these words Allegorically; As if by One Days telling another
were meant, that Christ told his Apostles: or, (as others have) Sapiens
Sapienti, Sancti Sanctis, Electi Electis, Christiani Christianis: and, under
the Nights Certifying, Iudaei Iudaeis (That which together with Iudaei
Christianis, and Christiani Iudaeis, might also be placed under the Days
Telling, having all one subject with the Nights Certifying.)

Of this sort are, Asterius (among the Greek Scholiasts,) Cassiodore,
Bonaventure, and others.

It is true indeed that Christ spoke unto his Apostles the Glory of GOD. For
it was that which he sought, and not his own glory. And I would, Beloved, that
the same mind were in you all, which was in Christ Jesus. I would wise men
unto wise men, Saints unto Saints, the Elect unto the Elect, Christians unto
Christians, yea Christians unto Jews, Jews unto Christians, each one unto
another did relate and recount, so as this Text bears, the praise and honor
of their GOD. I would not the^ stand against the Allegorical sense of these
words, so much as now I do: And that is no more, but by holding with them who
have stood for the Litteral. I dcny not, but that both the Golden Apple, and
the Sylv^r Net wherein it is, that is, (as some have been conceited) Inter
quos Rabbi Moses ille Aegyptius vi de Pet. Galatin. de arcanis lib. 1. cap. 6.
the mystical and the litteral sense, would do well together to set forth The
Days Report in his richest colors (to speak improperly) of Or and Argent.
For which purpose we also hereafter, if GOD will, shall choose out the purest
of that Gold, to overlay the Days Report with Or, ornament of ornaments. vt
Ezech. 16. 7. iuxta* Heb.
chiefest ORnament. But because the silver has here less alay in it, and is
more warrantable, then the gold; I therefore covet rather, especially at this
time, to take part with them, who are enquested for the Sylver Sense.

These are not all of one mind neither. And yet not of so diverse, but that
all their understandings may stand well together, and may concur, for the
making up of a fuller and more plentiful sense: Or else each of them may well
stand by it self, each one making a milder and more easy meaning by it self.

Three, yea four (or more) litteral Expositions are past already. Caietane
expounds the whole verse thus: In successu dierum and noctium generatur in
nobis ex coelestibus notitia: tum quia vna dies aut vna nox non sufficit: sed
quod videtur vna nocte de astris, principium est ad sciendum in alia nocte: and
quod visum est in vna aestate, principium est ad sciendum in alia: and quod
visum est in vna aestate, principium est ad sciendum in alia. Et quod visum est
in vna Eclipsi, principium est ad sciendum in alia. Et sic de similibus coeli
motibus, actionibus, and effectibus. One Day is not sufficient, but there must
be more: One to tell another. By What is done such a day or such a night, or in
such a time of the year, in such a year; We learn what may be done another the
like Day, or Night, or in the same time of the year, another year. By what
falls out in one Eclips, we gather what may befall in another Eclipse. And
so is there bred in us knowledge of the motions, operations, and effects of the
heavenly bodies, even by One Days telling another. One Day tells another.

So likewise Lyra understands these words, of the variations of the Days
caused by the motions of the heavens. Variatio dierum (says he) secundum
longitudinem and brevitatem, caliditatem and frigiditatem, and alias
variationes quae per motum coeli causantur, and secundum certas periodos
reiterantur, ostendit potentiam and sapientiam motoris primi, scz. DEI. The
variation of the Days according to their length and shortness, lengthning and
shortning, according to their heat and cold, and other such like variations,
and diversities, caused by the motions of the heavens, and reiterated according
to their certain periods, Shows their Power, and Wisdom of the First Mover,
that is, of GOD. And in like sort Munster to have understood the words of my
Text, will appear in the second General part. One Day tells another.

The Litterall sense that I^nscnius brings of these words, besides the
affinity it has with some already mentioned, inclines much to that of
Dionysius Carthusianus: who entertaineth in these words, (that which well he
may) a Metonymie: whereby The Day is said to do that, which is done in the
day; to Tell that, which is told in the day. Hence Brentius here translateth,
Singulis diebus annunciat verbum. The knowledge of God increases daily, And
(according to that last exposition, which the Ordinary gloss here brings
Viz. Quod haec doctrina diebus and nectibus continuatur vsque ad poster^s.
) is both by Day and Night continued unto all posterity; The works of GOD, or
men by the works of God, do from Day to Day, show the Glory of his kingdom,
and talk of his Power. So too One Day tells another.

Rabbi Schlomohs exposition is, (like to some before going) that every Day and
every Night with their continual course and order, do join together in the
celebration of the Power and wisdom of GOD. One Day Tells another.

Abraham Ezra takes the meaning of the words to be (the same which before ye
heard out of Bucer upon the word (...)) That every day brings forth some new
work or other of the Almighties: Because every day, (and so every Night too)
utters and discloseth some new matter, in which the power, wisdom, and
goodness of GOD, is in a new manner, and after a peculiar sort made manifest.

Quidam ad eas lauds, quas a patribus acceperunt, addunt aliquam suam, says
Cicero De Offic. lib. 1
. So does the Day, Beloved, even every Day, besides that which it receives of
the precedent days, as of his Ancestors or Predecessors* Add still some new
matter of his own, whereby GODS name is magnified. As if vix ea nostra voco,
were his motto. Who says, that that which was done yesterday, is done To Day?
No more is that our doing, much less our deserving, which others have
performed. Let every man prove his own work (says the Apostle Gal. 6. 4, 5.
) and then shall he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another. Even as
every Day has something of his own, something done To Day, whereby he gladly
shows forth GODS Glory, as all his Predecessors did. One Day tellerh another.

Of like meaning are these words, in the judgment of some (who judge not
amiss neither) with that of the heathen men's (but whose it is, is not yet well
determined) Discipulus est prioris posterior dies. The later Day is the former
Days scholar, or Disciple. Hence Bucer here translateth, Dies diem docet, One
Day Teaches another.

Omnis res anterior posteriori norman praeministravit, says Tertullia^
Adversin Marcionem. l. a.
. Every foregoing thing prescribes, is as it were a pattern, or a samplar,
unto that which follows. Inquire of the former age, says Job. Job. 8. 8.
And, I have considered the days of old (says David) and the years that are
past. Psalm. 77. 5. Inquire now of the Days that are past, says Moses, (Deu.
4. 32.) which were before thee, since the Day that GOD created man upon the
earth, etc. And Deuteronomy. 32. 7. Remember the days of old: (says Moses too)
consider the years of so many generations. For, One Day tells another.

To the full meaning and understanding of which words, it is as true, and all
as pertinent too, that Prior dies posterioris est discipulus; The former day is
also the later days scholar, or disciple. One Day tells another. The former
day tells the later, and the later the former. The first the Chalde
Translation seems to me to have aimed at by their word of Diminution. The
second also, by their word of Addition. And this later agreeably unto that,
which before ye heard out of Bucer. That the Later Day tells the former Day,
this the heathen men saw also, as well as they did the other. Hence is that of
Aeschylus (...). 955
, (...). Time as it grows older and older, so it will inform thee better, it
will teach thee more and more. And hence is that of Demea in Terence Adelph.
Act. 5 Scen. 4.
: Nunquam ita quisquam been subductaratione ad vitam fuit; quin res, aetas,
vsus semper aliquid apportet noui: aliquid moneat, vt illa quaete scire credas,
nescias: and quae tibi putaris prima, in experiundo repudies. This, especially
if with the Apostle we prefer it to a higher sense, may well serve to allay
the puff of knowledge in us. 1. Cor. 8. 2. If any man thinks that he knows
any thing, he knows nothing yet, as he ought to do. For, One Day tells
another.

Finally, if ye will have the full and whole meaning of these words together,
according to their farthest bout and circumference, respecting especially The
Matter of the Days Report: I must needs hold with The Rabbis. See Bucers
preface to the Psalms
them, for this one place of holy Scripture, who avouched that every passage
thereof was Seaventie manner of ways to be interpreted. For I say not, that
this place of holy Scripture may bear Interpretation seaventy manner of ways;
But, seauenty times seaventy. For Every Day, Every way considered, tells
every Day every way considered, the Ever Ever-Ever lasting Glory of the Lord.
So has, One Day told another ever since the beginning; So does, so shall, so
may One Day tell another, (...), as S. Peter 2 Pet. 3. 18. Ecclus 42. 21. He is
from Everlasting to Everlasting. and, 39. 20, H^^ sees from Everlasting to
Everlasting. (...), For Ever and Ever. H^^. 1, 8 Exodus 15 18. For Ever and
Evertor, For Ever and yet longer, (...). Graec. (...).
speaks, for Ever and a Day, a Day of Evermore, And I would it could be 2 Pet.
3. 18. Ecclus 42. 21. He is from Everlasting to Everlasting. and, 39. 20, H^^
sees from Everlasting to Everlasting. (...), For Ever and Ever. H^^. 1, 8 Exodus
15 18. For Ever and Evertor, For Ever and yet longer, (...). Graec. (...).
more then for Evermore. Amen.

To God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three persons one God
immortal, invisible, and only wise; even to God, who is that he is, Be rendered
and ascribed all praise, honor, glory, power, majesty, kingdom, and
dominion, both now, and throughout all Eternity.

Amen.
THE DAYS REPORT OF GODS GLORY.
PSALM. 19. VERSE 2. One Day Tells another, etc.


IN these words (that which Part. 2.
partly appears by that which heretofore has been said on them, and that
which is agreed upon by all the best Expositors) there is contained a
Prosopopoeia, Elegans Prosopopoeia, an elegant Prosopopoeia, as Iunius and
Tremellius, and others have termed it.

Hoc, Eructat verbum, (says Theodoret on my Text) and Indicat scientiam, and
Enarrant gloriam Dei; non animata As some have thought Hun^ mundum animal esse.
Cic in Timpo. and vid. Comentater. in Damascen. lib. 2. orth. sidei, cap. 6. in
fine.
esse quae videntur, docet: verum est quaedam Prosopopoeia homines docens, ab
his quae videntur, ad opificem, qui minime cernitur, pervenire, and illi
hymnorum cantilenam afferre. That is, This same One Day tells another, and,
One Night certifieth another, and, The heavens declare the Glory of God,
argues not, the Heavens, the Days, or the Nights, to be living * creatures
endued with voice, Speech (...), etc. Damascen. Orthod. fid. lib. 2. cap. 6. in
fine.
and Language: But it is a kind of Prosopopoeia, whereby men are taught by the
visible things of this world to be brought to the invisible Creator of them,
and so to bring and sing unto him praise, Glory, and Thanksgiving. Coelt and
singult dies eo Deum et eius opera praedicant, quod nobis praedicandi materiam
exhibent, says Bucer: the heavens and the Days are therefore said to declare
Gods Glory, to praise his works, and to publish the same one unto another,
because they yield us matter of so doing. Singulis * a (...), etc: and paulo
post: (...), (to wit, by reading that same (...), etc: interro gatiuely: of
which he had there spoken before) (...). Athanasius in Fragment. Commentar* in
Psalm. ex Niceta.
diebus ade^que singults momentis Deus manifesta sui testimony edit; and little
consideratione in cognitione Deide die in diem proficimus* says Gualter. Every
day, yea and every moment God shows forth manifest tokens and testimonies of
himself, by consideration whereof we are from Day to Day more and more
furthered in the knowledge of God. Nec intelligas (says Caietan) coelos
narrare and annunciare loquendo, sed materiam narrationis and annunciationis
praebendo. We may not think that the heavens do declare, or that the days
tell one another by speaking, but by ministering matter for speech and
declaration. And (as Dionysius Carthusianus speaks) Dicuntur coeli enarrare
Gloriam Dei, si^ut dicuntur benedicere Deo, eumque laudare, videlicet quonia^
praebent intuentibus occasionem atque materiam contemplande Creatoris
potentiam, sapientiam, and perfectionem. The heavens (and so likewise the Day
and the Night) are said to declare the Glory of God, in that sense that they
are said to bless the Lord, and to praise his name: to wit, because they
furnish their spectatours with matter and occasion of contemplating the power,
wisdom, and perfection of their Creator. According to that of Isay (Isa. 40.
26.) Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created these things.
Finally this One Days telling to another, is like unto that in the 12 of Job.
v. 7, 8. Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee: and the fowls of the
heaven, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the earth, and it shall show
thee: or the fishes of the sea, and they shall declare unto thee. Thee, and,
unto Thee.

So it is indeed; unto Men, for Man's sake, for his Learning, ad hominus
vtilitatem, for Man's Profit, as Theodoret here speaks, that one day tells
another. Illi audiunt tanquam verbum eructuatum, (says S. Austin) illi tanquam
scientiam annunciatam. Quodenim ructuatur, praesentibus ructuatur: They (that
is, men) do hear as it were a word, and as it were knowledge uttered unto
them* for look what is uttered, is uttered unto them in their own persons.
One day inciteth us by one thing, another by another, as anon ye shall hear
out of Munster. The noise that they make is like the voice of a crier unto Us,
like an Oyes whereby Our hearing is required. Their sounding and resounding,
their (...) and (...) is a catechizing unto us. In the 145. Psalm, when the
Prophet David had said, All thy works praise thee, O Lord etc. They show the
mightiness of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power; he adds immediately (the
end thereof) That thy power, thy glory, and mightiness of thy kingdom, might
be known unto men, v. 10, 11, 12. And how ever it be of that that is done;
sure we are, that what is written is written for our learning. Rom 15* 4.

Let us therefore observe for our instruction, that which was last spoken of
the Days Speaking: The Manner of it; how that it is but by a Prosopopoeia. And
it may well teach us our duty. Us, Men and Women, who only were made to be the
speech-sounding letters in the whole Alphabet of the Creation. For (alas) the
Day indeed sounds GODS praises; But how does it sound them? Truly, we must
lend a figure to that sounding speech and speaking sound, or else it will be
neither sound nor speech. Only we, we men and women, can truly and properly
speak GODS praises, if we will. We only have speech and language, and have it
only to that purpose. Our Tongue and Speech are our only Quia licet humana
dignitas ab anima rationali pendeat, ca tamen cum sit invisibilis, nulla
quapiam alia re magis cognoscitur, qu^m ^ratio^e. P. Martyr ibid. Vid Postel.
De O^ig^nibus* fac. 1 See also the Last Sermon: where, of one Days telling a
word] or, Speech]
apparent Glory above other creatures; whence (...) (Cauod) in Hebrew signifies
both Glory and Tongue. As P. Martyr well notes in his common place of the
Resurrection, sect. 28. Psalm. 16. 9. Genesis 49. 6. my Glory, that is, my Tongue.
Or is it so rather, because our tongue should always be sounding forth the
Glory of GOD? of GOD, who is our Glory, Ier. 2. 11. And, Let him that glories
((...)) glory in the Lord. 1. Cor. 1. 31.

And yet see, whether the Day be not more forward in sounding forth, and
speaking the praises of our GOD, yea eve^ unto us our selves, rhen are we:
which should be the only speakers in this lower house of the Parliament of GODS
praises. For, hear what the Prophet David says in the next verse unto my
Text, according unto most Translations: There is neither speech nor language,
but their voices are heard among them. And in the next to that: Their sound is
gone out into all lands and their words into the ends of the world. And as
Iunius and Tremellius have very well translated the former verse, Non est
sermo, neque verba eis; and sine his intelligitur vox eorum. They have neither
speech nor words, and yet is their voice very intelligible. According to that
of S. Chrysostom (upon that, The heavens declare the glory of God) (...). etc.
Tell me, how do they declare the Glory of GOD? They have no voice, they are
not possessed of any mouth, and tongue they have none at all. How then do they
declare the Glory of GOD? By their sight, says he. And afterward he
declares, how (...) to wit, (...). By our seeing of them we fall to thinking,
to considering of them, to understanding this and that out of them. And that,
when we behold such beautiful creatures as are the heavens, and the Days of
heaven: when we see in the one (...)* Such Beauty, such Greatness, such
Height, such Site and position, such Frame and Fashion, so sufficient so long
time to endure: In the other, (...), other things as great as those, such
Co^sonancie and Modulation, such Order and Moderation, so Exact and Curious: We
should (...). Adore and worship him, who has made them such fair and
beautiful bodies, passing not only our perfect understanding, but even our
conceits capacity. For if we only look and gaze on them, though to the end
of the Horizon: if we only note every Horoscope, and not apply such admirable
sights to their right end and use, his Glory, who has exhibited them unto us,
what great matter, quid tanto hiatu dignum, have we done? Even as little
children, who when they should learn their lessons, do nothing but look upon
the painted babery of their books: being loath to be gu^ltie of more learning,
then is the gilt of the cover, or the leaves; and skilling no more of the Text,
then the Text hand letters come unto; Lastly, getting no more fruit of all
their schooling, then is upon the fig tree in the end of their Accidence.

If either Sight or Hearing, or both of them together may ought profit us in
knowledge: we have not wanted either of the Heavens, or of the Day or of the
Night, sufficient information. (...). Such is their sound, that it may be heard
of all men: nor only such is the heavens sound, but such is the sound of the
Day and of the Night also* For they doc (...), ring loud in their ears that
see them, stunne and astonish their beholders: whilst (...). Their sight, or
sightlinesse, sends forth a voice more shrill then any trumpet, as S.
Chrysostom speaks. yea so farforth, as that the very invisible things of God
Romans 1. 20.
are made manifest unto me^ by this their speech, their voice, their words. As
shall farther be declared, when we shall come to speak of the Matter of their
speech.

Now I would to God we that have voices did as much as these do, that have no
voices; and our words were as these their words, which yet are no words. I
would their (...) did not put our (...) down. For so nearly in the Greek
does their sound imitate our voice, and so far indeeed does their (...) Which
signi^ieth indiffer^^tly either Sounding, or Speaking.
(...) exceed and surmount ours; a thing, I say not in reason, but in reasoning
absurd, that both Kinds should not equally participate their Genus. The Days,
though they have not (...) (voice) properly as we have, yet have they (...).
(Discords, Shrilnesse, Harmony) Clemens Alexandrinus (...). p. 2
has suited them all three in one sentence: (...)). The disagreeing (or,
iarring) Elements has God by the stroke (or touch) of his hand reduced into an
orderly lowdnesse (or shrill tuneablenes:) that so, by an harmonicall concent
in sundry tunes, the whole world might make him See that which hereafter in
this Sermon is in the Margent noted out of Austin, de civit. Dei, lib. 11. cap.
18.
melody.

First the Days are indeed Different in their sounds. (...), says Hesiod. One
Day is as a mother, another as a stepmother unto man. For when man would needs
know evil, as well as good: no marveile, if he reapt fruit accordingly, To
know Omnis Dits, omnis Hora, qu^m ni^il simus ostendi^, and aliqu^ argumeto
rec^nti ^dmon^^ fragi^itat^^ oblitos, Senec, epist. 101. i^ initio.
the evil Day, what it meant, as well as the good Day: the Day of death, as
well as the Day of life, the Day of damnation, if he take not heed, as well as
the Day of salvation. What then, Beloved? but that therefore ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time: because the
days are evil. Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. And that good Days follow good deeds,
evil Days evil deeds, is not to be doubted. For, If any man long after life
and to see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips
that they speak no guile: Let him eschew evil, and do good: Let him seek
peace, and follow after it, etc: as both the Prophet David, and the Apostle
have Psalm 34. 12, 13, 14, 15. and 1. Pet 3. 10. 11, 12, 13.
spoken.

One Day tells another. Non habet officium Lucifer omnis ide^, says the Poet
Ovid. de Fastis, immediately before that heretofore cited, Ille Nefastus erit,
etc.
: Every Day has not the same office, serves not altogether for the same
purpose. And as Solomon says (Prove. 27. 1.) Thou know not what a Day may
bring forth. The year is like unto a pleasant field or garden in which are
set the Days like unto diverse pleasant plants or fine flowers, each one
having his several sweet smell and savor. Aliter olet flos vuae, aliter flos
oliuae, aliter flos rosae, aliter flos lilij, aliter flos violae, aliter
redolet spica, etc: as elegantly says S. Gregory, in his fifth homily upon
Ezechiel. The rose Vid Ecclus. 39, 13, 14.
has his proper sweet smell by it self: the lily Vid Ecclus. 39, 13, 14.
by it self, the violet by it self, the pinke by it self, the gyllyflower by
it self, the carnation by it self, and so of the rest: So every Day has his
several temper and temperature, whether it be of First or Second, Active or
Passive, certain of most rare qualities: most certainly, of most rare
accidents: whereby it smells sweetly unto GODS Glory. One Day inciteth and
inviteth us by wholesome rain, another by fair and dry weather: one by frost,
another by snow: one by hot, another by cold weather: one by calm and mild
weather, another by storms of hail; by lightning and by thunder: as in effect
Munster has very well noted on my Text Vid. Eccl^^* 42. v. 24 and
. But because this has heretofore been touched by me in the first general
part, I will bear of (if so you will bear with me) another way. The Church of
Christ is also likened unto such a garden or field as last I spoke of. For so
S. Gregory understands that, Genesis 27. 27. Which is there spoken by Isaac unto
Ia^ob in blessing of him, Behold the smell of my son is as the smell of a
field which the Lord has blessed. And Cant. 4. 12. The Church is called a
garden incloased.

The variety of sweet and good smells in so goodly a garden what are they?
Bonus odor Christi est praedieatio veritatis. The sweet savor of Christ, is
the preaching of the truth, says S. Austin. And Thanks be unto God, (say we
with S. 2. Cor. 2. 14. 15.
Paul) which always makes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the
savor of his knowledge by us in every place. For we are unto God the sweet
savor of Christ, etc. (...). O, says Austin by occasion of those words,
Felices qui bono odore vivunt, Quid aute^ infelicius illis qui bono odore
moriuntur? Happy are they which live by such a sweet smell: But what more
unhappy then those, whom such a sweet smell kills? Yes; they are more
unhappy, which die with Variety of good smells. Who, when Christ is preached by
so many of us, after so many diverse manners of preaching, (as partly the Days
Emphony shall declare) yet it is unto them The savor of death unto death, and
not the savor of life unto life; And that for want of the Grace of Gods Holy
Spirit to Blow upon them (Cant. 4. 16.) that so that other sweet and good smell
and savor of Christ, those Fragrant and Odoriferous Spices, to wit, The
practice of virtue, and the True Worship of God, may Flow out* Aromata nempe
Adoramenta delectabilia sunt, etc: (says Sim. de cassin 4 or Evang. l. 13.
Sect. sed Christus.
one) True Adoration is Aromaticall Delight: and there is no smell to the
spiritual smelling more delectable in this life, then of Virtues Flowers. But
to recover me to the Days Diaphony again; it is but Discors Concordia. They
all agree in the showing forth of his Glory, and giving us good instructions.
Such like discords has Ovid. Met* lib. 10*
he known, whoever -- tentavit pollice chordas, Et sensit varios, quamvis
diuersa sonarent,


Concordare modos. Such like discords has the Apostle S. Paul exhorted us
unto, when he would have one to draw one way, another, another way, for the
more glorious building up of the Church of Christ. But how is that? some to
hold of Paul, some of Apollos? or that there should be strife, envying, wrath,
contentions, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, and discord, or tumultuousnes
((...))? 2. Cor. 12. 20. No, no, Beloved; but every man to follow diligently
his own vocation, to do his own business with singleness of heart, and
synceritie: according to the diversities of gifts which we have according to
the grace that is given us. As there at large, by the similitude of diverse
members in one body, and diversities of offices of the members, the Apostle
has declared.

A second kind of diphonie required in us, is: That we should not be unequally
yoked, as the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 6 14. Have no fellowship with the
vnfruit full works of darkness, but even reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. 11.
The Day, Beloved, has no commerce or co^fere^ce with the Night, but with the
Day. For, One Day tells another. So if we, that are children of the Day, (1 Thessalonians. 5. 5.) have any communion, or communication with, or about
night-matters, a great chance but the Day shall declare it. 1. Cor. 3. 13. for,
One Day tells an other.

A third kind of Diphony there is, that which S. Bernard Super Cantic. sermon. 85.
has* vt dissentias tecum, vt tibimet adverseris, vt gravi and vigili lucta tu
ipse contra teipsum infatigabiliter praelieris: postremo, vt valefacias
inveteratae co^suetudini, innataeque affectioni. For a man to dissent from
himself, to oppose himself against himself, to strive and struggle
earnestly, and vigilantly with himself, to be infatigable in so encountering
with himself, Finally, to ^asseere his inveterated evil customs, and his
inbred affections.

This contrarying and contradicting of one self, is in some sort to be seen
in that which One Day tells another. For Contradictories, though not at the
same time; yet the same Day, and in diverse respects* they may be true. And many
times the very same Day reports things that are clean contrary. Witness,
sorrow and heavines, at the death of our late Queen: joy and heavenlinesse, at
the reign of our gracious Sovereign; And all this in one Day: or else,
heaviness continuing for a night, joy came in the morning. One day so much
differing from it self, to teach us one day to become new men. One Day Tells
another.

Secondly, the days are (...), shrill and sounding, as already ye have heard.
But here we may hear the duty both of Priest and People. The first I beseech
by the things which now they see, and quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus: by
the example of the Day, which now they cannot choose but eye, unless they shut
their eyes of purpose, that they would be still more and more (...). Too raw,
too young yet to speak, and to show a man's self in such an asse^bly. If the
Day should so say of it self, we had missed of his light in this Assembly.
And if it should stay until it came to ripeness of years, yea or of days:
it would never come unto us, we should never see it. for, lo, to morrow it is
gone. His voice does not serve him to preach. So it seems. And yet it is as
good as the Days voice, if there be any comparison betwixt them. For the Day
(as ye have heard) has indeed no voice at all: and yet in the preaching and
predicating of GODS praises it has a shriller voice then any trumpet, as has
been told you out of S. Chrysostom* Behold I cannot speak for I am Ierem. 1.
a child: would not serve the Prophet Ieremiahs turn. Nor here will it serve
the Days turn, or excuse it for not telling forth GODS Glory, because it has
no voice to tell it withal. One Day Tells another.

The People also are here taught to preach GODS Glory, and the congregation to
talk of his praise. For who made the Day a Deacon, or a Priest? or else who
ever gave him Letters of Orders? yet is he still a preaching unto us the Glory
of GOD, that placed him in such an order. Ought not we much rather to be
always telling of his praise, who has made us of an higher Order then the
Day, and of an higher calling to call upon him.

And this is the rather spoken, because of some, who, because they are not in
Orders, care not how disorderly they live* and because they are not Priests,
care not how profanely: because they are of the Laity, care not how lewdly
they carry themselves in words and works and conversation. Forgetting all the
while Om^es iusti Sacerdo^alem habent ordinem. Iren^us. lib. 4. cap. 20. Greg.
Mag.
their Spiritual Priesthood, Rev. 1. 6. Romans 12. 1. their Holy Priesthood, 1.
Pet. 2. 5. As if that required neither holiness of them, nor fruits of the
spirit* Iustus quisque etiam viue^do loquitur. Every good man speaks and
preaches by his Good Life: says S. Gregory. And that this is the best kind of
speaking and of preaching, and that which gives all laudable act and
perfection thereunto, either in Priest or People, S. Austin (De Doctrina
Christiana, lib. 4 cap. 28, and 29) has at large declared. Where amongst other
things, Si aute^ ne hoc quidem potest, says he, ita conversetur, vt non solum
praemium sibi comparet, sed etiam praebeat alijs exemplum, and sit ei quasi
copiae dice^di forma viuendi. If it be so with a man, that he cannot be a
preacher, for that he wants both wisdom and eloquence of speech; (for so S.
Austin determines of it) Then let him, yea he must be a preacher in
conversation and holiness of life. Let his holy and orderly living serve him
instead of holy Orders, his formal carriage and demeanure serve him instead of a
concionatory speech most eloquently performed. And this kind of speaking and of
preaching GODS Glory (whereunto all, both Priest and People, are liable)
comes nearest of all to the Days telling one another in this place, which is
by the due observing of the ordinance of the Days and Nights and Heavens
Ordinary.

One Day tells another. The third and last is, the Days (...), the Days
Harmony. (...), etc. As excellently says S. Chrysostom (...). ad popul.
Antioch.
by occasion of the words of my Text. For like See that next in the Margent
cited out of Theodoret, de provident Sermon. 1. (...). Act. ^8. 25.
as sisters dividing their fathers inheritance betwixt them, do it with great
good love and liking on each part, they take their own lot contentedly,
neither of them intruding upon the others right: So the Day and the Night have
the year parted evenly betwixt them, with as great aequality and aequabilitie.
Which may well teach us to agree better then we do. We go to law, we wrangle,
we brabble, we cavil and fall out about small matters: whilst the Day with
the Night, one day with another, never yet was at strife and variance, never
iarred about matters of as great moment as concerns their whole estate, and
as necessary as Light and Darkness, Day and Night.

One Day tells another. Here too (in S. Chrysostomes understanding) is a
lesson for the covetous carle. (...) (says he) (...). Hear ye this ye
covetous, and greedy of other men's money: imitate the Day and Nights equality
and equabilitie, The Day pilleth not or polleth, it takes nothing from his
fellow, but gives him rather, that which he has to give. For One Day tells
another.

It fares with the Days in the year, as they say it does with fruitful
trees and plants in some places of Barbary: where they plant under the Date
tree, the Olive tree: under the Olive, the fig tree: under that the
Pomegranate* under it, the Vine: under the Vine, they sow Wheat: and under
Wheat, pulse: all prospering one under the others shadow, and yielding their
fruit the same year. So all the Days of the year are as it were planted one
under the other, and one above the other: some are higher, some lower; and
placed are they Secundum sub and supra, making up as it were a whole
Predicament of GODS praises. The predicating whereof is the fruit they all
bear, they all bear the same year, whilst the one still prospers and
comes up under the Night and shadow of the other.

This may show unto us our duty and condition. For we are all placed in this
world, yea eve^ in this Realm, in like sort as the Days: one under another,
one in higher, another in lower place: alvnder one Summum Genus as it were, one
most noble Sovereign. He is unto us, as the Sun to the Days that be under
him: (for Genesis 1. 16. 18. and Psalm. 136. 8. The Greater Light was made to rule
the Day) or, (to speak too little of him) he is as the date tree to those that
be under him. He has even the olive tree under him, the fig tree, and the
vine. These three trees, Judge. 9. will teach us that are Subjects our duties,
eve^ as the days of the year do teach us too. These seek not Superiority one
over the other; but look in what place GOD has set them, be it better or
worse, higher or lower, foremost or hindermost, That they keep, and therein
keep the ordinances which GOD has appointed them. (...), as says S.
Chrysostom upon the words of my Text. They (the Days) keep themselves within
their own bounds and limits, and the one seeks not to extrude the other. Nay
and he says farther: (...). Hear ye this, ye highminded, and that are
puffed up, and who are loath to give place, and yield superiority unto others,
(or who having once gotten into office, are loath to leave the same again for
others) The Day gives place unto the Night, and encrocheth not upon that that
ought not to be his: But thou still having and taking the fruition of honor
and preferment, can not abide thy brother to have and take part with thee.
The days they intend to let their light shine, to shine upon the earth. Genesis
17. to give light upon the earth. v. 15. Mat 5. 16.
I* would ye did intend nothing else, but to let your light so shine before me^,
that they seeing your good works, might glorify your Father which is in
heaven. And I would ye did not rather strive for Superiority, for higher
places, and one to go before another.

Hence are men now-adaies so prone to conspiracy, treason, and rebellion*
because they are so unlike the Days of the year, whilst they cannot stay til
it comes to their turns to be exalted. Ye may see* by the example of the
Olive* the Fig Tree, and the Vine, (Judge. 9.) That they that bear good fruit
indeed, will not have a kingdom, that appertains not to them, no though it be
offered them* but rather give themselves to follow diligently that vocation,
whereunto they are called: so seeking to glorify GOD, yea and to cheer him
too, by the fruit of good living, like unto the fatness of the Olive, the
sweet and good fruit of the Fig Tree, and the wine of the vine. But it is the
Bramble, or the Bryar, which bears such bad fruit, who would advance himself
above the trees, and would have all put their trust under his shadow. As if his
shadow were a fit and sufficient shelter for the highest Cedars of Lebanon.

Wherefore, Beloved, be ye not like unto the scratching bramble, but to the
good trees, that had rather live under the shadow of another, and so bring
forth fruit, not once a year only, but, like unto the Tree of Life in the
Revelation, every Month of the year: yea Every Day of the year, while it is
called To Day. Because so does every several Day of the year. One Day Tells
another.

Here also, if we consider the Days and the Nights too in Relation to their
Rulers and Governors: we shall farther see how they Relate Gods Glory; whilst
they afford excellent instructions, both for the Rulers and Guides of GODS
people, and also for the People themselves that are Guided and Governed.

For the first: they ought to be like unto the Rulers of the Day and of the
Night. They are, The Lights in the Genesis 3. and vid. Ier. 31. 35.
Firmament of the Heaven; The Sun, The Moon, and the Stars. Their Office
two fold: To Rule, and To Give Light. So by them The Heavens Declare the Glory
of God, and the Firmament shows his Handy work. So also by Kings and Rulers,
whilst they are full of the Light of Knowledge, and not only Rule, but Give
Light too upon the Earth; Their High Seas and Seats of Honor, their Thrones
and Chaires of Estate Declare the Glory of God, and their Commonwealths strong
Firmament shows his Handy work. Whilst, I say, there is no Day or Night, no
Subject so Dark and Ignorant, but has a Vid* Ps. 2. 10.
wise and Learned Ruler, and a Judge, a Guide, a Leader well Iustructed. Such a
one as in his place and calling, being himself Lightsome, is very industrious
in Giving Light unto his Day-and-Night Subjects and Inferiors.

Such a one as is, first and principally, Christ himself: who is (...), The
End and perfection of all Kingly Glory and Dominion: who should be First in
their Intention, that bear rule, yea and in their Attention too; as a perfect
pattern and a most true Rule of well Ruling. Whose Dominion is from one end of
the world unto the other: Whose Throne is Everlasting: Whose Scepter is a
Scepter of Righteousness: Who is that Sun of Righteousness, to whom in a
Mystical Sense the 5. and 6. verses of this Psalm are most suitable: and in
Whom, as hereafter shall be showed, the Glory of God is most resplendent.

But under him, and though in our Horizon Next and Immediately, yet a great way
after him: Such a one as is our King, (not to flatter him, but that GOD may be
more and more Glorified by Him, and he incited to Run on, in being Next and
Annexed to him in Giving Light, to whom in Ruling he is Next) who is like unto
The Sun (in the 5th and 6th verses of this Psalm) which comes forth as a
Bridegroom out of his chamber] Brave, and Chaste, and undefiled. And Reioyceth]
in the Psalm 19. v. 5, 6
Lord Psalm. 104. 34 and 105. 3. and Phil. 4. 4.
heartily, and in the Statuts Psalm. 119. v. 14. V. 6.
of the Lord, v. 8. As a Giant or strong man] whom nothing may put back, or
divert from his settled godly resolutions. To Run his Course, or, Race] In the
way Psalm. 119. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 27, 32, 33, 35. Genesis 18. 19.
of Gods Commandments: from one End of Them, unto the other: and therefore is
Temperate in All things (1. Cor. 9. 25.) and that for the Joy that is set
before him (Heb. 12. 2.) To obtain a Crown Incorruptible (1. Cor. 9. 25.) and
that same (...) 1. Cor. 9. 24* and Phil. 3 14. V. 6.
, Vid Ps. 119. v. 6
most Brave and Royal Reward of his well doing. For so In keeping of the^
there is Great Reward, v. 11. And therefore too he may well be seen to Runne]
as Swiftly, as he runs Gladly and Willingly: even to Runne] All the world
over in One Day: having a Care of All his Subjects and through his zealous
Heat, coupled with The Light of Knowledge, finding out all that is amiss and
repugnant to Gods Glory, and reforming it. And this not One Day only, but with
continual perseverance, (...) (Here the worthiest Title of a King) unto the
End Psalm. 119. sect. 5. v. 1.
, until he come to him that is The beginning and the End, and to the hight of
Gods Glory through him; And so: From Day to Day, from One Day to another, from
Day Temporal to Day Eternal. One Day Tells another.]

Now likewise for the People: They may here learn and be admonished, not to
attempt, speak, or imagine any Evil against their Rulers and Superiors: no
more then do the Days and the Nights; who to their Rulers oppose no
unruliness, neither withstand they their Lights, least they should stand in
their own Light, and so be nothing else but Darkness. As it fares with the^
who by Disobedience to their Guids and Governors, and by plotting mischief
against the^, seek to extinguish their own Light: as though being weary of
there Old Eyes, they would pluck them out, and so either see with the holes, or
excha^ge them for New. And being herein so unlike to Children of the Day, as
that they are not to be reckoned Children of the Night: whilst they enter
meddle with such hideous and prodigeous Works of Darkness, as are not to be
found in the Blackest and the Darkest Night.

Again, the People are here taught, concerning their Kings and Princes, Rulers
and Leaders, Guides and Governors: That though they be never so Good, never so
well Allied, never so Wise and Learned, yea though they were Gods Signet upon
his Right hand (Ier. 22. 24.) yet they should not be Proud of the^, Glory in
them, Presume on them, or put Vid. Psalm. 146. 2. and indo. and, 118 8, 9. and
104, 29.
Trust or Confidence in the^; much less Adore them, and give away Gods Glory
unto them.

All which not we only of this Land, but commonly All People of the world are,
and have been, faulty in. Al which were more tolerable in the Days and
Nights, then in any of us all. For as much as their Seducements should be
through greater Enticements Vid Job. 31 26* 27. Deuteronomy. 4* 19.
. Their Rulers are in Higher place, more Glorious, more Full of Light, then
ours: and if Solomon in all his royalty were not like unto one of the Lilies
of the Field; much less unto all the lights of Heaven. Theirs are situated in
a Firmament, ours in Infirmity. Theirs have a kind of Everlasting Psalm* 89.
35, 36. see more hereafter in this Sermon.
permanencie: ours, as soon as God takes away their Breath they die, and are
turned again to their Earth, and to their Dust. Their Rulers are of greater
Might then ours. Witness, their Motions, Influences, and Operations; their
Oppositions, and Conjunctions, their several Aspects, and the like: whereby
they are of so great force, both by Sea and Land, and in the Air: being
Causers also of Generation, and Corruption: showing thereby the Glory of the
First Mover and Creator, and his Superexcellent Omnipotency. And yet for all
this, The Days and Nights are not Proud of them, Rely not on them, put no
Affiance in them or their Alliance, desert not their Allegiance, Duty, and
Obedience to their Creator, and to the Command of his Supremacy, because of
them: they Glory not in them, but in him that made them, and made them (Day and
Night, Light and Darkness) before such Rulers were set over them. They worship
not the Creatures, but the Creator: finally they Report and Declare his glory,
and not theirs: but so as theirs also redoundeth to his glory, who is Blessed
for ever.

Consider next, Beloved, how that we have a longer time of continuance then
has the Day, and therefore have more Time to learn. And yet we see we have
so played the Truants, that we are come to Day to be taught our duty toward
GOD, yea and our Prince too, of an Infant, that is but a Day old. For
Angustis^imum habet Dies gyrum, says Seneca Epist. 12.
. The Day has but a narrow compass. The Month is of a far greater bout then
he. The Year, like unto one of the greater Circles, is of a greater circuit
then they both. The Day in Longevity like unto the (...) Arist. lib. 5. Animal.
, if this be not rather like unto the Day. The Day but a Day old: and yet it
adds some knowledge unto the Days of old.

Ostendent terris Hunc tantum Fata, neque vltra
Esse sinent. It does but peep into the world, and but show it self as it
were upon the stage: and yet makes it a Great show of Gods Glory,

Peepes us Such Lecture of the Day,
Both as he comes, and flies away:
Bides, but to bid the world Adieu,
And do Days Duty to his Or, God.
Dieu. So that it may say with the Prophet David, I have more understanding then
my Teachers, Psalm. 119. Mem. v. 3. And in the next verse, I am wiser then the
Aged. Days should speak (says Job. 32 7.
he,) and Multitude of Years should teach Wisdom. But, what? So much Wisdom
in so Few years? Few years? Few Days. Few Days? yea and Few of Job* 32 6.
iuxta Heb.
Days. As few, and of as few, as One. And yet that One not so long as One Day
Natural. And that One can be no more then Once: once expired, can not be
reiourned: once past his term, can have no return. For what? Verene potest
esse Dies saepius qui semel fuit? Certe non potest, says the heathen Cic. de
Finib. lib. 2. iuxta fine^
Orator. And yet for all that, so liberal is it of his little life, and short
Time, to spend it to GODS Glory, and to man's behoof, That (according to the
Italian Proverb) Come la candela, fair' ben' a gli^altri and male a mistesso,
Like the Candle, it burns out it self, to give Others Light. Like the
Candle, of less Continuance then those to whom it gives Light.

Yea and so as it were Quidam ex Arabam Gram maticis dictiones, quotquot vi
Aliph vni^nis invic^m cohaerent and coalescunt, vno spiritu omnes, etiamsi
animam e^flare oporteret, nimis superstitiose conten* dunt.
Superstitiously liberal is the Day of his Little and short Breath in this
point of Service; That, Gods Glory being as it were an Quidam ex Arabam Gram
maticis dictiones, quotquot vi Aliph vni^nis invic^m cohaerent and coalescunt,
vno spiritu omnes, ^tiamsi animam e^flare oporteret, nimis superstitiose
conten* dunt.
Aliph of union, whereby All the Days words are loyned together in One, the Day
con^umeth it self in that One-Continuall-All-Day-Long-Pronunciation, and never
Once takes breath, till it has yielded up the Ghost.

We are so far off from bestowing our Breath upon the Continual pronunciation
of Gods Glory, and upon the preserving of unity of words, That we rather bestow
it in pronouncing the contrary, and in Disvniting of Things and persons. Our
Tongues, our Wits, our Spirits, and our Lives, which we ought rather to spend
in Keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace (Ephesians. 4* 3.) are wasted
to the dishonor of GOD, in making worse then Superstitious Divisions, and
separations of Things that God has joined together: yea and of Religion it
self, under a pretense only of Religion, and of Gods Glory. This, and the like
Expense, or Mispending rather, though it be of Life and Breath it self, upon
Gods Glory, and Man's Good, is but Equivocall, and Counterfeit: It Is
Antichristian Scattering (Luke 11. 23.) It Is no true tingling of our Hearts
through the heat of Love, and therefore but a Tinkling Cymball. In su^me, it is
but Hay and Stubble 1. Cor. 3.
, such as is made manifest by the Days Declaration, and Revealed by Fire: but
shall not abide the Touch of This Days Declaration, if ye put the^ together,
and compare them, for likeness: much less, of the Last Days Declaration and
Fiery Trial: when all Declaring Days shall Concur, and concurring shall
conspire to give in most Evident proofs against us,

How blameworthy we are, spe^ding so much Breath indeed, and so many Days as
we do, to spend it and them as we do: to spend so little, and of It and Them
to spend so little in the Honor of God, (whose is the Day and the Night, Psalm.
74. 17. and whole is the Spirit and the Breath, Job. 34. 14. Et vid. Job. 12.
10. Zech. 12. 1. Genesis 2. 7 and, Psalm. 146. 1, 3. and, 150. v. 6.
) and in the Releeuing of our poor distressed Brethren, a high point of Gods
Honor too.

A high point is this of Gods Honor, To have Respect unto Low Things: A thing
resembling Gods Goodness, a Pleasing Sacrifice unto him, and to the Daily
Offering whereof All Days and Nights, together with their Rulers, do invite
us. The one, like unto the King of Heavens Amongrs, Disperse abroad, and give
Every Day and Night the Light of his Benefice^ce. The other, like tha^kfull and
kind Alms folks, show unto us Men, what Every Day and Night is given them.

The one and the other show, and give to understand, That what they give, and
what is given them, is given unto us: That, what every Day and Night is given,
All is 1. Cor. 3. 21, 22
ours: That we should imitate their giving, or rather the perfection of his
giving, who is the Iam. 1. 17.
Father of Lights, from whom every good and perfect gift Descends: who 1. Tim
6. 17.
gives us Abundantly All things to Enjoy: who gives us Every Day our (...).

Where is such Daily Bread, as all the Scholars in the world cannot express
All that is given us with That Bread. Bread, with such an Epithete, as shows
Gods Glory by the weakness of man's capacity; with such an Adiection, as notes
the weakness of man's Existence: that he can no more continue One Day without
Gods sustenance, then the Adjective can stand without the Substantive; with
such an Adiunct, as jointly intimates unto us the Knowledge, Wisdom, Power*
and Goodness of God. Who* (knowing whereof we be made, and having a perfect
Insight into our Psalm. 139. 14, 15, 16.
substance yet being imperfect, and our Bones and Members being not hid from
him, by whom Day by Day they were Fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them) is Able and Vouchsafes Day by Day to give us Our Bread, so Agreeable and
Conducing to Our Nature, and to the Susteining of Our Substance. Lastly, Bread]
with such an Addition unto Gods glory and our good, as that it contains All
that God gives unto us, making for the one, or for the other, and far beyond
all that we ca^ desire or deserve. Among the rest, that Bread from Heaven (Ioh.
6.) Bread Supernatural, Light-Bread, and Bread of Life: of life too
Supernatural and Everlasting. That Bread that comprehends all the rest, that
we can and can not comprehend. Which our Heavenly Father giving us, and having
given for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us All things?

Then God giving us such Bread, and that Continually: and we Daily praying unto
God to give it to the poor as well as to our selves: shall we, unthankfully
crossing the fulfilling of our own desires, be sparefull and Niggardish of our
Bread, in communicating it unto our Brethren? Our Brethren? yea, or (if that be
not enough) in lending it back again unto our Father? Who if he give us All
things spiritual and Temporal, is he not worthy of the lone of Some
Temporal? He that gives to us all Bread, and light, and life to eat it in,
and has promised to give us Bread, and light, and life Eternal?

And now it may be we will brag of giving Bread unto the poor, and that
perhaps Every Day. But then, Beloved, let us remember the Addition that is
annexed to Our Bread that God does give us, as it were prescribing a Condition
of liberality to our giving. Without which, it is not our Bread, that is, such
as is in our Daily prayer, which we give. It is our Cour^est sort of Bread,
when as Ours is the finest; The Poorest, when as, Ours is the richest, and when
as the poorest have most need of the richest; it is Bread with Terms of
Diminution, yea and sometimes of reproach and derogation, when as Ours is with
most liberal Addition, with Supererogation, and without Casting any man in the
Teeth. This Learn, if not by One Days Adding abundantly to another, yet by
Our Daily Breads Addition.

The Poor shall never cease Mat. 26. 11. Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
; their Righteousness, that relieve them, shall never cease: and therefore our
Liberality toward them should never cease, so long as any Day or Night
lasts. One Day unto another Telleth] both the one, and the other. Yea and as
though it were an especial part of the Days Office so to do, so each Day in
and by his light does still more and more present and tender to the view of our
tender Compassion, the lamentable spectacles of our Poor Afflicted Brethren,
that they may be succored by us, as we are, or would be relieved by the Day,
or any thing he brings us: and that To Day: that He the present Day may be
graced, by GODS being glorified, by our works of Charity, and Plentiful
Sowing to the Spirit, In His little Daytime. That so we may walk henceforth
as Children of the Day and of the Light, following that which they as our
Fathers Tell Us, and consulting Tell one another, for our Good. That in any
case we be no longer like unto those Proci, or Wooers, in Homer (...)
; of whom even the very swine-heard Eumaeus, that base peasant, could see to
Tell and Complain unto Ulysses, That they wastfully and Immoderatly Spent all
things both by Day and Night, and yet did not any Day or Night offer of their
Spendings any Sacrifice unto GOD,

(...), for also many Days and Nights which come from GOD. Let us take heed,
Beloved, least in like sort Despising the Glory of GOD, who is our Glory, (as
it is in the Psalm) We wander in vanity, and follow after Lies. Take we heed
of Consuming on our l^sts, of making provision for the Flesh to fulfill the
Lusts thereof, of any longer wooing of the world, Flattering of the Flesh,
Making Suit to Hell, and Courting of the Devil. Such Wooing will prove to be
our Woeing, not by taking away of any O, but by adding a thousand Woes un to us
all. Such Sowing to the Flesh and Sow-wallowing in the Mire, will prove to be
our Reaping of Corruption, and vnrecoverable pollution. Such Suit, will prove
The Deeps Swallowing of us up; Such Courting, our Carting unto Hell. In a word,
Such Glory will be to our shame: Such Minding Earthly Things, will bring
Damnation in the End; and the rather, because we so little regard Every Days
Continual Suite unto us, and Telling one another, if not to the contrary, yet
that it should be to the Contrary. One Day Tells another.

S. Chrysostom (with whom Theodoret agrees also) understands these words
mainely and especially of the (...) of the Days, and Nights, and Hours of
them both. The Greek words are more emphatical, then that so many English may
ma^ch them. For if I say, Order: it is too little; if Comeliness, or Comely
Order: if Goodly Moderation, or Right Temperature: all is too little. For judge
ye what the rest may be, when as the least of them all, (...), is (according
unto Plato De Legib. 2.
) more then (...), which is too much for any English word to answer.

This their (...), and (...), as it may be gathered out of that which out of S.
Chrysostom and otherwise has already been alleged: so it is farther Quam
minimo sonitu. Cic.
expressed by S. Chrysostom, when he says: (...), etc. who is so unblessed
and retchlesse, which seeing so great and so exact an Eucrasie in the Hours,
and such a stable and steadfast order of the Day and of the Night, etc. And a
little before: (...) Id quod ^edium est, tum primum sit, tum postremum*
postrema ver^ and prima media ^iunt Cic in Tim^^.
(...). What should one speak of the goodly Eutaxie of the Hours, how like
maidens dancing in a round very handsomely and curiously they succeed one
another, and by little and little, and without any stir in the world, the
inmost convey themselves uttermost, the foremost hindermost and middlemost, do
all shift places one with another, and yet for all this do never stand still,
but do still stand in their just distances, Et positae spatijs aequalibus
horae Ovid. Met. l. 2. fab. 1.
. Here that may be assumed, Romans 10. 15.
How beautiful are the feet of the^ which bring glad tidings? etc. How
beautiful, (...), how hower-like? And then are they fair and beautiful
indeed. The same in effect has Theodoret upon my Text in these words
(according to the Latin Translation) Cum nox atque dies ad hominum vtilitatem
crescant, atque decrescant, cumque a se invicem tempus mutuentur and rursus
debitum sibi vltro ^itroque reddant, providentiam, quae ipsis inest, ostendunt.
The Day and Night, so, as we see, growing longer and shorter, increasing and
decreasing; borrowing time one of another, and again duly repaying one another
what they borrowed, and all this too for man's behoof, do thereby show the
providence of God which is in them Et sa^e diem and noctem ve^n tisorores
quasdam videre est, que temporis spatia ad bominum vsus invicem mutuant^^ fimul
and benevole reddu^t* etc. Theodoret. de provident. Ser. ^
. This (...), this indissoluble order, This vnceasable interchangeable
unchangeable succession of the Day, and of the Night, GOD has sufficiently
declared unto us, Genesis 8. 22. saying: Hereafter seed time and harvest, and cold
and heat, and Summer and Winter, and Day and Night shall not cease, so long as
the Earth remains. And by his Prophet Jeremy, c. 33. v. 20. calling it there,
his Covenant of the Day and of the Night, that cannot be broken. If you can
break my covenant of the Day, and my covenant of the Night, that there should
not be Day, and Night in their season: Then may my covenant be broken with
David my servant etc. And in the 25th verse, If my covenant be not with Day and
Night, and if I have not appointed the Order of heaven and earth, etc. And P^.
8^. v. 29, 30. My covenant shall stand fast with him. His seed also will I make
to endure for ever: and his throne as the Days of heaven. As the Days of
heaven. And. v. 35. His seat is like as the Sun before me. And. v. 6. He
shall stand fast for evermore as the Moon, and as the faithful witness in
heaven. The faithful witness. This faithful witness, witnesses unto us our
unfaithful witnessing of GODS Glory: This never broken covenant of the Day and
of the Night, teaches us to keep the covenants of the Lord inviolable. One
Day Tells another.

Lastly, if the Days (...), and (...) seem not fair and beautiful enough of
Ordinem seculorum tanqua^ pulcherrimum carmen, etiam ex quibusdam quasi
antithetis bouestaui^ (D.us) and postea^ Si^u^ ergo ^sta co^traria contrariis
opposita sermonts pulchritudinem reddun^: it a qua dam non verbo rum, sed rerum
eloquentia contrariorum oppositione seculi pulchritude compo nitur. Augustia de
civit. Dei. lib 11. cap 18
themselves look we then on the Nights vicinity and vicissitude. For as by the
near adioining Darker Lights, or Windows, which are in the Body of the
Church, the great Chancell-window-Light is more conspicuous: as the Light and
Learning of the Priest, matched with the Ignorance of the people, is in show
more eminent: and as the Raven approaching near with his black opposition,
makes the plumage of the Caystrian Swanne to look more white: So L'
architecte du monde ordonna qu a leur tour


Le iour suiuist la nuict, la nuict suiuist le iour; as that Divine Sallust. in
the first Day of the first week, verse 497, 498. Tenebrarum lucisque varietas,
ipsam lucem nobis iucundiorem magisque gratam reddit. Theedoret de provident
Sermon. 1.
French Poet has sweetly uttered. God, the great Architect of the World; has
appointed the Day and the Night still to follow in their turns one immediately
after the other: to add so much the greater grace and luster to the clear
brightness of the Day, by being so nearly followed by the dark shadow of the
Night. So, Beloved, if we look upon the foul inconveniences of (...) and
(...): (confuse disorder: and unruly vntemperatnes) we shall find the Days
(...), and (...) to be more fair and necessary marks of our imitation;
especially if S. Paul stand by, and give aim with, (...). Let all things be
done honestly, 1. Cor. 14 40
with comeliness, with decency, and in order. (...),] ta^ haec quam alia, says
S. Ambrose: as well those things there expressed, as others things whatsoever.
And, and reliqua, quae apud cosdem nulla vel ratione vel ordine geruntur,
castigat, says Athanasius (according to the Latin Translation) The Apostle
there blames not only the things there mentioned, but any thing whatsoever
should be done by the^ against either reason or good order. Then we must take
heed how we walk (...), inordinately, as the same Apostle speaks, 2. These.
3. 6. and that by the example of the Day, which in so Cant. 4. 2. like a flock
in good order.
good order tells another. One Day tells another.

Now to end in the same manner that I begun, with the Manner of the Days
telling one another, and with their Harmony together: I beseech you let it not
be verified of the Day in respect of us, which Clemens (...). in initio. The
Gre^kin alluding to the name of Eunomus, ^^ore eleging then the (...).
Alexandrinus has of the grasshoppers in respect of Eunomus, (...). They sang
unto the All wise God a better song and made him better melody by Or, a ^e
(...) accorded long.
wrought, then did Eunomus withal his skill and modulation. So let not the
Days Harmony being but in such a Manner, being but by wrought, exceed ours,
who learn by the Book too; the word of God: yea and who have the Law of God to
teach us too, The undefiled Law of God, converting the soul: The Testimony
(yea and the Testament) of the Lord, which is sure, and gives wisdom unto the
simple: The Statutes of the Lord, which are right, and rejoice the heart: The
Commandment of the Lord which is pure, and gives light unto the eyes: The
Judgments of the Lord, which are true and righteous altogether. More to be
desired are they then gold, yea then much fine gold: sweeter also then honey and
the honey comb. Moreover [(...)] etiam, over and above (that he is taught by
the Book of Nature, or, the Book of the World) by them is thy servant taught:
and in keeping of them there is great Reward.

Teach us them, and teach us by them, and by the other, O Lord God, which
teach man knowledge; Teach us, O Lord, how to keep them: keep thou that
great Reward for us, which by They keeping of them thou have purchased for us,
O Lord, our Strength, and our Redeemer.

THE DAYS REPORT OF GODS GLORY.
PSALM. 19. VERSH 2. One Day Tells another, or, One Day tells a word unto
another, etc.


Part. 3*
AT the first handling of these words (Right Worshipful and all alike
welbeloved in Christ Jesus) I proposed to your godly considerations 3. general
parts. The first was, the Meaning of the words: The second, the Manner of the
Days speech: The third, the Matter, or, the Subject of their speech. About the
two first were spent the two first Sermons. Now remains, that, by GODS
gracious assistance and your great good patience, the rest be taken up by the
Matter, or the Subject of their speech.

The Subject then, if we take it more properly, is that which we falsely call
the Subject of Logic, even Res Omnes, All Things. Which Logitians, like
Sophisters, mainetaine to be the End of Logique. For then Res Omnes, All
Things, bears with them no other meaning then Res Aliquae, Some Things. For
so they expound their Res Omnes, to be Rerum omnium conceptus qui primi
conceptus, sieve primae notiones appellari solent. And he should be a mad
fellow, that should take the conceits or names of things to be All things, and
so impiously collect, that more living things have been of man's making then of
GODS: because in the second of Genesis man gave the other living things their
names, although GOD gave them their forms, whence they had both to be, and to
be named. And so it will prove in the end, that Res Omnes, All things, are not
Logicks Subject, no not any Thing at all is the Subject thereof: unless
Logic will be content to take things in conceit, or Names instead of
things: as wont it is to be fed with Demonstrations, when as some other carries
away the Effects.

They must then leave Res Omnes, All things, to be the Subject of One Days
speech unto another, the Subject of his Glory, who made All things out of
Nothing, and by working on so barren a Subject, gave each Day as plentiful a
Subject to declare on, as all Things are.

And yet if we take the Subject more improperly, for the End; it is but one
thing, that is here the Subject: even The Glory of GOD, that endless End
wherefore all things are, and do continue. This therefore is no Adequate
Subject; with which neither All things, nor All Reports can match in
Exequation, much less can make any true Exaggeratio^ thereof, but only by a
true Antiphrasis. This Subject also (if we go no farther the^ The Book of the
World, or, The Days Grammar,) is the Only Part, or Parts of Speech, that the
Day has. As it were to teach us, That all the parts of our Speech should be
so declined and undeclined, in respect of Good and Evil, That they should at
no time swerue, or Decline from Gods Glory. This the Grammar of the Scripture
Tells us too; That whatsoever we do we should do all to the Glory of GOD:
And, That Our Speech should be so seasoned, as that it may Minister Grace unto
the Hearers.

And here first I admonish all, who undertake any Matter or Subject to speak,
or to write of, especially the Poets and Critics of these days, to learn
here of the Days, what Matter to treat and to write of. Especially, whereas
they are not ignorant, that God has created every man for his Glory, Isa. 43.
7. And therefore not to employ his wit, or wear out his time otherwise. What a
shame then is it for Christian Poets to choose unto themselves no better
Subjects then they do, the most of them? in so much that it is a shame even to
name those things whereof they write. A great scandal, Beloved, to
Christianity, and a foul eie-sore to those that are without. Happily (to make
the best of it) Iuven. Satyr. 1.
Quicquid agunt homines, votum, timor, ira, voluptas,
Gaudia, discursus, nostri farrago libelli est.
But as for GOD and their Creator, he is as far off from their Matter, as
they are far off from him: who notwithstanding, as Theognis says, is to be
proposed to us in our poetry,

Theogn. v. 3 (...), etc.
(...), First and Last, and between both. And here I cannot but commend unto
you, and to your imitation Saluste Du Bartus, a Poet above the ordinary level
of the world, for the choice of his subject most rare and excellent, and such
as is the Days Subject here in my Text. Or else shall I rather commend unto
you our Prophet David here, who throughout this whole Book of Psalms makes
the praise and glory of GOD to be still the sugar-burden of his song: the
inscription of the whole book being, The (...)
Deciphering of Gods Praises.

But where shall I find a Critic, whom I may commend unto you for the like?
so like are they all unto those, of whom it is said in the Psalm, 78. 33. Their
days did he consume in vanity. They wast their wits, and spend out their whole
life time, many of the^, in vain toys and trifles. A worthy Subject surely to
treat of, whether it ought to be Vergil or Virgil; Carthagin^enses, or
Carthaginenses; Preimus, or Primus; Intellego, or Intelligo: And in that verse
of Invenall Satyr. 11.
,

Qui Laccdaemonium pitysmate lubricat orbem: whether it be to be read
pitysmate, or pygismate, or pitylismate, or pedemate, or poppismate, or
pyreismate, or piteremate. And a thousand such like phluaries* foolish and
unlearned questions, which engender strife, envy, raylings, backbitings, evil
surmisings, vain disputations, and which are unprofitable and vain, as S.
Paul 1. Tim 6. 4. 5 2. Tim 23. Ti^. 3. 9.
speaks: nothing concerning any man, much less a Christian man's life, and as
ill befi^ting his Discourse. Unless they think that GOD has placed them here
in this world for an end so vain and frivolous; and not rather, with the
Prophet David, As long as they live to praise the Lord, and as long as they
have any being to sing praises unto Ps. 146. 1.
our God: yea and always to be talking of his worship, his Glory, his Praise,
and wondrous Works, Psalm. 145. 5. This Glory of GOD to be the Subject of
One Days Speech unto another, This Praise of his to be the price they all
intend and contend for in all their conference, was every where pointed at in
my former Sermons.

One Day tells another. That which One Generation is said to tell another,
yea and which all the works of GOD are said to show and to talk of in the
145. Psalm. Where, v. 4. One Generation shall praise thy works unto another,
and declare thy power. And v. 10, 11, 12. All thy works praise Thee, O Lord
etc. They show the Glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy power. And look
what the Heavens are here said to declare in the first verse of this Psalm,
The Heavens declare the Glory of God: and Psalm. 97. 6. The Heavens have
declared his Righteousness: and what the Firmament is here said to show, (v. 1.)
The Firmament shows his Handy Work: Of that also is it here to be
understood, that One Day Tells another.

So that, what for the infiniteness of GODS Glory (for, who can express the
noble acts of the Lord, or show forth all his praise? Ps. 106. 2. And The Lord
is great and ca^ not worthily be praised. Ps. 96. 4. And, The glorious Name of
God excels above all thanksgiving and praise. Nehe. 9. 5.) And what for the
manifold Works of God (O Lord how manifold are thy Works? Ps. 104. 24. eve^ as
manifold as All Things are;) I find my self in a narrow straight, whilst I
have undertaken unto you more then I can perform. Toi^s (...). as Dionys.
speaks, de Divi. nom c. 2 p. Graec. 267. in fine.
For so it is, that in less the^ an hour, I must tell you (if I should tell
you all) what every Day tells unto every Day, every Hour unto every Hour,
yea every (...), every Moment of time, unto every Moment. According to that
which has been delivered in the explicated Meaning of the words of my Text.
And that were more, then to tell you the many and diverse co^binations Vid.
Clav sup. Joan. de Sacr. Bosc cap. 1 page 34, 35, and 36. Edition, 4.
of each letter of all the Alphabets in the world, with each other letter:
although we should take the same letter as often in the same word, as it is
possible. For more infinite are the Things themselves, the Creatura literarum
inflar per ordinem, and congruentia sua dominum opificemque suum significante
and clamante. Athanas. co^tr. Gentil. fol 216.
letters of the Alphabet of GODS Glory, (among which All Days and Nights too,
like so many Dividuntur Arabum Literae in Solares and Lunares.
Sun and Dividuntur Arabum Literae in Solares and Lunares.
Moone-Letters, must have place) the^ are all the Letters of all the Words of
all the Languages in the world. There is neither speech nor language where
their voice is not heard. Nay there is not any letter of any language in the
world, but makes one of the words of Gods Glory, and many words may be made
of it to that purpose. And well we may recount unto you some one word, or some
of the words, which One Day tells another: but all the words we cannot,
because we know not all the letters of this Alphabet. So that, when I labor to
tell you every thing that One Day tells another, it fares with me, as
sometimes it did, when I thought to have numbered a great flock of fould,
residing upon a great River: whilst I began to tell a great troop that were
risen, there rose up still more and more, even in the telling of them mingling
themselves so thick together, and flying so fast one after another; that, what
with their fast flying, some one way, some another, every way a great cry, my
memory and sight were so distracted, that my whole design was broken of. For
so, so many are the Days, so fast following one upon the other, so diversely
showing forth Gods Glory, so full fraught with the messages thereof, so
abounding still more and more with matter of Gods Glory, even Dum loquimur,
whilst we speak unto you, and whilst they speak one unto another: that it
will be more then we shall be able to do in so short a time, to point at some
two or three of those excellent Reports, whose well appointed infiniteness has
disappointed my farther, yea and well near Qui enim pie infinita persequitur,
and si non contingat aliquando, tamen p^oficiet prodeundo Hilar. de T^init.
lib. 2.
infinite intendment.

First therefore of the Glory of God in General, and then of some excellent
Particulars thereof: both being the matter of the Days Report, and the Subject
one way or other of their Speech.

The Glory of God, is that most absolute paragon of perfection, whereby he is
truly (...), (as Damascen speaks) superperfect, above, and before all
perfection; That Divine Excellency whereby he is superexcellent, eminent, above
al things, yea above Excellency it self, or any name that is named, not in
this World only, but also in that that is to come. Ephesians. 1. 21. That infinite
Sea of Essence, as S. Adv. Eunem. lib. 1.
Basil and De Orth. ^id. lib. 1 cap. 1^.
Damascen call it. Which also Damascen Adv. Imag. Oppug. Orat 1. p. 5.
elsewhere terms (...), a Being beyond all Being, and a more then Divine
Divinity. Again, it is cleped by Ibid. Orat. 3. page 148.
him (...), a Power above all power, as also speaks the Ephesians. 1. 21.
Apostle, (...), far above all power and Might. In a word, His Omnipotent,
Infinite, and Eternal Being.

And this is proved by the enterchangeable putting of God himself, and of his
Glory, for the same. As, Psalm. 108. 5. Set up thy Self, (or, be Thou exalted)
O God, above the Heavens, and thy Glory above all the Earth. But most evidently
by the answer God gave to Moses, Exodus 33. Where when Moses desired to see
Gods Glory: no, says God, Thou can not see my face; for there shall no man
see Me and live. Where we are advertised, that, as to see Gods Glory is to see
God himself, so his Glory can be no moreknowne, then can himself in his own
nature. This Damascen. advers. imag. oppug orat. 3
(...), this natural Glory of God, as others Among who^ Athanasius, in the
place next hereafter cited out of him and Theophilus Antioch. who (lib. 1. ad
Autolyc. c. 1.) says of God, (...) etc. where (...) may as well signify
Inseparable, as Incomprehe^sible.
of the Fathers and the Schoolmen, so also Damascen well saw; and saw also,
that the Naturality thereof makes a maine difference betwixt the Glory of God,
and of other things, of the Creator and the creature, where he Damasc. vbi
supra.
says: Moyos, (...). He only is truly Glorious, as not having his Glory from
any other, (as with us, they say, Honor est in honorante; and Epictetus, in the
first chapter of his Enchiridion, reckons Glory to be (...) in respect of us)
but Himself being the cause and fountain of all Glory and Goodness.

This makes the difference betwixt Gods Glory and others to be as great, as is
betwixt an everlasting fountain and one drop issuing thereout: yea and as is
betwixt the nature of God himself, and the natures of other things.

Now then the Glory of God being in it self such, as cannot perfectly either
be described or descryed by any man living, and such as none but the three
persons of holy As D^mas^. (cap. 1. lib 1. orth. ^^d.) Basil. (advers. Eun^^.
lib 1) Dionys. Areopagi^ etc do maintain.
Trinity know what it is: (He dwelling in the Light that none can attain unto.
1. Tim. 6. 16. And it being in it self so true which Zophar speaks, Job. 11.
7. Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty: to
his perfection? And that too of Elihu, Job. 37. 23. The Almighty: we cannot
find him out.) We may not think that the Glory of GOD is Totally, or
Integrally declared by the Heavens and the Firmament, or that One Day tells
All This Glory unto another. For that were rather to deifie the Days, the
Heavens, and the Firmament, Then the Deity to be by them declared to be
glorious.

Therefore as Moses was permitted to see but parts, and that the back parts
too, of Gods Glory: so there is no creature, no not all the creatures in the
world, that can declare more then part or parts of Gods Glory.

This here the Prophet David intimates unto us. Who, when he had said, (verse.
1.) The Heavens declare the Glory of God, for as much as he meant not the whole
complete Glory of God, and for farther explication, he afterward insisteth on
some particulars thereof, saying: The Firmament shows his Handy work. One Day
tells a word unto another; And, One Night Knowledge unto another, etc.

So the holy Spirit of God abundantly in the Scriptures speaking of Gods Glory,
for our better apprehe^sion thereof, and to apply himself to our capacities,
uses to descend from the Glory of God in General, or the naming thereof, to
the setting forth and describing of it by some Particulars; such as are
accounted among men (through the shallow reach of our understanding and
judgment) equivalent Synonymaes with Glory.

So the Glory of God is in the Scriptures explicated and varied by the names of
Majesty, Kingdom, Excellency, a Glorious Name, Righteousness, Mercy, Truth,
Greatness, Power, Praise, Beauty, Light, and such like. Yea and sometimes too,
by Gay Apparel, and Excellent Attire. For in such things also are me^ wont to
place Glory. Hence says the Scripture, Psalm. 104 2.
He has put on Glorious Apparel. And, V. 1.
He is become exceeding Glorious, he is clothed with Majesty and Glory. And
Job. 40. 5.
He decked himself with Majesty and Excellency, and arayeth himself with
Beauty and Glory. And, Psalm. 66. 2.
Sing forth the Glory of his Name: make his Praise Glorious. And, Psalm. 145 5.
I will meditate of the Beauty of thy Glorious Majesty. And, 1. Cor. 16. 27
Praise and Glory are before him: Power and Beauty are in his place. And, as
before ye heard, They show the Glory of thy Psalm. 145. 11.
Kingdom, and talk of thy Power. And, as before also was alleged, Psalm. 97, 6
The heavens have declared his Righteousness. And, Deuteronomy 5. 24.
Behold the Lord our God has showed us his Glory and his Greatness. And, Psalm.
57, 11.
The Greatness of thy Mercy reaches unto the heavens, and thy Truth unto the
Clouds.

So is it still but by some excellent Particulars of Gods Glory, that he gives
us some taste of that whole, whose Half is more then the whole worlds Glory:
yea, whose least title is more, then all the highest Titles in the world can
style sufficiently. Were it possible for us at once to comprehend, what ever
thereof ever any Day or Night has uttered: yet still might we say unto GOD,
like to that that the Queen of Saba said unto Solomon. 1. King. 10. The one
half was not told us. For thou have more Glory, more Wisdom, and Prosperity,
then we have heard by Report. Yea, and yet so as has been said, to wit partly
and particularly, is the Glory of GOD as many ways signified unto Man, as any
thing or creature is by the bountifulness of GOD any ways dignified. Tanta
haec formarum varietas, atque numerositas specierum in rebus conditis, quid
nisi quidam sunt radij Deitatis, monstrantes quidem quia vere sit a quo sunt,
non tame^ Quid sit prorsus diffinientes? Itaque de ipso vides, sed non ipsum;
says S. Bernard, in his 31 Sermon upon the Canticles. This so great variety
of Forms, and such a number of Species, or, special kinds of things created,
what else are they but certain rays of the Deity, showing that he truly is,
and that truly it is he from whom they are, yet not defining altogether What
he is? so that of him we see much, yet he himself is not seen of us. For the
Glory of GOD, being of the same nature with Goodness it self, has so diffused
it self, as that it has made all things not only glittering, but Glorious.
Hence he has made every thing beautiful in his time, Ecclesiast. 3. 11. yea
and according to the Riches of his Glory, as the Apostle speaks Ephesians. 3. 16.
,There is not any thing, but has some Glory or other: even Hooker, l. 5. sect*
42. Glory that God has co^ferred on his Creatures. See more thereof afterward.
That, wherein his highest perfection does consist. So 1. Cor. 15. There is a
Glory of the Sun, a Glory of the Moon, and a Glory of the Stars; So there
is a Glory not only of the heavenly, but even of the earthly Bodies. According
to the several and different degrees of the divine similitude and perfection,
which GOD vouchsafes to communicate to all his creatures.

For although the Glory of GOD be in it self such as has been said, or rather
such as cannot be said what it is: yet so exceeding bou^tifullly has God dealt
with us, as that (...) Damascen. vbi. infra. Non invidit nobis invisibilem
naturam suam D^us, ne quis id possit obtendere, aut se ab hominibus omnino
demisit incognitum Verum, vt predixi, creaturam ita disposuit, vt etsi ipse in
sua natura videri non possit, ex operibus tamen possit agnos^i. Athan. advers.
Gentil. fol. 216.
, He has not left us altogether ignorant of his glory: But that by the Glory
that we see caused by him in all things else, as it were by his back parts,
or, footsteps, we may so far judge of his invisible and inestimable great
Glory, as is fit and expedient for us to be informed therein, and as is
agreeable to our capacities. (...), says Damascen. GOD has manifested unto De
orthod. fid. lib. 1. cap. 1.
us the knowledge of himself, as far forth as we were able to comprehend
him. And, Ib. paulo post.
(...). That which was expedient and profitable for us to know, he has
revealed; but has concealed that, which we were not able to endure. So whilst
we cannot look directly into the bright body of the Sun, for the dazeling
luster thereof: yet illustratos claritate illius montes videamus, as S. Gregory
Homil. 30, de diverse. lect. Evangel.
speaks, and S. Super Cantic. sermon. 31. where he says. Neque hoc luminare
magnum (folem l^quor istum que^ quotidie vides) vidisti tamen aliquando sicut
est. sed tantum sicut illuminat, verbi causa aere mentem, pariete^ etc.
Bernard has the like: We may with ease see how the Sun shines upon the
hills. whilst we cannot see GODS glory and live, such is the insuperable and
insufferable force thereof yet may we behold things inferior unto him (and so
are all things) be beamed with the brightness of his glory.

Not but that he could have made Them too, too hard for us to look upon: (a
taste whereof we have in the shining face of Moses, as also in the surface of
the brightest bodies) But in his goodness he would not; That so he might the
more communicate his goodness unto man, by imparting so much the more, and
more ready knowledge of the innumerable parts of that glory, which surpasses
knowledge.

Hence has our good GOD provided us of that Book I told you of in the
beginning, then termed The Book of the World: but now is it become The Book
of GODS glory too. A Book of golden Hos. 12 10. It is reckoned amongst the
benefits, and loving kindnesses of God toward his people, that in speaking
unto the^ he used Similitudes.
Similitudes of GODS glory, yea and a Book gloriously garnished with the Images
thereof. According as every thing approaches more or less to the highest
perfection; Some bearing the very Image thereof: but every thing some way or
other resembling it, and bearing likeness, if not liking thereunto. (...),
says Damascen De Orth. fid. lib. 1. cap. 19. And Bonum Common Summum ac
verissimum Deus est. Aug. Ep st. 3.
.

And here we may observe, that which Moller has well noted on my Text and the
verse aforegoing (Athanasius also saying, In Fragme^t. Images Beproued.
that David in this Psalm (...), reprehendeth those that worship the creature
above, or besides ((...), besides) the Creator) we may, I say, observe, how
vain and foolish their superstition is, who must needs forsooth have Images,
to put them in mind of GOD (for that is their Achilles for the defense of them)
when as GOD has for the same purpose set before us, and exhibited to our view
and due consideration, the Heavens and the Firmament, the Day and the Night,
yea and the whole state of things created; that by the ensignements of them,
and by such goodly monuments, we should be admonished of the Creatours most
excellent glory, and most glorious Excellency.

Where neither is there a Noma^clator wanting unto us. The names, the natures,
the offices of all things; their hid properties, their proper virtues, their
virtuous endowments are all discovered unto us, by the continual Report that
One Day unto another, and every Day unto us, makes of them. Every Day and
Night, like so many Bedils, still atte^ding us for the same purpose, and to
tell us: Such, and such are the badges, Such and such the traces of his glory:
There Is his Aeternitie, There Is his Power, There Is his wisdom, There Is his
Goodness, There Is his Truth, There Is his Justice, There Is his Providence,
There Is his Mercy to be seen. And so alike of all the Glorious attributes of
GOD; according as Calvin super Rom 1.
and Zanchius Compend. lico primo de Dco. p. 22. and inde.
do well agree, That Speculum creaturarum patefacit singulas Dei virtutes, The
Book, or Mirror of the world, or of GODS Creatures, discloseth unto us all
the proper Attributes of GODS Glory.

So that what ever of these it be that they shall pretend to be put in mind of
by their Images: they are more, and better put in mind of the^ by all the
works and creatures of God. Yea (...), (Romans 1.) That which may be known, or,
That which is lawful and expedient (...). lib. de Mundo.
to be known concerning God, is manifest in them. For the invisible things of
him are seen by the Creation of the World, they being considered, or,
understood by his Works. By his works. And so by Similitudes and Images of
Gods own making, Gods own warranting, Gods own appointing for that purpose:
for which they would have pictures and Images of man's making to serve, yea and
of man's maintaining too, against the express prohibition of God himself.

Unless they will fly to that miserable shift and base trick of begging the
question in Logique, to have the felling down of the Second Commandment
handsmooth to be granted them: A thing as much as any thing else to be stood on
by us, till such time as they shall have proved their Church to be of that
nature of freehold. For otherwise, they fall upon the dint of that Commandment
so much the more by their Images, because they say they have them to put them
in mind of God. For the having of other things enough besides, to do that; is
a reason, why we should not make Images for that purpose. For to transgress
Gods Commandment lightly and needlessly, is not a lighter sin, then to do it
upon some kind of Necessity.

And that we have other things enough besides to put us in mind of God, this
19. Psalm is sufficient to prove unto us. In the last verse whereof, we have
The Redemption of the world, chiefly to remember us of God, and of his Glory.
In the verses going before that, unto the sixth verse, we have the Statutes and
Commandments of God, doing the same also: in that they Verse. 7.
convert the soul, Verse. 7.
give wisdom unto the simple, Verse. 8.
rejoice the heart, Verse. 8.
give light unto the eyes; and by them is Gods servant taught. And that
Commandment it self, which forbids Images, as also four other of the
first, together with the Preface, make such often mention of God, and of the
Lord, as if God had thereby purposely anticipated that Reason of the Papists,
heretofore of the heathen; by telling them, that that so often mentioning of
his name, and those his Commandments so pure, so sure, and so sweet (as here
the Prophet David calls them) must needs put them still in mind of God, if
they regarded those his Commandments, but so much as to remember them.

Thirdly, we have all The works of God whatsoever, Qui^quidagit: Which
Genebrard too understands by the Judgments of the Lord, in the 9. verse: but
must needs be included within that, which is in this second verse, One Day
tells another.

Fourthly and lastly, we have all those Resemblances of the Creator, wherewith
God, that is 1. Cor. 15. 28
all in all, deigneth to dignifie all and every of his Creatures.

Which is reason sufficient, why we should not make any graven Image, or the
likeness of any thing to put us in mind of God: especially those being unto
us such bad Remembrancers of God, when they so ill resemble him: (The Godhead
being not like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by art and the invention
of man, as S. Paul said, in the seaventeenth of the Verse. 29.
Acts.) And whereas otherwise we have even all the Works and Creatures of God,
better Remembra^cers of God; in as much as they are all better resemblers of
his Glory. There being not one of them all, but (as before was begun to be
declared) some way or other does resemble him.

Omnis Creatura reprasentat eu^ qui est Trinitas, says Tom. 1. page 14. Col. 2.
Bonaventure, every Creature resembles, yea, represe^teth God. And, Saptentia
suam similitudinem diffundit vsque ad vltima rerum, says Thomas Sum. part. 1.
quaest. 9. art. 1.
Aquinas. God, who is wisdom it self, diffuseth the similitude of himself
even to the lowest, the least, and last of all things. And, as Zanchius De
Operib. Dei part. 3. li. 3. cap. 1.
says, Nulla quidem res est, quae non aliquam cum Deo similitudinem habeat:
quia omnis effectus similitudinem aliquam habeat cum sua causa necesse est. Ita
fit vt nihil sit in mundo, in quo non aliquod Dei, divinaeque bonitatis
vestigium impressum conspiciatur. There is no one thing, but is somewhat like
unto God: for that every Effect must needs be somewhat like his Cause. Hence it
is, that there is nothing in the world, in which appears not some print of
Gods beautiful footing, and some impression of his goodness. And Hier.
Savonarol. de triumph. Crucis. l. 1. c. 10.
another says, Dei Essentia omnium aliorum ab ipso similitudinem continet.
And, Ibid.
Propria vniuscuiusque natura consistit, prout aliquo modo diuinae perfectionis
est particeps. The Essence of God contains the Similitude of al things else.
And, The proper nature of every thing consists in some way participating the
divine perfection. And again, Lib. 2. cap. 4.
Nihil est in vllo effectu, quin excellentius in prima causa inveniatur: There
is nothing in any Effect, which is not to be found after a more excellent
manner in the first Cause of all, that is, in God^ who as the Cl^ch^oveus in
comment, in 4. cap. lib. ^. Damascen. de fid. Ort^odox. et The. Aquin. sum.
part. 1.
Schoolmen well mainetaine, Rerum omnium perfectiones supereminenter in se
complectitur, In a sort more then eminent compriseth the perfections of all
sorts of things; (...)


(...), Cropping the top of every virtues flower: to apply that of Olymp. Od. 1.
Pindarus more rightly unto the worlds Creator, in as much as he is a higher
king then Of whom was said that of Pindarus.
Hiero.

And hereupon have the Schoolmen built their two fold Whereof see, Damascen.
Orthod. sid. li 1. cap. 4. and commentator. ibid. and Dionysium de Mist. Theol.
cap 1, 3, 4, and 5. and Car^lum Bovillum, de Nibilo, cap. 11.
Divinity, (or, Theology) Affirmative and Negative. By the former whereof, they
attribute the perfection of every thing unto God: Again by the latter, which
is the Negative, they in some sort thwart and cross the Affirmative, showing
some obliquity therein; But so as Anaximander Milesius, showing the obliquity
of the Zodiac, is therefore said By C. Plinius lib. 2. cap S.
Rerumfores aperuisse. For certainly this Negative Divinity (which else is
called Divine Ignorance) opens yet wider unto us the knowledge of Gods glory
by his works. All whose perfection, though by Divine Assertion it belongs
unto God: yet is he by the Negative Divinity none of all their perfections, no
not the perfectest of them all. (...), says Lib. 1. Orth. fid. cap. 4. And
Dyonys. (de caelbierarch. cap. 2) says: Excedit illa Divina Maiestas
subst^tiam omnem, vitamque transcendit: Nulla hanc exprim^t lux, omnisque
sermo, omnis men^, ^tque ratio, absque vlla comparatione, illius simil^tudine
inserior est. and cap. primo de div. nom^ although he affirm, Deum omnia es^e
quae sunt, rerumque omnium zominibus posse nuncupari: quod nibil sit in rerum
natura subsistens, quod non habeat a^ quod summae divinitatis vestigium, vnde
illius nomen D^o possit vite and pie accommodari: yet he says also* Deum nibil
esse eorum quae sunt; quod supra omnia est, and omnia e^uperat: proinde nomen
omne recusat, quia transcendit vnivers^ quae nominari possant.
Damascen. God is not any thing at all: not because he is not at all, but
because he is above all, even such a Transcendent, whose being is above all
being, according to that which formerly has been declared. Hence too, the
Negative Theology is by them and by the Fathers reckoned the By D^mascen (vbi
supra) and his Commentators by Dionysius (de caeles. hi^r. cap. 2. and in lib.
de Mist. Theolog. p. 336) by Carolus Bovillus (de Nihilo cap. 11. iuxta fine^^)
and by others: Nazianzen, Cyprian, etc.
truest and the surest; Excellent and Superexcellent Negations, taken from
things visible and within our reach, most fitly, truly, and illustriously
bowing and rebounding to the praise of GODS perfection, and raising in our Deus
per Abnegationem multisormiter in Scripturis discribitur and nominatur. Barth,
de Rerum proprictat l. 1. c 5.
view the sparkles, and the spangles of his Glory; The Glory of the Creator
being declared by his surmou^ting his Creatures in the fairest of their Glory,
and at the highest pitch of their perfection: they, with their then going
down, lifting up the balance of GODS praise for perfect Beauty and Glory.

To instance in the Day. (...), says Clemens Alexandrinus, by occasion of the
words of my Text: The Lord himself is many times called Day. And in another
place ((...)) he gives a reason why the Word, or, Son of God is called Day,
saying: (...). He is the Word that gives light unto things hidden and in
obscurity, and by whom every creature was brought unto light and being. and
so is he called Day. And it is a good rule of Dionysius, (de Divin. Nom. cap.
10.) yielding also another reason hereof: (...). God is so to be called Time,
and Day, and Aeternitie, and such like, as is agreeable and befitting unto God,
as not being mutable or moveable with any motion, and in his continual Of
Moving, or Motion in God: see Damasc. de Orth. fid. lib. 1. c. 10, 21, and 4.
And his Commentator. And Th. Aquin. Sum. part. 1. quaest. 9. artic. 1.
working abiding always in himself the selfsame (...), est Varennio, secum,
ipse solus: sed Posselius, (...) (in Vlpia in 2. Olyn.) vertit, in eodem statu
permanere (...) (in Justin. Martyr. pro Christian. a, polog. 2.) redditur, In
statu and condition sua. vid. Wis. 7. 27.
, and as being the Cause and Author of Days, of Time, and of Aeternitie. For
which cause, (says Dionysius immediately before) as also for that he is indeed
the Time and Eternity of all things (in regard of the purity of their
perfection) and because of his being before all Days, all Time, and all
Eternity: God is in the seave^th of Daniel called the Ancient of Days. The
Ancient of Dayes] a Vide Iunium.
(...) of the Aeternitie of God. And Figura haec sieri debet out ornandae rei
causa quae pulchra est, out vitande, quae turpis est.
therefore the Days made choice of to Adorn and set forth the Eternity of
God.

And herein appears greatly the Glory of GOD; The Day it self being so full
of Beauty and Perfection. Which as heretofore Sermon. 2.
it has been showed, so has it always been acknowledged by man. This was not
very obscurely intimated by Job, who (Job. 42. 14.) called the first of those
three fair daughters of his, Iemimah, that is, Day Ita vule* Edit. ita Lebcus
in Onomastico, in verbo Diem.
: it may be too,

-- quarum quae long pulcherrima. Neither was it vnacknowledged by the
Heathen; that which was collected by them, as otherwise, so also by that goodly
order, heretofore Sermon. 2.
Sermon. 2.
specified, of the Day and Night continually succeeding one the other. Hence,
for their Beauty and Comeliness, have they also likened the^ rather unto
women then to men. As appears by the propounding and expounding too of that
Riddle in the life of Aesop, where it is said: (...). The Day and Night two
women, enterchangeably succeeding one another.

And yet for all this, That the Day is so Fair and Beautiful in the eyes of
the whole world: he that made the whole world must needs be fairer. And that
so infinitely beyond comparison: as that the Day it self is no Day, but Night,
in this respect: yea and that GOD himself is no Day, but infinitely above all
Days perfections, and therefore a more excellent kind of Day. As also what
ever else it be, that the Day or any other of GODS creatures declares to be
in God, it declares it to be in him after a more excellent manner.

Psalm. 89. 30. His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as
the Days of heaven. Where the Days resemblance of Eternity, argues the true
Eternity of God; yet so, as that he is not so, but more then so Eternal. Non
eius aeternitatis est hic M^ndus, cuius aeternitatis est Deus: Mundum quippe
fecit Deus, and sic cum ipsa creatura quam Deus fecit, tempora esse coeperunt.
Et ideo dicuntur tempora aeterna, non tamen sic sunt aeterna tempora quomodo
aeterna, est Deus: quia Deus est ante tempora, quia fabricator est temporu^,
says S. Austin in his first book against the Manichees, the second Chapt. And
he seems to have taken it out of Dionysius in the place cited; where Where
he says: (...). (where, (...) Coaeterna, perionius re^dreth, eiusdem
eternitatis) and a little after, (...), etc.
the same in Greek is to be found. the English of both is this: This world is
not of the same Eternity with God. For God made the World, and Time took his
beginning with that which God created in the beginning. And therefore though
time may in some sort be said to be Eternal: yet is it not so Eternal, as is
God: for that God is before all Time, in as much as he is the maker thereof.
And upon the 9. Psalm says S. Austin, Quid est seculum seculi, nisi cuius
effigiem tanquam vmbram habet hoc seculum? Vicissitudine enim temporum sibi
succedentium, etc: aeternitatis quaedam imitatio est. What is [world without
end] says he, but that which this world has some shadow, or resemblance of?
For in the continual vicissitude of times succeeding one the other, there is a
certain Imitation of Eternity. And that it is another manner of Eternity which
is in God, then that which is in the Days, the World, or Times of the World;
and that this Eternity is but a counterfeit, and indeed none at all, in respect
of that: is manifest by Eternal Duration: in which (as it is in the Additions
on the 89. Psalm) Omnes Dies sunt And, as Seneca has of (...) Aeternus;
(epist. 102. iuxta finem) Aequaliter sple^det omen Coeli latus, Dies and Nox,
aeris infimi vices suat.
simul, nec sibi invicem succedunt. All Days are at once, and do not one
succeed the other; as they they do with us here in this world. And therefore
no marveile, if with God One Day (as S. Peter 2. Pet. 3. 8. and, vid. Eccl. 18
10.
says) be as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one Day; with whom
all Days and times are all together and all alike present. And therefore he
only truly has Eternity.

And as it is of the Eternity of the Days; so is it of all other the Days
Resemblances of their makers Glory. Among the rest, the Light of the Day, is no
light argument, how that God is infinitely a purer kind of Light, and as far
surpasses the Day-Lights absolutest perfection: perfection? yea rather
imperfection, if we compare it with the superperfectnesse of the Creator.

This, and this use of setting forth Gods Glory, by truly extenuating the Day
and Lights perfection in their highest elevation, is pointed out unto us in the
7. of Sap 7. 29. 30
Wisdom: where it is said of the Wisdom of God: She is more beautiful then
the sun, and is above all the order of the stars, and the Light (or, the
Day, as God called the Light Genesis 1. 5.
Day:) is not to be compared unto her. For Night comes upon it, but
Wickedness cannot overcome Wisdom. The Daylight, for all his rare
perfection, yet must needs endure his dark opposite, the Night, his obscurest
adversary, to come over it, yea and for the time to overcome it; But the Light
of Gods Wisdom has no enemy (no not the Ephesians 6 12.
Prince or Luke 22. 53. Col. 1. 13.
power of Darkness) able to overcome it, no nor to come over it. And therefore
the brightest Daylight is indeed no Day nor Light, but Night and Darkness it
self, in comparison of God himself; To whom Darkness and Light are both alike
(Psalm. 139. 11.) Who is the True Ioh. 1 9.
Light, the Everlasting Wisd. 7. 26. and Isai. 60, 19, 20.
Light, (...), the Light of Ioh. 8. 12.
Life, the Light in which is no 1, Ioh. 1. 5.
Darkness, the Light which has no Intercourse, or Fellowship with 2. Cor. 6.
14.
Darkness, The Light that caused the Light to shine out of 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Darkness, the Light that shines In the Ioh. 1. 5.
Darkness.

Quid tibi videbitur Divina Lux, cum illam suo loco videris? Seneca, vbi supra.
Thou that so much admirest the Light of this World, what then, think thou,
Will thou think of that Light of God in Heaven, when thou shall see it There
in his Brightest Glory: or, shall there See God As He Is, as S. John speaks.
(1. Ioh. 3. 2.) In Thy Light shall we see Light, says he: (Psalm. 56. 9.) God
send us that Light of Heaven.

Now here to declare the Glory of God, but so as unto the World it is declared;
we had need summon together All Things with their Perfections. But because the
summons would so be longer in sending forth, the^ I may be in speaking unto you
at this time: we will now content our selves with those and their perfections,
who are present already; and therefore need not to be warned to make their
appearance, but that their appearance be in their own likeness; such as their
Creator has allowed and allotted them, in making them after His own likeness:
And they are, The Days here in my Text, with their Perfections; And you, Men,
Fathers, and Brethren, who are all the children of the 1 Thessalonians 5. 5.
Day, with all your Excellencies.

(...), says Aristotle, in his 7th book of Physics, and the 4. Chapter; The
proper virtue of a thing is his perfection. And the Virtue of each thing is, to
do that passingly well, for which by the maker thereof it was ordained and
appointed. So the Virtue of all the Works of God is to serve excellently well
to that purpose, to which God has deseigned them. That they may do (as Elihu
Job 37. 12.
speaks) Whatsoever he commands them upon the whole World.

This is otherwise termed their Beauty, their Rational, or Intellectual
Fairness. So says Simon de Lib. 4. cap. 1.
Cassia very excellently: Quam pulchritudinem quaelibet creatura singulatim
atque coniunctim habere potest in ordine vniversi, quam vt id agat quod sibi
praeceptum atque impositum est, and illum obtineat finem ad quem ordinata est?
etc: What other Beauty or Comeliness, in a so well ordered World, either jointly
or severally can Gods creatures have, Then to do that which is enjoined and
commanded them, and to attain and retain still that end, whereunto they were
ordained?

So is every Tree at his fairest, when it brings forth such fruit, as the
first and Naturating Nature has naturally ingraffed in it, according to his
kind. So there is no greater fairness of the Eye, then sight* of the Ear,
then hearing: of the Nose, then smelling: These being the Ends whereunto nature
has advanced the^. So the Days are then at their fairest, when they serve
man's turn to work and labor in. For hereunto has God ordained them:
according to that, Psalm. 104 23,
Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor until the evening: And, Ioh.
11. 9.
Are there not twelve hours of the Day? And, Mat. 6. 34.
Sufficient for the Day is the travail thereof. Instigatque animos opera ad
mayor a calentes, Exacuens varijs mortalia pectora curis; as S. Vbi infra. vid.
etiam The: odoret. de Diis and Angel. circa initium.
Hilary says of the Day. Sol aut oriens diem promit ad laborem, aut occidens
noctem superinducit ad requicm. Lactant. de Ira Dei. cap. 13.
And then too are the Days in their perfection, when by their Lightsomnesse
they not only further men's actions, but set forth also all visible perfections;
so far forth, as that God called the Light Gen 15.
Day. The Light, which O^thod. fid. lib. 2 cap 7.
Damascen calls (...), etc: The Beauty and ornament of all things visible.
And yet, God called the Light Day; yea and S. Carm. in Genesim. and look back
upon the reason given by Clem. Alex. why Christ is called Day.
Hilary says as much of the Day:

-- Dies varia rerum discriminat ora,
Et dat cuique suum disiecta nocte colorem, etc.
So that it is one of the Days as well as of the Lights perfections, to make
the Beauty of other things appear.

This, and all this, makes the Nature of the Day to be so hard a thing for us
to define: A thing attempted indeed by many; yet never (for ought I know)
attained unto by any. And no marveile. For if the true differences of all
things be of so hard inquiry, as that that difference, whereof we think our
selves most sure, has suffered some doubt: (good Eaurentius Valla, Franciscus
Vallesius, etc.
Philosophers maintaining other creatures besides man to be reasonable, and S.
Basil defending against Lib. 1. p. 237.
Eunomius, the nature of the Earth to be unknown) what then may we think of
the true difference of so pure a creature as the Light, or the Day?

And this again argues, how much more his own nature and perfection is beyond
our reach, who has made the Day and the Light such, as surmounteth the height
of humane wit and understanding.

Nor is it the Light visible only, which the Day according to his beauty and
perfection utters. Dicitur namque tempus facere id quod fit in tempore; says
Dionysius Carthusianus on my Text. The Time or the Day is said to do that,
which is done in Time, or in the Day. Hereof are examples in Scripture As,
proverb. 27. 1. thou know not what a Day may bring forth.
; and herehence is that Inscription of the Book of Chronicles, Latined Verba
Dierum. And, Cum Doctorum officio tam probe fungantur dies ac noctes, as Calvin
says on my Text: The Days and Nights being unto us such good Teachers and
Instructers: Therefore it is the Light of knowledge also which the Day utters:
knowledge of GOD by all his works. All his works, whether of Creation,
Conservation, Judgment, Grace, or whatsoever they be: even as many as he would
have known unto man. For he works great things which we know not, Job. 37.
5. And Psalm. 77. 19. his footsteps are not known. And, Ecclesiast. 16. 21. The
most part of his works are hid.

And yet how infinite are those works of GOD, which are made known unto man,
and that by means of the Days revealing and relating the same one unto
another. That which GOD has also ordained the Days for, to be men's
instructers and informers, by their comparing the events of one Day, with the
accidents of another; according to that Psalm. 89. 12. Teach us so to number
our Days, that we way apply our hearts unto wisdom. And Psalm. 78. 5. I have
considered the Days of old: and the years that are past. And Hag. 2. 16, 19.
Consider in your minds from this Day, and before etc. And, Deuteronomy. 4. at the 32.
verse, Inquire now of the Days that are past, which were before thee, since
the Day that God created man upon the earth; and ask from the one end of
heaven unto the other, if there came to pass such a great thing as this, or
whether any such like thing has been heard.

These, and all other the Days beautiful virtues and perfections (of which
there are more in my former discourses to be seen) how still they are
preserved, how at this Day, and from time to time continually, they are
retained and maintained by them, is by the Prophet David witnessed, where he
says: Psalm. 119. 91. Lamed. 3.
They continue this Day according to thine ordinance: for all things serve thee.
And, Psalm. 104. 19. He appointed the Moon for certain seasons: and the Sun
knows his going down. Numquid vlla in ipso est Sole praevaricatio? etc.
(says S. Ambrose upon the 18. Psalm) Sol diem illuminat, tempora statuta
custodiens etc. manet ipsa immutabilis demutatio, and conversio vertere ordinem
suum nescit, vna omnium obedientia, etc. Is there any prevarication in the Sun:
it never fails to enlighten the Day, keeping his appointed times: and both
Sun and Day, and all, are in their enter changeableness unchangeable: They
keep their turns without turning out of order, and hold on their conversions,
without being inverted or perverted: They all per form one uniform obedience.
And, S. Chrysostom on the first chap to the Romans, says: (...); Have ye
not seen the goodly orders of the Day, and of the Night, how they abide the
same continually? And, Ecclesiastic. 16. 27. They (The Day and the Night) cease
not from their offices Et vide Bern. in sermon. de St. Andrea, fol. 134 vbi ita
ait: Dele* igitur quia creatorem offendisti, cuius legem coelestia and
terrestria praeter te indefessa statione conservant, etc.
.

Which had it not heretofore In my second Sermon,
sufficiently been proved, or were it any ways to be doubted of: yet Daily
Experience (Quae nunc pro Domino, which now speaks in the Days own case)
makes it a case more then evident. For behold one perfection of the Day
instead of all: even that last before mentioned, of incessantly enlightening
man's heart and understanding, with the knowledge of GOD by all his works.
Which because they are infinite, we must insist in some particulars; The Earl
of Salisbury, in his Answer to certain scandalous papers, page 3.
in which God, as in his means, is especially seen of us: to wit, in those
great works of deliverances, and defenses, which he provideth for whole
Nations, and people against public and private practices: as a great Statesman
of our times, though Temporal, yet Spiritually has written.

Pertinent hereunto are all the wondrous works of GOD, which he wrought for and
amongst his people of Israel. In respect whereof, not only were those things
spoken, His name is Great in Israel, He has done Great Things for us, He has
not dealt so with any Nation, and the like, but undoubtedly these words also
of my Text have by the Prophet David been delivered. Nor so only: but they
have been penned also by the Tongue of that Ready Writer, in regard of All Gods
powerful Works, All his Mercies and Judgments, showed toward, or among
Jews, or Gentiles, even All People and Nations of the world; whether in their
Exaltation, or Depression: according to that which heretofore, in the first
Exposition of my Text, has been declared. Here whole People and Nations, yea
All People and Nations joining with the Jews in that same Infancy related and
dilated, Ezech. 16. thereout to make perfect the praise of Gods Glory; who
gives to Every Nation, and to All People, Their Multiplying, Increasing,
Waxing Great, Rich Clothing, Excellent Ornaments, The word of Life (v. 6) The
Overspreading of his Love (v. 8. Vid. Cant. 2. 4
) To be His, and His Anointed: to Prosper into a Kingdom, To be Renowned for
Beauty: Beauty, made Perfect through His Comelines, which He puts upon
them, (v. 14.)

See then, Beloved, whether the Days beauty and perfection in revealing and
relating unto us such Beauty and Comeliness of such works of GOD, be e're a
whit abated or diminished: nay whether it be not rather more and more
exquisitely polished and refined.

And for this purpose I will resume that, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. Inquire now of the Days
that are past, which before thee, etc. Inquire, Beloved: were there ever
greater deliverances of any Nation and people, then have been of ours in these
late Days? every Day as it were striving with other, ((...), a happy strife
for England) which of them should be the conveyer unto us of the gladdest
tidings of our greatest deliverance.

By the late Queens Days of famous memory, how diversely were the Days
diapred with Gods admirable Works, in protecting this our country and people?
Her self, (and the whole Realm by her safety) before she began to reign,
strangly preserved, and she reserved by God to be our Queen, and to bring the
people of this land out of dark ignorance and superstition into his
marveilous 1. Pet. 2 9.
light. Afterward* reigning, how often and admirably was she, and the whole
Realm delivered from the raging of their enemies? No sooner a Rebellion, then
easily repressed. No traitorous design, but opportunely discovered, either by
the parties own confession, or otherwise, after a strange sort. No conspiracy,
by divlish association and witchery so strongly compacted, which by the divine
prudence and providence was not by and by confronted and confounded. No
invasion so mightily addressed, which by the powerful goodness of the Almighty
was not soon countermaunded; and the authors thereof mightily distressed,
danted, and endangered by weak Witness the Spaniards great Arma^da in the year
1588.
means. No Plague so contagious and general, which by the mercifulness of God
has not quickly and wonderfully ceased. No dearth so direful, which ere long
by the merciful hand of God has not been eased. No rumor of war; which
was not still from time to time, and in short time, stilled and appeased.

Last of all, The Day of her death, which aforetime had been deemed dreadful
to the whole land, was, by the extraordinary work of Gods wisdom, so
converted into a joyful catastrophe, as that that very Day yielded us
unspeakable matter of magnifying the great Goodness, and loving kindness of
our God. Who against that Day had provided us of a religious, a gracious, The
24 Day of March.
and a learned king: and one, as not without rovall issue, to take away that
former fear: so not then to learn, or unaccustomed to sway a scepter. Him, I
say, had God provided us, yea and preserved also aforehand The 5. Day of August.
for us: that, for the farther good and preservation of this kingdom, he with
his rightful title should succeed the last Queen therein: and that so
peaceably, as that not so much as one sword should be drawn, no nor one Word
uttered or muttered against him; And as he succeeded thus peacebly, so he
should be even a Solomon for peace, making us at peace withal the world: and
at peace too within our selves, by the happy union of both these kingdoms; God
by means of him making Great Britain as a Psalm. 122. 3.
^itie, that is at unity in it self: and making peace within her Walls, and
plentiousnesse within her Psalm: 122. 7.
palaces.

But since the time of his Majesty's reign, a time as yet of small
spaciousnes, (God add thereto the length of many Days and years) how
mightily God has preserved him, and in him this whole Island, is fresh enough
in your memories. You cannot yet forget, unless vee too much forget God, the
deliverance from the treason of Watson, and the rest: The deliverance of us all
from that great Plague, and ceasing it, wherewith in the beginning of his
Majesty's reign God for a short time chastised us. Or, if ye might forget
these so quickly; The 5. Day of November, 1605.
yet shall not that late most hideous and horrible intended Massacre by
gunpowder, the 5. Day of November last, shall not that, I say, continue for
ever in our memories, as if it had been there Written and engrave^ with a pen
of iron, and with the point of a diamond for Ier. 17. 1. and Job. 19. 24.
ever? That so that 5. Day of November may still remember us of the Mercy and
Judgment of the Lord in that Massacre. Mercy, in that it was but intended:
Judgment, in that it might, and was near to have been performed. Which what
do we say, that it was intended? In which the match and powder were almost
already tended which should have blown up at once, and in one instant, the
Kings Majesty, the Queen, Prince, and States of Parliament: where this Island
should have seen the whole body of her inhabitants cut off at one blow: Lucan.
lib. 2.
vnius populum pereuntem tempore mortis: yea and where there should have been
for them all, even in the deliberation of common affairs, Lucan. lib. 7.
Communis -- rogus, ossibus astra Misturus: One common fiery blast, that should
have blown up their bones into the firmament. An attempt, beyond that of
Salmoneus, Virg. Aencid. lib. 6. Civitas autem cum tollitur, deletur,
extinguitur, simile est quodammodo, vt magnis parva conferamus, ac si omnis hic
mundus intereat ac concidat. A^g. li. 22 c. 6. Civit. ex Ci^erone, de Repub.
lib. 3.
Dum flammas Iovis, and sonitus imitatur Olympi.
For here the universal Estate of three kingdoms, (which so many years
together had stood quiet, pleasant and happy; and yet had never before rejoiced
in a condition so happy, plausible, and well governed, as was that whereon it
was at that day with great surety reapposed,) had in a moment of time not been
disturbed only, but utterly dissipated and consumed. In imitation, (for the
Tertull. lib de Baptismo. lib. de coron. milit. and lib. de praescript. adve.
haeret, etc
Divle does counterfaitly imitate and emulate the things of God) in imitatio^, I
say, of that last Day and end of Time, when in the twinkling of an eye,
Lucretius.
Vna Dies dabit exitio, multosque per annos
Sustentata ruet moles and machina Mundi.
Then Deuteronomy. 4 32.
Inquire now of the Days that are past, which were before thee, since the Day
that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one end of heaven unto
the other, if there came to pass such a great thing as this, or whether any
such like thing has been heard. And (if I may be so bold to apply that which
follows too) Verse. 33.
Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of a fire, as
we have heard, and lived? And that in the 36. verse, Out of heaven he made us
hear his voice to instruct us, and upon earth he showed us his great fire, and
we heard his voice out of the midst of the fire. The fire? yea, Beloved, and
such a fire, (that should have been) as never the Israelites heard of. Their
Days can tell ours of such a fire as was never heard of before: and ours
again can requite theirs with the Report of such a fire of gunnepowder, as
heretofore has not been heard of. They lived: so (ever praised be God) do we
too; our King, Queen, Prince, States, and State, and all: and are as yet in
perfect estate. God showed the^ his great fire upon earth; And so in the vaute
he showed us the wood and gunpowder ready for the fire, which he had well near
kindled in his Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
wrath. The voice of God spoke unto them out of the midst of the fire. And so
it did, and does unto us all, by the Days Report, the Report we have heard of
our deliverance, liverance, the 5. Day of November, out of the midst of so
furious a fire. Yea, the voice of GOD speaks unto us, to this whole Land,
this whole united Island, as unto them in the same Chapter, Verse. 9. and 10
Take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, that thou forget not
the things which thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not out of thine
heart, all the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons and thy sons sons.
Forget not the Day, the 5. Day of November, wherein thou were so strangely
delivered, and learn thereby to fear me all the Days that thou shall live
upon the earth. Teach thy children, saying, as it is in Psalm. 118. 24.
the Psalm, This is the Day which the Lord has made; or (as others read) This
is the Day, in the which Lord has made: has made a mighty deliverance for us
his people of this Land: and has made his Glory known to the whole world, by
so, so preserving us that Day.

The like may be said of all the Beauty and Comely ornaments, which God has
bestowed, not on us only, but upon all other nations: To who^ he gives godly
Kings and Queens for Nurses, and such like, as before out of Ezech. for all
which more particularly I refer you to every Days Relation. To which also,
and to the Books that thereof are written, I must for brevitie sake remit you,
touching the manifold Discoveries of new Countries and People, to the
unspeakable Advancement of Gods Glory, and that by One Days telling Another.
whence the Psalter of the Nebiense Bishop has to the words of my Text, and the
verses next following, especially the Where is to be seen, that Columbus
often gave forth; that God had chosen him, to fulfill that Prophecy.
fourth verse, Apponed a long Where is to be seen, that Columbus often gave
forth; that God had chosen him, to fulfill that Prophecy.
Annotation of Columbus his voyage and Discovery of the New World, or West
Indies. And where we also may Observe, concerning many other Countries and
People besides our own, and among them all Virginia; how One Day already
Tells, and shall still Tell more and more GODS Glory (God grant it may) unto
another.

And so much of the Days Beauty and Perfection, to show how thereby they show
forth, and that most excellently, the Glory of GOD. For, Savonarol. triumph.
crut. l. 2. c. 2.
Omnis causa in sui perfectione effectus maxim honoratur. Every Cause is most
of all honored, or glorified, by the Effects perfection. Whence the workemans
cunning is most seen and most commended in an absolute piece of work;
according to that, Ecclesiastic. 9. 19.

And all this is to learn us a good lesson, by the example of the Days, and
other of Gods creatures, to do but as they do in setting forth GODS Glory:
That is, to hold us to our Own Glory, and by that which is our Beauty and
Perfection; to endeavor to demonstrate unto all the world, what a Beautiful
and Perfect Creator We all have. Our best way of Glorifying GOD, being even by
that wherein our chiefest Perfection does consist.

Hence are we by the Scripture so often put in mind of Perfection. Mat. 5. 48.
Ye shall therefore be Perfect etc. Heb. 6. Let us be led on forwards unto
Perfection. Mat. 19. If thou will be Perfect, etc. Luke 6. 40. Whosoever will
be a Perfect disciple etc. Col. 1. 28. That we may present every man Perfect,
etc. Col. 3. 14. Love, which is the bond of Perfectness. Col. 4. That ye may
stand Perfect, etc. 2. Tim. 3. 17. That the man of God may be made Absolute,
being made Perfect. And, ^am 1. 4. That ye may be Perfect.

Now wherein this our Perfection consists, as it is pointed out unto us by
those places of holy Scripture, which suggest unto us our Perfection: so will
it not be unprofitable to unfold.

Savonarol vbi supra cap. 1.
Ipsius Hominis vera perfectio in subijciendo se Deo, and ineo venerando
potissimum consistit. The true Perfection of man himself resideth in man's
submitting himself unto God in due Obedience, and in worshipping of him. In
worshipping of him. And indeed, To worship GOD, what else is it, but Ibid.
To Turn unto God, To call upon him, To subject our selves wholly unto him, To
desire and endeavor to become as like Satis Deum coluit, quisquis imitatus
est, says Sencca, opist. 95.
unto him as is possible, and to be made Perfect by him. Again; there being a
twofold worship of God, External and Internal: and the Outward being ordained
for the Inward, as an handmaide to atte^d it, so the Internal being the
chiefest: It must needs be, that our Chiefest perfection must be included
within the Inward worship of GOD. Interiorem autem verum Dei cultum, dicimus
esse rectitudinem ac perfectionem vitae hominis interioris. And the true inward
worship of God, we call Uprightness and Perfection of life in the inward man.
So The holier a man's life is, the Perfecter is he. Sanctitas vero est
interioris hominis perfectio; qua etiam totus homo perficitur. And Holiness is
the Perfection of the inward man, whereby is made perfect the whole man. And
therefore by Holiness and Perfectnes of life is God best Glorified, and most
syncerely worshipped.

The Reason here of is plain, as in the Perfection of other Creatures. For
this Inward and Chief Perfection standing in Holiness, and in all kind of
Virtue and Godliness shows; that much more Holiness and all kind of
Goodness belongs unto GOD, as a near Attribute, who has attributed so much
thereof unto men, as we see shining in their good life. (...) etc. 1. Pet. 2.
9. That ye may show forth the Virtues of him that called you.

And therefore they come short of most rightly Glorifying GOD by their Chief
Perfection, yea and of the true and entire Worship of GOD; who more regard the
External Service of him, then this his Internal Worship, and their own
Perfection; who care more to come to Church, to hear Sermons, to receive the
Sacraments, and such like: then to keep themselves holy and blameless in life
and conversation, until the Day of the coming of our Lord Jesus. Preferring
therein the mother of pearl before the margarite, the husk before the
Diamond, their own Outward Perfection before their Inward, GODS External
Worship before his Internal, their own slender Glory before GODS, and their
own true and perfect Glory. And as if GOD were a Body and not a Spirit, so
they worship him only, or else chiefly, with Bodily Service, which profitteth
little 1. Tim. 4 8.
, And not alike in Godliness, which is profitable unto all things: and in
Spirit and in Truth, as he requires to be worshipped Ioh. 4. 24.
. For so, by our Internal acts of Purity and Righteousness, we are made more
like unto GOD, and therefore more Perfect, and therefore better setters forth
of GODS Glory, by our nearer resembling of him: then per actus exteriores, by
mere and precisely External acts of Service, which are but dissembling with
GOD.

Dicet aliquis: (says Sup. Ephesians 1. 6.
Athanasius) Est ergo Gloriae cupidus Deus? Nequaquam. Nam nullius Act. 17. 25.
indiga est rei Divinitas: sed vult sane a nobis Gloriam consequi: hoc est, a
nostris rectis operibus, etc. Some man will say: why, is God then desirous of
Glory, as of a thing which he wa^teth? No, See the next Sermon, there where
Austin is alleged on Ps. 39.
says he: The Divinity lacks nothing. (He has Glory enough in himself, as
being the Cause and Fou^tain of all Glory, as before ye heard) But it is his
will to be Glorified by us, that is, by our good Works. According to that,
Mat. 5. 16. (and the like is again, 1. Pet. 2. 12.) That they may see your
good works, and Glorify your Father which is in heaven. And this too, for our
own good, and not Cui nec iustitia creaturae cuius quam est necessaria, Aug*
cp. 106.
for Gods. For, as the Sun has no need of us, but we of him: so God has no
need of our Glorifiyng of him, but we have all need of the Glory of God; of
which we all come so short. Romans 3. 23. and, as Elihu speaks, (Job. 35. 6, 7,
8.) If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? Yea, when thy sins be many,
what do thou unto him? If thou be righteous, what give thou unto Et homil
2. in Joan. (...).
him? or what receives he at thine hand? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou
art: and thy righteousness may profit the son of man. S. Chrysostom upon
that Romans 1. 23, 25. (Where the Apostle tells, how the Gentiles turned, or
changed the Glory, and the Truth of God) says: Super illud, (...) etc.
(...). They wronged the Truth and Glory of God, as much as in them lay. For
indeed, let the^ do their worst, they can not wrong God, who is the Truth;
There being no shadow of turning or alteration with him, and he having in
himself his own peculiar Glory perpetual, and perpetually inviolable. And
the Lily of the Iam. 1.
Fol. 28. ^.
Mass says well, Gloriae Dei nullum est contrarium malum: quia de bono and de
malo resultat Gloria Dei: and de malo inquantum pungit, de bono inquantum
remunerat. There is nothing that can cross or contrary the Glory of God, for
that both good and evil redound to his Glory: the one by his revenging, the
other by his rewarding of it.

Next, let us change the name of Perfection into Beauty: Beauty Rational and
Intellectual, as has been said. Which seeing the Days do for their parts so
precisely maintain, as has been declared: we that are Reasonable and
Intellectual creatures, ought in all reason as curiously to preserve on our
parts: least we prove unlike, not only to God, but even to our selves: and
become more deformed then those creatures, which God has formed void of reason
and of understanding.

For that the Beautifying of our selves, the making of our selves Fair and
Comely, the preserving of our Beauty, the Trimming and Decking of our selves,
is in us too the setting forth of the Glory of our God. Hence is the Church of
Christ, throughout every part thereof, described to be so Fair in the
Canticles, chap. 4. ver. 1. Behold, thou art Fair my Love: behold thou art
Fair. And in the 7. verse, Thou art all Fair my Love. And so Fair in the 45.
Psalm, as that God himself (ver. 12.) has pleasure in her Beauty.

But then we must consider too, Beloved, whereon this fair Beauty stands,
and wherein this Comeliness consists.

And we shall find it to be that, wherein we said consisted our Perfection.
For, Quae mayor hominis pulchritudo, says Simon de Vbi supra.
Cassia, quam vt obediat Deo? Certe dixerim nullam, etc: What greater Beauty
has man, then to obey God? I may well say, none at all. This, Solomon in the
end of Cap. 12. v. 13.
Ecclesiastes witnesses, saying, Fear God and keep his Commandments: this is
every man, that is (says he) for this End is every man created, and by this
does every man atchieue his chiefest comeliness. Consider every man severally,
and ye shall find this to be all his Beauty, to be always in Vid. Sap. 8. 3.
presence of the first and vnmarreable Beauty, and that the created Fairness
should be ever near the uncreated, and the Caused never to be near to leave
his Cause. And, as S. Super Cantic. sermon. 31.
Bernard has, Qui clarior, (claritatibus spiritualibus) ille propinquior: esse
autem clarissimum pervenisse est. etc. The brighter and fairer a man is, (in
Spiritual Beauty and Brightness) the nearer he comes unto God: and to be
Most Fair, is even to be Immortality makes us near unto God. Wis 6. 19
present with God, to see him as he is, that is (says he) to be as he is, and
aliqua dissimilitudine non confundi, and not to be speckled or spotted (as now
we are) with any unlikeness unto GOD.

Thus to be Most Fair, Most Perfect, and Most Glorious, is not for us till
after this life, and that therein first we shall have strived for the positive
and comparatiue degree of Fairness, Perfectness, and Glory.

But alas then for the Days, and such like creatures! This is not at all
competible unto them in the world to come. By how much the more inexcusable
are we, if we suffer the Days so to outrunne us in the Service of GOD, when as
none but we have the Reward proposed unto us. What? shall the Greatest glory
redounde unto us, Beloved, and to none but us? And why then can we endure,
every part of every Day to do nothing else but show forth Gods Glory; whilst
with us Al magna.
Maxima vitae pars elabitur male agentibus, Al maxima.
magna nihil age^tibus, tota aliud agentibus? as Epist. 1.
Seneca speaks; The greatest part of our life is spent in doing evil, a great
part in doing nothing, but all in not doing that that should be do^e, to Gods
Glory, so as all things should be done (1. Cor. 10. 31) -- Forma Dies vitae,
The Day resembles Life, says Carmin. in Genes.
Hilary. I would, Beloved, our life did as well resemble but the Day. Were I but
a Nightingale, could Arriar. Epict. lib. 1. cap. 17.
Epictetus say, I should do the duty of a Nightingale: if a Swan, the duty of a
Swan. But now that I pass them, by being endowed with Reason: reason is, I
should Honor and Glorify God. This indeed is My Duty: this I do, and will
continue to do, not giving over this charge of mine, until I be discharged of
this life. For what can I, nay what ought I to do else, but to extol the Name
of God, and to show forth his Glory. If a Heathen man could say all this: what
then, think you, ought each of us Christians to say, and to do accordingly?
If God had made me a Day, I ought to have done the duty of a Day; if a Night,
the duty of a Night: And that had been, To show forth Gods glory; But now
that he has created me after his own Image, and therefore more lively to
express his Glory, according to that 1. Cor. 11. 7. He is the Image and Glory
of GOD: so making me to excel the Day in more then Reason, yea and, more then
was reason, making me a promise of an Everlasting Crown of Glory, if I would
but for a short season show forth his Glory; reason is, if reason be for any
thing, that I, I more then any thing, should set forth the Praise, the Honor,
and the Glory of my GOD. This indeed is my duty: for this am I most of all
obliged unto GOD: this I do, and doing will do continually, not deserting
this duty of mine, until I shall have paid nature her last duties. For what
can I, nay what ought I to do else, so long as I have any being, but to
glorify GOD the author of my being, and of my well being; beginning it here in
this life, which in the life to come shall be perfited; here longing, and
thither looking for to come, where being Vid. Sap 8. 27.
joined unto GOD, and made like unto him, we must needs enjoy Most Glorious
Felicity; There being, as Plotin says, no felicity, no pleasure, En^e. lib.
1. in initio.
or co^tentment without GOD: who is, as says Iamblichus.
another, Omnis Beatitudinis fastigium, meta, finis: The height of Happiness,
the goal of Glory, and period of Perfection.

To whom this Day and evermore be ascribed all Perfection, Happiness, and
Glory.

THE DAYS REPORT OF GODS GLORY.
PSALM. 19. VERSE 2. One Day Tells another, or, One Day tells a word unto
another, etc.


Part. 4.
HAving in the Subject of the Days Speech already spoken of the Glory of GOD in
General, how it is reported by them: we are now, by the same guidance of our
GOD as before, to descend with the Prophet David, to some excellent Particulars
of GODS Glory uttered by the same Reporters. Like unto those, who, having left
the main Ocean, are now entered into an arm or creek of the Sea nearer home;
or like those, who for a while have been lifted up to see the flame of a great
fire, but afterward let down again, can still behold the Sparkles Vide
Ecclus. 42. 22.
, and no more.

Before, One Day told [The Glory of God] unto another, Now, One Day tells [a
Word] unto another. Illud incertum esse apparet, de quo verbo, and qua Scientia
loquatur hic versus, says Wolfgangus Musculus on this place. It is uncertain
what Word is here meant, that one Day tells another; as also, what Knowledge
one Night is in this verse said to teach another. And he proposes two
Acceptions.

Either that there should be understood The Word of God, by which the Heavens
were made, and The Knowledge of God, whereby they were most cunningly made; or
else, The Word of the Heavens, of the Days, and of the Nights predicating GODS
Glory. And he says, that this latter seems unto him to be simplicior; (the
simpler, or the plainer) yet so, vt dictione Scientiae, quam indicari dicit,
non eam qua nos Deum cognoscimus, sed qua Deus coelos summa sapientia condidit
ac disposuit, intelligamus. That by the Word [Knowledge] which one Night is
said to teach another, we understand not that Knowledge by which we know God:
but that Knowledge, by which God after his most excellent wisdom made and
disposed of the Heavens.

But who sees not, Beloved, that this most excellent knowledge of GOD leads
us to that other, which is, our knowledge of God? as also, that the knowledge
whereby we know GOD, again conducteth us to that knowledge whereby GOD made
the world? Like as when in a Regresse Demonstratiue, we first demonstrate the
Cause by the Effect; and then again the Effect by the Cause. So that it
comes all to one, whether of those two knowledges we there understand.

Again, to propose two meanings of Word, and Knowledge here: and for the
word, Word, to embrace the latter; but for the word, Knowledge, to entertain
the former: (as here Musculus does) what else is it, but indeed to embrace and
entertain both? both? yea, Beloved, and so we may, and must too, accept of a
Word here in my Text in both these senses: unless we will be very extravagant
from a whole stream of Interpreters of best note. And it is the rule of S.
Austin, conf. l. 12. c. 31. Cu^ alius dixerit, hoc sensit quod ego: et ali, Imo
illud quod ego: Relligiosius me arbitror dicere, cur no^ vtrumque potius, si
vtrumque verum est^ and si quid tertium, and si quid quartu^ etc. When one
says, Such a thing is understood by such a place of Scripture: another says,
another thing is thereby understood: I hold it the more religious course for me
to say, and why not rather both, if both be true? yea, if a third, or if a
fourth meaning? And, Ibid. August.
Vnus Deus sacras liter as vera and diversa visuris multorum sensibus
temperavit. God has so tempered the Scriptures, as that he has made them fit
for diverse understandings, so long as they are true. And, in his first book,
de Genes. ad liter. the 18th Chapter: Si qua scripta divina legerimus, quae
possint, salva fide, qua imbuimur, alijs atque alijs parere sententijs, in
nulla earum nos praecipiti affirmatione it a proijciamus etc: If we light upon
any place of Scripture, which may, aagreeably to the analogy of faith, yield
us more interpretations then one: Let us not be headlong in affirming but one,
with excluding of the rest. Yea or, with praeiudicing of the rest: as himself
says afterward of himself, in the 20th Chap. No^ aliquid vnum temere
affirmans cu^ praeiudicio alterius expositionis fortasse melioris, etc. Not
Peremptorily or rashly affirming but one meaning, with prejudice of another
exposition, which happily may be the Vide etiam Fulgent* ad Monim lib. 2 page
113, 114, 117, 118.
better.

Because of all which, Beloved, I intend (God willing) to prosecute the Word,
that here One Day is said to tell another, not only in those two senses last
above mentioned; but in some seeming other, agreeable to wholesome doctrine,
consonant to the circumstances of my Text, and not at all dissenting from, or
preiudicing the most commonly received interpretations; rather keeping my self
to the liberty of the word, then any way either to imprison it, or the riches
of the Observations that arise from it; as one M. Hutton in his Answer to the
Reasons for refusal of Subscription, page 86. and see Bernard. su^er Cani.
sermon. 51. Non sane a prudente de diversitate sensuum indicabor, etc.
of late, as out of S. Austin, has in like case well pronounced.

One Day tells a word unto another.] 1. Aword, 2. But a word, and 3. But One
word.

1. First: A word. And here first, in [A word] we have whereby to rectify the
words, Mottes, or Mottos, Apophthegmes, Aenigmaes, Symbols, Posies, Emblemes,
Titles, and Inscriptions of these days. These Days? No. But rather, The Men
of these days; by the Example of These, and All Days else, and of The Heavens
and The Firmament. Whose Mottos, (pleasant and Amiable See the Italian, Motto.
Mottos) and whose Firm Imbossings and Glorious Imbrodery, are still The Glory
of God: according to that which already ye have heard, and shall hereafter
hear, so long as The Days Report lasts. For so, One Day tells a word unto
another.]

Where first, unto Gods Glory, I cannot but commend the modern Mottos, Posies,
and Inscriptions of Christian Princes, whether in their Coins, or otherwise:
In which The Glory of God is either Expressed, or evidently Employed. Such as,
wherein God and his Grace is mentioned, is put to be their Helper, is implored
for Tuition, is magnified for Unity, is united to Right and Equity, is honored
by Dishonor to Evil Thinking, by Things Admirable being the Lords Doing, by
the shield of Faith protecting, by Jesus passing through the Midst of his
Enemies; by Victory and Salvation ascribed to The Cross of Christ Jesus: and
the like.

In all which, compared with the Profaneness and Idolatry of Pagans; and the
Abolishing thereof, as of Darkness at the Sunrising, ye may discern Rev. 5.
5. Genesis 49. 8, 9.
The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, as it were by his Paw; The propagation of his
kingdom, by those Signs and Symbols, those Stamps and Impressions of Gods
Glory left on the Earth; whilst his Hand is in the Genesis 49: 8.
Neck, and Collar of his Enemies: and whilst he stampeth and Tra^pleth Vid.
Isai. 63, 2, 3.
upon Infidelity, dashing it in pieces like a Potters Psalm. 2.
Ye may see his Inheriting the Heathen, by making Kings and Judges of the
Earth to be so Wise and Learned, so to Serve the Lord, so to Rejoice in Him, so
to Kiss the Son, and to put their Trust in Him: as that their very Mottos,
Emblemes, Inscriptions, Dedications, and Consecrations signify the same.
Pilate himself (by the Divine power and providence, and maugre the Enemies of
Christ) Quod scripsit Pilatus, de Inscriptione, praescripsi^.
prescribing to them herein, when he wrote that Title, or Inscription, and put
it on the Cross of Christ: The Interpretation whereof Haec siquidem Eructuat
Interpretati^, etc Sim de Cass^in Ev^ng. lib. 13.
Eructuateth the great power of Christ; and how Invincible He, the Entitled, is;
against whose very Title nothing could prevail. But especially He himself,
That Entitled King, that Crowned and Flowrishing King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, has taught them so to do: in that which he said touching the Coin of
the Tribute, and the Image and Superscription thereof: Render Mat. 22.
therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the things that
are Gods. The things that are Gods? What are they? Christ elsewhere taught the^
saying: Mat. 6. 13. pervse also 1. Cor. 29. v. 11, 12, 13. where are specified,
Thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for Ever. So that
therefore, even out of the Image and Inscription, there is a Tribute due unto
God too: a Tribute of Thanks, and of Praising his Glorious Name: a Tribute of
Attributing, and Ascribing the Glory of the Image and Inscription, and All
Biches Honor Strength Greatness Power Glory Victory Majesty Kingdom
Supremacy. All in Heaven All in Earth.
that is Caesar's, unto GOD.

This The Days also do not omit to tell us: which what Name, Title, or
Inscription soever they bear, whether of the Sun, or of the Moon, or any
other: yet their word, or Motto shows, That the Glory thereof, all the Glory
of the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Heavens, and the Days of Heaven, and
of all things else, is, and ought to be attributed, and appropred to the All
Gloriom Creator. For so, One Day tells a Word unto another.]

Where next I cannot choose but reprehend the Sea the Remains of a Greater
work.
Vain and Profane, yea and Diabolical Mottos, Titles, Devises, Emblems,
Impresas, Epitaphes, Epigrams, Anagrams, Pageants, Plays, Enterludes,
Inscriptions, Dedications, and such like, applauded and embraced by Christ's
Soldiers: and yet are they Antichristian Badges. Whereof some are Wanton and
Lascivious, some Proud and Vainglorious; some Prodigal and Luxurious, some
False and Injurious, Injurious are they all to Gods Glory, by being Extravagant
from His words Ephesians. 5. v 4, 5. 19. 20. Ephesians 4. 29. and inde. 1. Cor. 15. 33. Col
3. ^. 9. and, 46, etc.
words-direction: either by Corrupting of Good Ma^ners, or by something which
does Coincidere, (meet together with it in the Divle, and fall together into
Hell:) as by propagating of Profaneness; by Affecting to Magnify Men's Names,
insteede of GODS; by Engendring of Strife and Scandals; by Intituling
themselves, or others, to that which is not theirs; yea and to that which is
not theirs; yea and to that Isai 9. 6. Wonderful, Father etc. Christ's Titles.
Papal Glory of God which is not theirs, and unto which all that is theirs
should be assigned, and resigned.

One Day tells a word unto another.] Where, in the next place, observe with
me, how for [word] some Translate Speech; voice, or Language; According to
those words of the third verse. Gods Glory by Speech, and Language


Here also the Great Glory of God is seen, by that great Glory of Man above
other Creatures, wherewith GOD has doubed and enobled him, the better to enable
him to set forth the Glory of God that so exalted him.

This has been before entreated of. And appears to be so much the more
Excellent a Gift, because it is so long a coming. For it is not given
Ordinarily in an Instant, but in Succession of Time, and in the process of
many Days and Nights. We are Infants a great while, and with much ado learn
to Speak our own mother Tongue: but with much more ado the languages of
others. We must be long experienced and practiced therein, before we can be
perfect.

For so, One Day Tells Speech unto another.]
This should teach us to make high reckoning thereof: and, when we have this
gift, to employ it diligently to that purpose, wherefore we had it: seeing that
it was so long before we had it, and before that we could Glorify God by it;
seeing also that the Time will not be long, before our Speech will failc us.
For this too Experience learneth us, This One Day tells another: The Speech
and word of God to be Aeternall, but the Speech and words of Man to be every
Day nearer and nearer to Expiration.

One Day tells a word, or Speech unto another.] Behold another Actuary, or
rather a whole Chorus, or By Increase of Speech and Languages,
Company of Tongue-Actors, singing melodiously unto Gods Glory. Namely, the
great Increase of Languages, that Continuance of Days and Times has uttered:
in so much that already they amount in reckoning to many Hundred. There are
(says the 1. Cor. 14. 10
Apostle) so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without
signification. Surely no. Nor without Signification of the Glory of God. In the
showing forth whereof: see here, how the world has from time to time profited
by Languages.

The time was when, Gen 11. 1. By Unity thereof,
The whole Earth was of one Language, and of one Speech. And Then did One Day
tell another the Glory of God, by that One Speech, or Language. Under which GOD
wrought so many wonderful works, and whereby He, the author of that union, did
then the better enable the Nations to unity of Minds in the true worship of
him, and to the attaining to the Knowledge of the Truth with more facility. But
when they abused that Union, and that easy way of getting understanding, (by
understanding all that was spoken in the world) to Proud and Presumptuous
Association and Confederacy: The^ also GOD declared his Power, in Confounding
their Language, and making such a By Confusion thereof,
Division among them, as was never heard of in the world, and which their
unheard of Malice and Presu^ption brought upon them; That one of them
understood not the other: So to give them to understand their duty by Division
and Want of understanding, which before they would not learn by Union of
Speech and understanding. Yet even then too, the Powerful Wisdom and
Goodness of GOD proceeded on still to the farther manifestation of it self,
by that Confusion and Division of Speech: even at that Day, out of that
Babeling Infancy By Distinction and Distinct Multiplicity thereof, out of that
Confusion:
of the world Ordaining his Praise. His Praise: In producing afterward Distinct
Knowledge out of that Confusion, as it were Light out of Darkness; making it
appear every Day more and more unto the world, by the ensuing Multiplicitie of
Languages, which in Times ensuing were also understood, How Well he could
Teach, that had so well Divided. How out of the Mouths of Such Infants, as Men
then were, and ever would be, but that God Teaches them, he could so well
Divide unto the World, and Disperse According to one signification of (...),
for which (...) is also put.
His Praise of Knowledge. He still preserved Knowledge, that was Good, in the
midst of that Division; yea and increased it thereby: making afterward Diverse
Languages and the Gift of Tongues, a means of dividing greater Knowledge, and
more ample By preservation thereof, in the midst of that Confusion.
Declaration of his Glory to the world. To which rightly appertains, the
strange and admirable preservatio^ of so much of the Hebrew Tongue (the
Speech, as is most approved, that first was in the world, and in the which Gods
Word was written) in the midst, not only of that Babels Lingua Hebraea in
Divisione Gentium per loquelam so la populo ad Dei culium pertine^te rema^sit.
Sim. de cass. lib. 13. Vid. Bertram. in praefat. in co^par. Linguae Heb. and
Aram.
Confusion, nor only of the Aegyptiacall Affliction of the Hebrews, but also
of that after- Confusion and Mixture of the Language of the Hebrews, in their
Idolatrous Familiarity and Commerce with the Assyrians, and in their
Babylonish and Chaldeish Captiuities; It appearing thereby, and One Day telling
another, That not only The Word of the Lord endures forever, but also that
Speech and Language, in which The Word of the Lord In illa locutus est
Christus, and mundum docuit qu^ nesciebat. Sim. de Cass. vbi supra. Gods Glory
by Extraordinary and Miraculous Speech:
Spoke, or was Delivered, is so far forth kept inviolable to the End of the
world.

One Day tells a Word, or Speech unto another.] Hereout issues now farther
into our discourse and consideration, Extraordinary, and Miraculous Speech:
whereby GOD for the farther Ordination of his praise has afforded unto men
most wonderful Instructions; That so they, with whom the Word of GOD spoken by
the Ordinary Admirable Speech and Language of Men and of the World will not
prevail: yet, by the uttering of it by Extraordinary and Miraculous Speech,
above the Speech of Men, or the Personous Personated Speech of the World, may
be enforced to the Ever Hallowing of his Name.

By the Gift of Diverse Tongues:
Hence was the Gift of Speaking Diverse Languages so miraculoussy bestowed on
the Apostles (Act. 2.) for the Promulgation of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and of the wonderful Works of GOD. To which, as to a most strangely
vouchsafed means, we that are partakers of the Gospel, and of the Spirit of
Grace, owe no less then that Participation; and therefore owe the giving of
Great Glory unto God in that behalf. In respect whereof, One Day does so tell
the Glory of GOD unto another, That diverse, induced also by that Romans 10. 18.
Where the 4th verse of this Psalm is alleged, have by the Days here in my
Text understood Christ and his Apostles, Christ Telling his Apostles (as
formerly ye heard In the first Sermon.
) or else Christ's Twelve Apostles: who, like unto the Twelve Hours of the Day,
by that Light, that he the Brightest Sun infused into them, especially by the
Effusion of His Holy Spirit, and conferring the Gift of Diverse Languages upon
them, Preached The Knowledge of Salvation to people of All Tongues and
Languages.

And here we may note their unthankfulness and rash judgment, who, contrary
to the Rule of the Apostle (1. Cor. 14. 39.) dislike and forbid Speaking with
Tongues; so far forth, as that one Word, or Sentence in the Church, in
another Tongue then theirs, although with Interpretation annexed, does offend
them. They being of like Superstition for their own Tongue, as others are and
have been for the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. And they, who before could not
be suffered to have any Service in their own Tongue, now not willingly
suffering any one Word in Sermon, or Bible, to be out of their own Tongue.
When as the retaining of some Words in another Language, especially by common
use and Explication understood, makes much for A dification, and for the
Glorious Building of Gods Praise. For (to omit many other reasons) those
Words, yea, or Sentences, are they not, like unto the Reserved Manna, a Sign
and Memorial unto us that Believe, of Gods Good Will toward us, in that he
has made choice of us also, to call us to the knowledge of the Truth by means
of Diverse Tongues, Understood and Interpreted? and in that, from former
Darkness, he has brought us to such plenty of Light in him, and has, by the
Report of his Glory, so richly and Superabundantly furnished us with Knowledge
in our own Tongue; That we have now somewhat to spare from our own necessary
uses, to lay up in his Glorious Golden Her. 9* 4.
pot, in Sign of Thankfulness? Like as does our Mother University; whose
Latin seems now to be turned into Gold, Gold of GODs Glory; whilst, in the
time of the Spiritual Vintage of Good-Wine, it does of late make Latin Hymns
of GODs Glory to be the Prefixes of the Latin Sermons of His Glory. Wherein,
among other comme^dable ensignements, appears a Sign of Thankfulness unto
GOD. Without which, it is to be feared least GOD return us, among others, That
Sign of his displeasure, To speak unto us with men of other Tongues, and with
other Lips: and that the rather, because of our Iudaizing, that is, our
Obstinacy, our Unbelief, and Disobedience, in regard of The Report of GODs
Glory, which Every Day brings unto us, both in our Own and other Romans 10.
16. and vid. Ioh. 12 37 38, etc.
Languages. In so much that still it may be said of all in general, They have
not all Obeyed the Gospel: and, Lord, who has believed our Report? Yea; When
the Son Luk, 18. 8.
of Man comes, shall he find Faith on Earth? notwithstanding so many ways
of speaking, and so many kinds of Tongues and Languages; by the Hearing and
understanding of which in all their variety, variety Extraordinary and
Miraculous, GOD has labored to make Men to Believe. By the Speech of
Superiors; Angels,


For hence it is too, that GOD has diverse times spoken unto Men by Angels.
Angels? And would no other serve the turn? Would not all the Speech and
Languages spoken by all the People of the Earth, and many of them Priests and
Prophets too, suffice? Is man so bad a Scholar, so dull of Heb. 5, 11.
Hearing and of understanding? Then has he so much the more to answer for, if
nether the Speech of Angels may make the word of God to fructify within him.
Heb. 2. and the Lord of Angels.
For the word of God Spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every Transgression and
Disobedience received a just recompense of reward. And If so (says the
Apostle) How shall we escape, if we Neglect so great Salvation, which at the
first began to be Spoken by the Lord, etc? And, chap. 1. ver. 2. God has in
these last Days Spoken Mat. 21. 38, 37.
unto us by his Son, etc: his Son and Heir: whose speech, of all others,
we should Reverence. Here is the Speech of one that is Greater then the Angels.
And will you hear the Speech of those that are Lesser the^ the Angels? All
showing forth the powerfulness of By the Speech of Inferiors:
his Speech that is the Greatest, and conferring a still Apposite Apposition to
his Glory.

Me^; Dumb, and Infants.
One Day tells another.] For that God has sometimes made the Dumb to
speak, and taught an Infant in an Instant to Speak wisely. And when (not to
speak of All the Dumb that Christ endowed with Speech) he made the Children to
Cry in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David. (Mat. 21. 15.) To which
Christ him self (verse. 16.) applies that of the 8. Psalm: Out of the Mouth
of Infants (or, Babes) and Sucklings have thou Vt Psalm. 8. 2. and Heb. 10. 5.
See all the Significatio^s of (...).
Prepared, Ordained, Fitted, Fitly composed, and (according to the Hebrew)
Founded thy praise. A weak Foundation, to build upon; especially Such a work
of Such a Founder. The Foundation being sometimes no better then a Babell, or
Confusion. But so did he sometimes out of a less matter (by as much as Nothing
is less then Any Thing) make All Things, and All Things to His Glory. So is
his power made perfect through weakness. (2. Cor. 12. 9.) So has he chosen the
Foolish things of the world to Confound the Wise, and the Weak to confound the
Mighty, etc. 1. Cor. 1. 27. That no Flesh should Glory in His presence.

It is there also worth the observation; how that those words, Out of the Mouth
of Infants, etc: are inserted in the Second verse of the 8. Psalm, between
the first and third verses, in which the Prophet magnifieth Gods Glory in
consideration of the Heavens, and such like works of his, and his Ordeining;
As also the words of my Text are, in the second verse of this Psalm,
interposed Sun, Moon, Starr, Heaven, and Day-Infants;
between the first verse, and the rest; in which the Heavens too, and such like
Creatures, are brought in for the Declaration of Gods Glory. As though the
Heavens too, and the Days of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the
Firmament, and the rest, were to be reckoned among those Babes and Infants, out
of whose Mouths, together with others, he has Appointed the predication and
perfect Composition of his praises. And as though that second verse of the 8.
Psalm might serve to Parallel my Text, in the Days Parliament of Gods These
Infants Parliament.
Praises.

And here we may not omit, to bring in the Sun and the Moon, the Days and
the Nights, as it were Kings with their Nobility, in their Extraordinary Attire
and Parliamentall Robes, most wonderfully and Miraculously Testifying the Glory
of their Creator, and our Redeemer.

Among other things so Strangly Enacted by them; Work, that Things there
Enacted.
Strange work of the Lords, That Act of his, that Strange Act of His (Isai.
28. 21.) Whereby the Sun, at His Bidding, stood still in Gibeon, and the
Moon in the Valley of Aialon. The Sun, that otherwise, and in This Psalm,
fo Swiftly and with such Alacrity Runs his Course; yet There, by the same
Commanunding power, had no power to proceed, was put to a Demurre, Abode in
the midst of the Heaven, and Hasted not to go down for a Whole Day. And there
was no Day like that Day before it, nor after it (Josh. 10. 12, 13.) When One
Day was as Long as Two (Ecclesiasticus, 46. 4.) One Day went beyond it self in
Lauding the Lord: and lost his own proper Name, in Magnifying the Name of the
Creator. For how should it have any longer the Name of Day, that was so much
Longer then a Day, and was nether Artificial, nor Natural? Yet is it styled
Such a Day, as the like was never before it, nor after it. A Day of more then
Ordinary Continuance, in his Luminous and Voluminous Exposition of his Makers
Glory, by observing his Ordinance: And therefore Dignified with the Name of
Nonesuch, and to be of an Higher Order then the rest.

Here men may learn, to prefer the Glory of Gods Name before their own; To
approve themselves the Ministers and Servants of Reporting Gods Honor, by
their Honor and Dishonor, by Evil Report, and good 2. Cor. 6.
Report: That the loss of Name or Reputation for God and Godliness, for the
Glorious Gospels sake, and in the Service of either, shall be with manifold
adva^tage restored them in this Life, and that that is to come; Lastly, that
the best way to get Extraordinary Precedencie and Reputation, and an Excellent
Name above others, is by Exceeding others in Pains and Industry, by
Extraordinary Points and Exploits of Gods Service, and by Keeping his
Commandments, whether in things Ordinary or Extraordinary, with Ordinary and
Extraordinary Endeavor.

All this we are better taught, then by all this: even by The Day and Sun
Christ Jesus; who as he was employed in the Most Extraordinary Works of GODS
Glory, and therein demeaned himself with Most Extraordinary Obedience, and
loss of Worldly Reputatirn, not Seeking his Own Glory: so is he also Most
Highly Exalted, and Phil. 2. Heb. 1.
has obtained Most Extraordinaoy Appellations, a Most Excellent Name, and A
Name above Every Name, unto The Glory of God the Father.

Another strange Work of Gods Enacted by the Sun, and The Suns, not Standing
Still, as before, but Going Te^ Degrees Backward, in the time of King Hezekiah
Isai, 38. and, 2. Chr. 20.
.A wonderful Retrogradatio^ of the Su^, that was so Sensible in a Su^ Dial. A
strange Reiourneme^t of the Suns Days Journey; of the Iournal, or Day-Booke,
and of the Days Parliament of Gods Glory. On which both the Su^ and his People
are still ready to Dance their Attendance, whether it be by Tracing Ordinarily
Forward, or Extraordinarily Backward, or else by Sta^ds and Pauses
Supernatural. Yea and the Sun-Day, the best of all others, is the best of all
others for this Dancing. He that went more then Ten, or Ten Thousand Degrees
Backward by his Humiliation, is our best leader and teacher in Going Forward,
in Standing Still, and Going Backward, and in Going Forward by Standing Still,
and Going Backward. When as yet we Men and women, the Glory of GOD Inviting and
Commanding us, will not Mat 11. 17.
Dance: will neither Go Ordinarily Forward in our Callings with Persevera^ce,
nor, crossing our Corrupt Nature, Stand Still with Extraordinary Patience, nor
Go Extraordinarily Backward with Humility.

The Darkness, which, when Christ Crucified, was over all the Earth, from the
Sixth Hour unto the Ninth Hour Mat. 27. Mar. 15. Luke 23.
. When as The Sun was Darkened: (Luke 23. 45.) Darkened with a Super natural
Eclipse; both in respect of the Cause thereof, and of the Time that it Lasted.
The Cause: whether it were; The Moon Miraculausly Capering to and fro, from
the point of Opposition to Closing in Conjunction with the Sun As Dionys.
Areopagit. who diligently observed it seems to relate. Clavius likewise says
(upon John de Sacr. Bosc. cap. 4 page 531.) ^poie^tia divina Luna, relicto suo
proprio cursu, ad Solemn accessit, ipsumque ^obis occultavit; That the Moon (at
that Time) leaving his own proper course, came by the power of God
Miraculously to the Sun, and so hid him from our sight.
: or whether the Moon, then Interposed between Men's Sight and the Sun, was
the Iniquity, Infidelity, Cruelty, and Ignorance of the Jews, which was
then and afterward at the Full: And was then, and has been ever since too
near allied to the Tail and Head of the Old Dragon: As also the Indignity and
Compassion that the Sun, the Moon, and the Day were then moved withal; not
enduring as it were to hold the candle, or to give Light, at the offering of
such heinous Injury to their Creator: no, nor to show themselves in their
Ordinary Glad and Light Garments; but being themselves also clad in Sad
Mourning Weeds of Darkness, where they saw such Deeds of Darkness, and The
Lord of their Light to be so full of Dolours, Solisque Labores: And their Sun
to be so pained, in his being pawned and punished for us: The Day as it were
Disdaining and Disclaiming those Hours to be any of his, wherein The Lord of
Glory should be Crucified: and being contented, for Christ's sake, to loose, by
an Eclipse, Three Hours of that little Time of his life, that consists but
of Twelve.

The Cause of that Contentedness of The Day, was another, if not the only
Cause of that Eclipse* namely, That men might thereby the better Scan The
Glory, and The Power of Christ's Deity. That, as the Sun was then so
Extraordinarily and Supernaturally Obscured: so he was an Extraordinary and
Supernatural Sun, The Sun of Righteousness, that Suffered. That, as when
the Sun is Eclipsed, The Tail or Head of the Dragon is very Nearly Touched:
so the Eclipsing of This Sun and Son of God, by his Humiliation and
Sufferings, should thereby prove to be His Godheads Breaking of the Serpents
Head. That the Ordinary Sun Gave Place, and hid his head, as it were from God
Almighty, when That Sun was once Exalted no higher the^ The Cross. That well
may the Ordinary Sun Show his Greatest Countenance in his Lowest Estate: yet
he cannot show so great Power in his Highest, as Christ showed in his Lowest.
That His Setting may have that which of Two Hen. 2. and Rich. 1. vid. Ca^bd. in
fol. page 206.
others is versified, of it self alone best verified: Mira cano: Sol occubuit,
Nox nulla sequuta est. A wonder it is to Tell: Sun set, no Night befell. Yea and
this Suns Setting was such, as brought More Day, and Greater Light unto the
whole World, then ever the Sun of the World did to One Half of the World, at
the Highest point of his Liberal Distribution of Light unto the Day. That His
Descending was to such a Place, where the Serpent Pytho^ might have lain safe
enough, for ever any other Phoebus being able to come near to hurt him.
Lastly, That, as the Brightness and Glory of the Temporal Sun does after a
sort Demonstrate the Supernatural Splendour and Glory of that Eternal:
(according to what heretofore has bin spoken) so the World being thus Deprived
of the Sun and Daylight, by a Supernatural Eclipse, argues The Departure of
the Eternal Sun out of the World by a Strange way: a Way, whereof his Godhead
was incapable; and yet a Way Supernaturally munited with such Cou^termands of
Nature, as were competible and possible to none, but the Divine Nature.

This Dionysius Areopagita, being a Philosopher, was able to collect out of
that Eclipse. Who, as History relates, being in Athens, and seeing there that
strange Eclipse, brake out into these words: Either the God of Nature does now
suffer, or else the World shall be Dissolved. The Athenians too themselves, as
it is reported, by the strangeness of that Eclipse, coniectured somewhat more
then ordinary concerning The Godhead, and The worshipping of him, though
Ignorantly: and thereupon erected an Altar with that Inscriptio^, To the
unknown God. Act. 17. 23.

Out of all which there arise unto us these e^suing Lights of Instruction, and
Articles of Admonition, drawn out of the Parliamentall Act of the Darkness of
One Day.

The Glory of GOD, in our Obeying his Commandments, and his Countermands. And
that we should be like our Father Abraham: who, upon the Appearing of the
Command of The God of Glory, Got him out of his Country, from his Kindred, and
from his Fathers house, unto another country, and from place to place, not
Knowing whether he went (Heb. 11. 8.) until he came, where he had not a foot
of inheritance. Yea and, causing Natural Affection to stoop to the Affecting
and Effecting of GODS Glorious Command, he Offered his Son, his only Son
Isaac. And yet woe is us, that are so far off from Forsaking Father and
Mother, and the rest that Naturally we are addicted unto, for the procuring of
GODS Glory; that we will not, at his commandment, Offer unto him that which
costeth us little or nothing, and is not Repugnant, but Agreeable to any, but
our Corrupt Nature.

He that so loses his life, shall find it) some few Days or Hours of our
Life, that consists of

That we take heed of Jewish Infidelity, Cruelty, Iniquity, Ignorance, and
more then Jewish Crucifying Again unto our selves The Lord of Glory, and
making a mock of him. For fear least, if our Deeds draw near again to the
Tail or Head of the Old Dragon, in being like unto Darkness, and Symbolizing
with the Divle, or his Members; God strike us with more then Egyptian Exodus
10. 21 which may be also reckoned among the Acts of This Parliament. As also
the Star that directed the wisemen to Christ, Mat. 2
Darkness; and the Light that now (GOD be Glorified) we have, be taken from
us, our Sun and Moon be Eclipsed, our Day be turned into Night, and the
Length of our Days, both here and in the Land of Promise, be elipped off, more
then Three So Long lasted the Darkness at Christ's Crucifying; as is above
specified.
Hours, or, Three Days So long the Egyptian Darkness.
.

That we should gladly Suffer together with Christ, that, being conformable to
his passions, We may also

To Conform our selves unto the time of Christ's passion: not to pass it in
mirth and iollitie, but in weeping for our selves, in chastising of our selves
by true Poenitencie, without Sparing of our selves; our Sinful selves, who by
our Doings have put Christ to his Sufferings. The most seasonable and
reasonable celebration whereof is not in Feasting, but in Fasting, Praying,
Praising, Preaching, and the like: neither in standing far off in worldly
Opposition, but in Drawing near, with Soul and Body, unto the Righteous Sun;
who is nearer to us then the Heavens, even so Near as in our Hearts and in our
Mouths; (Romans 10.) and, as that In Him we Live, and Move, and have our Being.
Act. 17. Likewise, To be Serviceable and Applyable unto the other Days of the
Lord, the Days with Especial A Day in thy Courts is better then a Thousand.
Psalm. 84. 10. and See hereof, page 10, 11, and 13.
Happiness Destinated and Appointed for the Service of the Lord, and The
Declaration of his Glory, for some Extraordinary Benefits bestowed on his
Creatures. The^ to Rejoice with them that Rejoice, and not to be like to those,
who (according to the Arabia^ See thereof, the Learned Erpenius; in his
Exposition of Arabian Proverbs.
proverb) Loose a Margarite upon the Festival Day; yea the^ loose the union of
the Spirit, and so (it is to be feared) the most precious pearl of the Kingdom
Heaven. Whilst they can not brook the Church, or some that are in it, or the
way unto it, upon the Holy Days: when especially we ought to go, though it
were a farther and a harder way, from the utmost parts of Jury to Jerusalem,
from the blindest corner of Dissension to the sight of peace, from our own
Houses to GODS House, and the place where His Honor Dwells. Then, and There
Spiritually-Supernaturally to Leap For Heaven, To it, From that which is most
Opposite unto it: To resign our Worldly Businesses and Delights; which by the
Interposition of Earthly Cogitations, do disioyne and separate us, even upon
the Sunday, from our Lightest Su^ and Brightest Day, as it were by the whole
length of the Diameter of Heavenly and Eternal Things.

to hasten away from those points of Opposition, wherein we Christians, either
Prince or People, stand, while Christ is Crucified; to Spiritual unity and
Conjunction: the better to reclaim, or repress, the common professed Enemies
of Christ, and to debar them of their means of wronging Gods Glory.

Giving our holy Light unto Dogs, and casting the Pearls of the kingdom of
heaven before Swine. That we open not the Door to let filthy Sodomites come
in; but, like Angels of Light, strike such Vid. Sap. 19. 17.
such Light-Angels with Blindness, and take away the Light of their Eyes from
the^, that they may not find the Door, nor the Way into the House. Seeing
their coming is fot no other, but villanously to Abuse, and to deal
unnaturally with the House, the Lord of the House, and those within it that are
the Lords. Seeing also that their saying, Hail Master, yea and Kissing of
Christ too, is but to Betray him, to catch him, strike him, and misuse him. And
their Rabshaketh-like speaking the language of the people of God, is but to
Rail and to Dishonor him.

That we Love not that which God hates, whether it be the world, or the things
that are in the world: cherish not his Enemies in his presence: nor be
Favorites and Abettours of Notorious Offenders, and Excommunicated persons.
No: nor Grace them with the Light so much as of our Company, or Countenance.
But, David* like, to be Companio^s of those that Fear the Lord: Vid. etiam Ps.
29.
to let the Righteous resort unto our Company: to let no ungodly person Dwell,
or Tarry in our Houses; no, not so much as him that tells Lies: to hate them
that hate the Lord, and to be Grieved with those that rise up against him;
yea; to hate them right sore, as though they were our Enemies.

We must be zealous for our Heavenly Fathers Glory. Showing that we are not
Implicit only, or in gross, but indeed and Expressly in love with GOD: by
having the pulse of our Conscience Extraordinarily Moved, with Joy, when we
see God Glorified; or else with Disdain, Sorrow, and Impatience, when we see
His Name and Truth Blasphemed. Then it is our part to do as Craesus his son
is said to have done: who, having been always dumb, yet spoke suddenly,
when he saw his Father set upon. Or rather, to imitate the Son of God
himself: who otherwise being Isai 53. 7.
dumb, and not opening his mouth, yet spoke, and spoke as no man ever spoke, in
the behalf of his Fathers Glory; yea and was in an Extraordinary fashion Eaten
up with the zeal of his Fathers Psalm. 69. v. 7, 8. Romans 5.
House.

How then is it, that we are so Senseless in the wrongs that to GOD are
offered? why rather, when we perceive God to be so highly Dishonored and
Blasphemed; among other things, by Heretical Disparagement to his Sons
Deity: and more then Jewish Crucifying of him: why, I say, do we not Start,
and Startle, and Leap, though it be from one end of the Heaven to the other,
to Join with others in the hindering of the Wrongs offered to the Son of
GOD? In so doing do ye Glory still more and more, my Dearly Beloved: And you
especially, the Highest among Christians, that are out of this Auditorie, and
yet in The Parts of the Days Speech are, though not the Principal Verbs, yet
the Principal Praepositions; do you, I humbly Exhort you, put your Royal
Assents to the Days: Acts of Parliament of Praises of the Highest King, and
Most Praiseworthy. That not only Iom le Iom, One Day unto Another, but one [Le
Roy le veult] unto Annother, may Royally Recount and Ecchoize His Glory.
Whilst, like Zealous Ruling Lights (of as High Parentage, and of as Ancient
Creation as the Heavens) like Ben-Iamins (Great Kings, and Vid. Ps. 68. 27.
Little Sons of Gods Right Hand of Jealousy) like Zealous and Obedient Days,
or The Arabian word for Day, here used.
Iamins (that are still a Telling and Enacting) and like Zealous John's and
Iameses (that are still a Mark 3. 17.
Thundering out of Working and of Loving) you make your selves still more and
more the Fervent Interiections of the Dishonor of I AM. The Maintaining of
whose Honor is the Charge that is imposed on you. Decline it not, you most
Princely Praepositions, but Incline your souls and hearts unto it: That When
Christ your Life Col. 3. 4.
shall appear, you may have the Glory of Not being Declined by him.

The Darkning of the Sun, The Moon not giving her Light, The Stars falling
from Heaven, and The Powers of Heaven being shaken (Mat. 24. 29.) Which Shall
be, but little before Christ's coming and the end of the World. Whereof that
such things must needs be Prognosticating Signs, The later part of the
aforesai^ saying of Dionysius does well testify.

Here are Signs Extraordinary of Declining Days. Dark Blindness in the
Lightest, Falling Sickness in the Firmest, and Shaking Palseies in the Powers of
most Stedfastnes. All here, not The Days only, but the Lights of Heaven, and
the Powers of Heaven, shall make apparent show of their Decay; By Diverse
Defects, Strange Appearances, unusual Changes, and Manifold Infirmities. Not
by Eclipses only, but by Vide de Sole Elliptico. Ecclus 17. 31. what is
brighter then the Sun^ yet the Light thereof fails. and, vid. Job. 25. 5.
Ellipses too; as though The Sun it self were subject also to Convulsions.
Convulsions! And what not? Where as shall be so many Thousand Days and years
to cause Contraction in such an Old Decrepite Age: which is it self a Sickness
of this world, causing the Fairest Creatures to Decay, and Decaying to keep at
length as it were within doors, to hide their heads, and not to show
themselves abroad as they were wont: yea and to be so tedious to themselves,
the rather because of Men Tristitia assiciuntur, dum vident nostra Delicta.
Theodoret. super Romans 8.
that will not mend Themselves, as that The very Romans 8. v. 19 and 22.
Creature Groneth too, Travaileth in pain, and has an Earnest desire of
Amendment, by the Worlds Dissolution, and so Expects waiting when the Sons
of God shall be Revealed. And How long does it Expect and Wait? So long, as
that it may well teach men Long Suffering and Patience. (...)] from the
beginning of the world, or from Man's Fall, unto this present. This present?
yea, and as long as any time shall be: even unto the Last Moment (Moment of
most Moment) when All these Things shall be dissolved. 2. Pet. 3. 11.

But now you Heavens, and you Lights of Heaven; you Light and Darkness, you
Telling Days and Certifying Nights, What is become of all your Stedfastnes and
Constancy, which we have heretofore so much commended? Shall it be reported
of you, that you failed in your Last Reports of all? And will you be so
Deficient in the Last Act of all of All your Parliament? O, no. But then much
more by your Defects, Changes, and Infirmities, will Gods Power be made
Perfect. Which only is Everlasting: who is able to Diminish not only Man's, but
Your ability, to abate Your strength, and to shorten Your Time, for all your
Everlasting Permanencie: And, for all your Steadfastness; yet by your
Mutabilitie, to declare, that he only is Immutable: By your Unfaithfulness,
compared unto Him, yea and by your Job. 25.
Impuritie in His Sight; to make it good, that he only is Good, and Faithful,
and Pure. Even as the Wisdom also of his Angels is, in respect of him, but a
foil of Folly, to Magnify His Wisdom.

So then you, Days, (and likewise, you, the rest) will not Then, in your Old
Days, and Days of your Greatest Infirmities, after so many Successions, and
when your Succeeding Impotencie shall exceed your Power that was his
Predecessor; I say, you will not the^ give over Telling one another his Power,
that exceeds all others. You will then Tell] by your Waxing Old as does a Heb.
1. Psalm. 102. Isai. 34.
Garment, how True he is, that gave his Word you should do so. You will
Pronounce His being still the Same, by your being, when you shall be so Old,
so Diverse: His Extolling, by your Falling down: His Enduring, by your
Perishing: The Dilatation, the Explication, and Unfolding of his Praise, by
your being Folded up, (Heb. 1. 12) and Rolled together. What shall I say, that
you Will say? I know not how much you do Now Tell. How then can I foretell,
how much you will The^ Tell unto Gods Glory? Only this I know, That you will
Then Tell, and More then you do Now, A Word unto One another; A Word of God,
that Endures for Ever. And the Elder you wax, the more Talkitiue you will be:
and the more you decrease, the more will your Glorifying Speech increase. As
reason is; your Knowledge and Experience of Gods Glory ever more and more
Increasing.

And here the Oldest Men of all may go to School, to the Oldest Times and
Days, and other of Gods Creatures, much elder then themselves: to Learn of
them, how to behave themselves toward God, in their Old Age, and when that
their strength fails them. Not then to neglect, and resign to younger men,
the Service of Gods Glory. Not then to do that, which they say Old me^ may do
by Authority: But what they ought to do by the Authority of the Book of Gods
Glory. Which requires of them to cast away profane and old Wives Fables, and
to Tell, as the Days do, true See page 25. of the good use of our English
word [Tale]
Tales of God Almighty; such as may be unto others insteede of Commentaries and
Expositions of Gods Great Goodness. Lingua cum verum loqui caeperit, id est,
Virtutem, Maiestatemque Dei singularis interpretari; tum demum officio naturae
suae fungitur: says Divin instit. lib. 4 cap. 26.
Lactantius. When our Tongue undertakes to tell Truth, that is, to be an
Interpreter of the Power and Majesty of so Singular a God, Then, and never but
then, does it discharge his Natural Function. You therefore that be Old, and
have had for a long time Experience of Gods Power and Goodness, and have heard
longer then others, what One Day has said thereof unto another: Be you
Examples of Truth unto others, of setting forth Gods praises, and of
Interpreting his Glory: and that so much the more, the weaker that you grow:
That Gods Power may have his Perfect Praise, by making you so Strong in
Praising him by your Goodness, when you are weak, and have one leg already in
the grave, yea and in your Sickness, and your Death. Then think too of your
Crown and your Reward, how near you are unto it: how near unto the goal of
Glory, and to the end of your race: and, that therefore ye ought not by any
means to slack your pace, but to hasten it: making it appear unto Gods
Glory, that it has been no forced Motion in you, unto Godliness and
Gloryfying Gods Name, but a Natural; Swifter in the End, then it was in the
Beginning.

A fifth, and necessarily the last thing Enacted; the Last Day, and End of
the world: when the Power of God, that Made the world, shall be Demonstrated
as it were a Posteriore: by the Dissolution and Destruction of Dissolution of
this Parliament.
the world, by the last Day, the End of Time, and Determination of all Terms
and Termers. When the Host of Heaven shall be Dissolved: (Isai. 34,) When Gods
Alpha shall return to his Omega, and Days Temporal shall Commend his Praise
to Day Eternal. When his most wonderful Power and Glory shall be seen in and
by the Son of God himself, Destroying the ungodly, and preserving His, that
is, the Godly, in the midst of that Universal Conflagration, and receiving
them to Glory: (prefigured happily by the preservation of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, in the midst of the Extraordinarily Hcated Burning Fiery
Furnace, and afterward promoting them, whilst their Enemies were consumed, by
One like unto the Son of God, Dan. 3.) When the Heaven, the Vesture of Gods
Glory, shall be Folded up, and Changed for a New. When the Heavenly Scrole, or
Book, out of which Gods glory is now taught us, shall be rouled together (Isai.
34.) and the whole Army of the Leaves thereof shall be looser then Sibyllas
Leaves, or the Leaves of This Book: yea, shall fall down as the Leaves of a
Trce, and as a Falling Fig from the Fig tree, (Isai. 34.) Lastly; when
This Book of the world shall be Cancelled and Burnt, and Men shall go no more
to School (to It, the Law, or else the Gospel) to learn such Knowledge of
Gods Glory, as now they have: but shall Themselves, not their Books, be
Translated, those that have been Good Scholars Here, from Discoursing and
Discursiue Knowledge of Gods Glory, to Angel-like Intuitiue Knowledge, and Ever
Blessed Beholding of Him and of his Glory, to whom we are so much Beholding:
especially for That Knowledge and Beholding of Him, and of his glory, That Gods
Glory, by the Miraculous Speech of the Lowest, most Indocible, and most Sensles
Creatures.
is Blessed for Ever. Amen.

And now, Beloved in GODS best Beloved, if we shall but draw the curtain, The
very speech of more Inferior and Base Speachlesse Creatures will come into the
Reckoning of Recounting Gods Glory. As when God opened the mouth of Balaams
Ass, (Number. 22.) and made a Dumb Unreasonable Creature to speak Reason: to
Reprove thereby the Madness of the Prophet (2. Pet. 2. 16.) yea and of Us all;
who either speak not at all, or else speak so out of Reason, as though we had
changed Differences with an Ass: who speak so much, and many years together,
and yet speak so little according to Gods word, and of his praise. When as the
Ass spoke nether often, nor yet much: and yet all he spoke was according to
That Word, and to That praise; whereof Man cannot Speak too much, nor yet too
often. And if we would speak of Other Kind of Speech we might find Another
Ass assumed to the Total Summing up of Gods praises: even that Christopher,
or Christ-Bearing Ass; that was Prophesied of, that Christ should ride upon
him, and was farther Dignified with His Riding on him.

And so, leaving these, let us proceed to things more Senseless. For
(according to the saying of our Luke 19
Savior) If these should hold their peace, the Vid. Hab. 2. 11.
Stones would Cry. Would Cry, and from their Low Estate Cry out Loud, in the
Commendation of the Power of God, that made them, and in the Proclaiming of His
Christ unto the World. He that is Able of Stones to raise up Children unto Mat
3. 9. Gods Glory, by Speech Miraculously Figurative. Where, of The VEIL OF
GODS GLORY: and the Rhetorical Figures, Flowers and Colors thereof.
Abraham: no marveile, though he be able to raise up Praise unto Himself, out
of Such Childrens Mouths.

I will not here speak of Stones Applauding Venerable Bede in his Preaching;
or such like: But will speak of Speech more warrantable.

When Christ was Crucified, the Veil of the Temple was Rent in twain* from
the top to the bottom: the Rocks also did Rent. Here are Rents of Gods Power,
here Revenewes of His Glory; proceeding out of Re^ted Mouths, or, as it were,
out of Cloven Tongues. Tongues and Mouths of Things Rented, that were most
unlikely ever to Rent of themselves: the one for Finenesse and Softness, the
other because of Strength and Hardness. So the one sending forth, out of His
Rent, as it were a Fine and Soft voice of Gods Glory, the other a Strong and
Hard voice: both of them Heard far and near, by One Days spreading the
Report thereof unto another; both of them fit matter for the Building of GODS
Glory, even in the Strongest Wall-worke thereof, His Strength of Our
Redemption. Of which, neither of them both is without signification.

The Renting of the Veil (to allow some space for the casting up of the Audit
of so Long and Large a Rent-Roule) is it not the voice as it were of a Crier,
Preparing the way of the Lord into Heaven, proclaiming the lifting up of the
Everlasting Doors and Gates, that the Psalm. 24.
King of Glory may come in, and pronou^cing the Opening of the way into the
Holiest of Heb. 9. 8.
all? Yea, and the opening of it unto us too? Our entering into that within the
veil, whither Jesus the Forerunner is for us entered in Heb. 6. 19, 20.
? And, that by the Blood of Jesus we may be bold to enter into the Holy place,
by the New and Living way, which he has prepared for us, through the Veil,
that is, His Flesh Heb. 10. 20
? The Vaile] that for us is most availeable. The Vaile] whereby the Veil that
lay over our hearts is taken away 2. Cor. 3.
, so that we may now see the Light of Gods Glory shining in our Hearts. The
Vaile] so Rent from the Top to the Bottom, that we need not fear the coming
of it together again, or that it shall have need of any more Re^ting. The
Veil, that is, His Flesh.] His Flesh, who had sometimes Stretched out the
Heavens, is now so Expa^ded and Retched, for us that were so wretched, on the
Cross, that all his Bones are to be told Psalm. 22.
: and it was strange that None of them was broken. For else what whole part was
there in his Flesh Psalm. 38. 7.
, from the Crown of his Head to the Sole of his Foot? The Top whereof had
Thorns for to Tear it, and Blows of a Reed to Break it. His Face, had
Filthy Spittle, Boxes and Buffets to Disfigure it. His Body, Bonds to Bruise
it, in girthing it to the Pillar, worse then is the Pillerie: yea and it had
Lashes to make Gashes in it. His Hands and Feet, had Nails, to Bruise them and
to Pearce them. His Inward parts, Gall and Vinegar, Despitefull words, Grief
and Anguish, yea and Death it self, to Dissolve this Rock, and to Rent the
Body of this Veil asunder from the Soul. The Renting whereof is our
Anagrammatized Entering into Heaven: As is also the Renting of this Rock, in
the Clefts Vid Isai. 2. 21. and 33. 16.
whereof is our Refuge.

The Blew 2. Chr. 3. 14.
of this Glorious Veil of Gods Glory, was, besides the seeming Color of the
Heavens, (which he passing through has opened unto us) His Hard Tying,
Scourging, Beating, and Buffetting, His Pains and Color of His Death. The
Purple, and the Crimson, were His Robe, and Royal Blood, that Heb. 12. 24.
vid. Heb. 11. 4,
Speaks better things the^ the blood of Abel. O Blessed Better Things! O
Blessed Better Colors of this Speech of this His Blood! Whose very Rhetoric
is true Divinity. Go, Aristotle, go with all thy Rhetoric, and take
Victorius Who have Notably well commented on Aristotle's Rhetoricks.
and Who have Notably well commented on Aristotle's Rhetoricks.
Maioragius to help thee yet, for the victory, thou availest nothing, in
comparison: thy Colors are all Vile, and veil bonnet, unto the Colors of
This Veil. For so, my thinks, it is sweet to lick but the Sea, the Remains of
a Greater work, p. 27. out of Giraldus Cambre^sis.
Letter of This Veil. This Veil, which Speaks Things as Sweet as Heaven. O
let us hear (for here Iuvat vsque morari, it is good and sweet Abiding Vid.
Mat. 17, 4.
) some more of the Nazaren Flowers, Flourishes, and Figures, of This Vailes
Elocution. His Woven Seamelesse Coat, yea His Righteousness, that had the True
Contexture of All Faithful Virtues without Sowtering, was the Fine Linen of
This Veil. His Being praised by his Brethren, His Fathers Children Bowing
Down before him: (Genesis 49. 8.) Every knee Bowing at the Name of Jesus, both of
things in Heaven and things in Earth etc. and therefore The Angels also
Glorifying him, and God in him; The Angels Ministering unto him, All the Angels
of God worshipping him: (Heb. 1. 6.) Angels, Authorities, and Powers being made
Subject unto him (1. Pet. 3. 22.) The Cherubims yielding up and resigning unto
him their Flaming Sword of Lordly Maioraltie, which turned every way, and with
which they kept the Way of the Tree of Life: His Vid Alibamer. Sylu. in verbo
Cherubim.
being our Propitiatory, unto and into whose Graciousnesse both Testaments, The
Law and The Gospel, our Fair Faced Books, do cast their Looks: His being
Immanuel: His Luke 2. 10, 11, 16.
Lordship joined to his Luke 2. 10, 11, 16.
Babeship, His Omnisciencie to his Isai. 9. 6. un. to us a Child is Borne.
Childhood; His Saviorship to his Babeship, And his Childhood; His Sonneship
to his Childhood, yea and his High Titles (Isai. 9. 6, 7. and Heb. 1.) to his
Sonneship, And his Childhood: His Glorious Godhead inseparably united to his
Manhood: His Manhood, by and with his Godhead, Glorified: His Mat. 18. 3.
Childefied Babefied 1. Cor. 14. 20
Brethren Heb. 2. 11. 12
, and Ioh 3. 3. and inde.
Regenerate Children Heb. 2. 13 14
: His Faithful Soldiers being made partakers of the Spoil of his Vestiments,
his Assumed Humanity, Revelation of his Mysteries, Aeternall Love toward them,
Understanding of the Old and New Testament, The Good things of this Life and
the Life to come, The Gifts that in and by his Ascending he gave unto Men: In
a word, The Clothing of His Righteousness, and Everlasting Glory Heb. 2. 10.
:

All these, are they not the Golden Glorious Cherubims Interior Homo Domus
Orationis est, imo Speculationis Divinae, vbi per Fidem illam Claritatem
ineffabilem centemplamur, and sunt Cherubin scientiaru^ Dei. Sim. de Cas. in
Evang lib. 13. fol. 1. Nomen [Cherub] aliqui interpretantur per Scientiae
Multitudinem etc. Doctores Hebraei, in verbo Cherubim, putarunt litteram ^
deservire, and a (...) Rab^a, quod puellu^ significat, dedu^erunt: exponentes,
Sicut puer. Has sequitur, inter alios, Lebeus; qui vu^t Cherubim refer
figuram puerorum, qui sunt plena and Florida sacie. Alii Cherub, universal
nomen faciunt ad omnem Figuram five Imaginem cuinsque Faciei, quae* expansis
alis tanquam avis volans effingitur.
(Heb. 9. 5.) Wrought like Children 2. Chr. 3. 10. iuxta Pagnini, and Genev.
Translat. and Derivat^onem, quam afferunt Doctores Hebraei, vt supra. Cui etiam
convenire videntur, quae de puerilitate proxime sunt dicta, and vulgaris
Cherubin, Descriptio.
, or, with Men's Vid. 2. Chr. 3. Exodus 25. 20* and Annot. Tremel. sup Exodus 25.
v. 18. Ea qu^ sunt in Lege, representant quidem Humanam effigiem. Pagnin. i^
Thesaur.
Faces, and Apparelled Vestitos pingimus ex Lege, Exodus 20, 26. Iun.
; with whose Ascending parallelled Vid. 2. Chr. 3 and Exodus 25.
Wings and Looks, the Swift Fame of Gods Glory is best Seen to be lifted up
to Heaven, where the Head of that Fame resideth: and out of whose Mouths and
Faces God has ordained a perfect Body of his Praise, by so Perfectly and
Superexcellently Fitting of One Body (Heb. 10. 5.)?

So that it was no marveile, though Miraculous, that the Earth too, our Old
Mother, were great with child with GODS Praises, and, like unto Elizabeth (Luke
1) had a Babe too within her that leaped in her womb for joy and wonderment,
at the sound of the voice of the Lord of Glory being Crucified, and Risen, and
so sent forth a voice of Exultation from the Lowest, for the Exaltation of the
Highest. Here She, for all her Heaviness and Immobility, could not but be
moved to make her Submissiue and Subterrene Obeisance at the Name of Jesus, and
to Omnipotency. Stand still She could not, but dau^ce she must as it were a
Quavering Pavin, and send forth a Quaking Vid. Heb. 12 26.
Shaking voice, of GODS Praises, for so high an Exaltation of any, yea and many
of Her Bodies, and her Children: as, from Terrestrial, to become Celestial.
Yea She could not here choose but be Delivered of Babes out of her womb,
before her Ordinary Time. Babes that Dyed not, but being Dead did Live again,
by this Abortion, or untimely Birth. Babes Borne with GODS Praises in their
mouths, and wearing the Liveries of His Glory on their backs. Babes of
Excellent Deliverie, in the Praising of a Now Raised Raising up Deliverer. For
The Graves, or Monuments ((...)) were opened, and Many Bodies of Saints which
slept, Arose, And came out of the Graves, or Sepulchers, after His
Resurrection, and went into the Holy City, and Appeared unto Many. Here (that
as well The Wonders of the Deep, as the Height of the Third Heavens, may
conclamitate with S. Paul (Romans 11. 33.) O the Depth etc. and that we with all
Saints may the better comprehend that Incomprehensible Depth and Height, Ephesians.
3. 18. 19.) The Earth also has Her Quire of Base and Treble voices, Consorting
with others, under Ground, and Her Sepulchers Church for the Service of GODS
Glory. Here are Grave voices too: here Words of Gravitie. The Graves and
Sepulchers, the Moniments and Memorials of GODS Praises, open their Mouths.
And what comes out of them? Not Words of Men, but Men of Words, Men Words, Men
instead of Words. Words as Substa^tiall as Bodies, as Weighty as Dead Bodies,
and as Lively as Twice Living Bodies.

Now if Speech, or Words of Creatures, in their kind be so Substantial, so
Weighty, and so Lively: in so much that the Speech of Men-Creatures is not
only called their Glory above other Creatures (as above ye heard) but is also
called by the name of (...), their Reason, their very Form, their Substantial
and Glorious difference from other Creatures: What then may we think of the
Chiefest Speech or Word of the Creator himself, after whose Image Man was
created? How truly Substantial, Consubstantiall with God, and of the very
Nature of the Deity, How Weighty and Powerful, how Lively must he needs be,
and Life it self?

And so, from speaking of Speech, and Speech Extraordinary and Miracalous, I
descend to some words touching [A Word] here in my Text: and draw nearer and
nearer to the last spoken of Word, giving you still warning by the way, of his
approaching.

One Day tells a Word unto another.] But a Word. Prosopopoeia in the Manner
of their Speech) it is but as it were Tanquam verbum, tanquam scientiam etc.
says S. Austin, as p. 41.
a Verbal Predicatio^, of GODS Glory. So far is the Day from any Real
Glorifying of GOD. Yea and so far are we of from giving any Glory unto GOD,
save in Words only.

Where we see the Goodness of GOD toward us his creatures, so far excelling
above all thanksgiving and praise, as Deeds are still better then Words; nay,
as all his noble Acts surpass our Quid retribuam Domino, our wordy more then
worthy Retributions. Ipse qua^do nos glorificat, (says S. Austin In Psalm. 39.
and see, p. 108. where Athanasius is alleged upon Ephesians. 1. 6.
) facit nos gloriosiores, facit nos honoratiores: quando eum glorificamus,
nobis prodest, non illi. Quomodo enim eum glorificamus? gloriosum dicendo, non
faciendo. When God Glorifieth us, he makes us more Glorious, he makes us more
honorable: But when we Glorify him, it makes nothing for him, but for our
selves. For how do we Glorify him? Only by saying, that he is Glorious; by
calling, but not by making of him so.

O then, Beloved, if it be but Words, they cost us nothing: why spare we them
in glorifying the Lord, and are no more sparefull of them in dishonouring of
him, in profaning, yea and blaspheming of his Holy Name? It Is but Words for
Deeds. But Words. And were all our words so as they should be rectified and
directed to GODS Glory, they would make but One Word in the whole volume
thereof. Yet see, as if we had still lived in Cimmerian darkness, where never
any Day might have informed us: we are so unthankful unto GOD, that scant and
scarce ca^ we afford him Words for Deeds: Words of Glory, for all the Glory
given by his Word unto his Creatures.

And here those Papists, who will not join with us in serving of God, in
praising and glorifying his holy Name; not so much, some of them, as in saying
Amen unto our Graces, (as the Relation of Religion at large discourses) are
very grossly reprehensible. The Days however otherwise it differs from the
Night, yet gladly joins with it in the Relation of GODS Glory; never ceasing,
so as it may, to play the Daily Orator in this behalf. Then let the Papists
liken themselves unto the Day: shall they, because of the dissentings between
them and us, therefore fall out with GOD too, and bar him of his Glory? What
though we were Heretics, nay though we were beasts; ought they not therefore
to accord with us in the recording of GODS Glory? For GOD sends us many times
unto the Dumb Creatures, to join with them herein, yea and to be enjoined a
Lesson by them herein. For this is such a General duty, so generally by all
things in their kind to be observed, that it ought not for any cause, for any
person, time, place, or other respect whatsoever to be deserted. They must
maintain the Predicating of GODS Glory de omni, per se, and quatenus ipsum; or
else they will prove erroneous, if not heretical Demonstrators of Gods Glory.
To praise and Glorify GOD in Words (for in Works they say they go before us)
is the End too wherefore they were created: it is their Glory too, their
Beauty, and Perfection. If they will forsake all these for our sakes, they
will do somewhat for their own.

One Day tells a Word unto another] But One Word. a Word without a Plural
number Avenar. Lexic.
.

But One Word; in respect of All GODS Glory.

But One Word; in respect of that Word, which last of all we shall speak of.

One Word, is but little in respect of all the Knowledge in the World. But much
less is this Word of Gods Glory, (so as by the Days it is declared) and this
Motto much less then one atome to the whole motey world of Democritus; if it
be compared to the Infinite Worlds of Glory belonging to the Creator of this
World. So that, though many be the words which the Days utter touching Gods
Glory, their words of this matter still ishuing and gushing forth like water
out of a never dried fountain: (according to that which has been delivered
in the expounding of the word (...) here in my Text) yet are they all but One
Word, in respect of the whole Subject of their Speech.

O then, Beloved, if we should spend all our time in speaking of, and to GODS
Glory: yet how little world Our words be in respect of that immense Matter, of
and to the which we should still speak! For Our Days are but a spanne long.
They are gone like a shadow, and pass away like smoke, Psa. 102. The Days
will last, when all Our Days are past: they will line, when we are dead and
gone.

And why then, Good GOD, have thou made Man, that he of all others, he rather
then the Day, should be the Speaker in the Parliament of thy Praises? He in
Words to Glorify thy Name, not only for himself, but for all other Creatures
too? tanquam nomine aliarum creaturarum omnium, pro tot tantisque beneficiis
etc. as Zanchius De Operibus Dei, part. 3. l. 2, cap. 1.
speaks (and Epictetus Arrian E. pictet. lib. 1. cap. 17.
has the like) in the name as it were of all other Creatures. What? and of the
Day too, which it self, after his Manner, speaks so much in thy praise? And
must it not needs then be no more then One word of thy Praise and Glory, and of
our Thankesgiving unto thee for all thy Benefits, which any of us all can utter
all our life long, in respect of thy Glorious Name, how it excels above all
Thankesgiving and Praise? Nehem. 9. 5.

One Day tells a Word unto another. A Word, and allwaies of GODS Glory. The
Subject every Day, and to every Day, the same continually. Yet never is any Day
weary of this every Days Subject; so showing how the Glory of God is no more
tedious for a continual Subject in this world, then it will be for an
everlasting Object in the world to come.

Then judge you, Beloved, whether they be not worthy of Reprehension; who
think it too much, to have the Gloria Patri etc. so much repeated, and would
allow it but one place for many: as my self have seen in too many places of
this Land; where, neglecting the Order prescribed by the Church and by our
Service Book, of concluding every Psalm with the Gloria Patri, etc. they, and
they too some of them who otherwise would seem to be formal enough, make have
to skipp over the often mention of that Glory, for which they were created, and
unto which they owe their chiefest service.

They that thus find fault with the so often together inculcating of Gods
Glory, why find they not the like fault with the Seraphims? Who in the sixth
of Isay, ver. 2. 3. (burning with the love of Gods Glory otherwise the^ these
fault-finders do) One cried unto another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the
Lord of hosts: the whole world is full of his Glory. Why correct they not our
Saviors Eli, Eli, upon the cross? Or his praying the Third time, saying the
Same Words? Mat. 26. 44. Why blame they not the Prophet David, for that he
would have all those that love the salvation of the Lord, to lay always, the
Lord be praised? Psalm. 40. 19. And for that same in one selfsame Psalm Four
times reiterated, (Psalm. 107.) O that men would therefore praise the Lord for
his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children of men?
And that, as often in the same Psalm, So when they cried unto the Lord in
their trouble, he delivered the^ out of their distress? And that Thrice in one
Psalm (Psalm. 115.) He is their helper and defender? And that, (Psalm. 116.) I
will call upon the name of the Lord? And that, (Ps. 118) In the name of the
Lord will I destroy them? As also, for that so often together repeated (Psalm.
118. and, 136.) His mercy endures for ever? Lastly, why blame they not the
Prophet David, for here avouching, that One Day still tells (the Glory of
God) unto another? Nay, and the Days themselves too, for so doing? For telling
a word, But a word, and But one word of Gods Glory? Always of GODS Glory, and
yet always telling that, and besides that doing nothing. For Every Day unto
another utters the Same. The Same. what is that same? The Glory of God.

Nor every Day only insisteth only on this golden Matter, but every Hour of
the Day too, yea and every Moment of an Hour (according also to that
Explication given in my first Sermon) still dwells on this one Glorious
Subject, incessantly urging the never ceasing Glory of the Highest.

Some man will say; he disliketh not the often repetition of the Gloria Patri,
etc: quatenus, for, or in that it is the often mention of Gods Glory. But,
(...), Arist. Physic. lib. 3. contex. 51
He may not so be gone. For, quatenus, even in and for that it is the often
mentioning of Gods Glory, therefore he ought not at all to dislike it. It Is (as
you have heard) the End whereunto man is ordained, to show forth GODS Glory
both in word and deed: it is all his Virtue and Perfection. He therefore that
shall mislike the continual doing thereof either way, does as if he should
pick a quarrel with a Rose, because it never smells but As Aul. Gellius
(lib. 19 cap. 2,) cites out of Aristotle.
sweet: or with himself, for being always Reasonable; and happily that makes
him in this thing so unreasonable. for it is a shame, Beloved, that such
Professors of the Service of GOD, as we would seem to be, should yet come
short of giving that Glory unto GOD, which even the whole world sticks not to
do: part-Christians, (as they are reckoned) Turks, and Infidels, and all. Not
any Tract in Arabian, which is not begun with the name of God, and of the
Merciful God, prefixed to it. In the End of the Lords Prayer, though the Glory
of GOD be there immediately before mentioned, (as ye know in the Conclusion)
yet there is annexed also to this sense: Honor and Praise and Glory, and
Virtue and Power and Justice to God the only King everlasting, for evermore. In
the beginning even of the Alcoran it self are put those three letters, Eliph,
Lem, and Mim: which they call the Seal of the Book, and by which (as they
say) are Quod enim semel fecisse bonu^ est, non potest malum esse, si
frequenter fiat* etc. Hieronym. Epistola vltima. Si enim semel facere optimum
est; quanto magis saepius* Si hora prima; go and tota die. Lacta^tius, lib. 4.
c. 28.
meant the Name, the Majesty, and high Command of God. It being a thing even
by the Law of Nature written in men's hearts, and unto which the whole world is
driven, by words to magnify GODS name, and by a verbal predication to declare
his Glory. And does it not then concern us more near, now that the Glory of
God is every Day more and more made manifest, to Seal up every Psalm, yea (if
it were possible) every word, every work, every thought, every imagination of
ours, with some specification, or else some intimation or other of that Great
Glory?

It Was not the often repetition, Beloved, that made the First dislikers of the
Gloria Patri, etc: not to favor it. No. the Arrians stuck at it, because they
stuck at Christ's Divinity. So did the Sabellians, because they co^fou^ded the
Three Persons. Wherefore the Church then wisely brought in the Gloria Patri,
etc: as to try who were such Heretics, so especially for the mainetaining of
Gods Glory against them. Yea but the Cause why it was so ordained is now
ceased. And how is that true? Arrianisme as yet remaining among the Turks,
according to the first sowing thereof among them by Sergius Monachus, who was an
Arrian. Or say that this were not so: yet the Cause of retaining it, being so
ordained, is not none at all. We know not all the Devils craft: his purpose may
be again to induce, and then to maintain old heresies. As at this day we see
Arrianisme about to creep into the Christian world again, and now and then to
peep up his head. And it is not good for us to be unprovided of our former
furniture; and because we have no war, to fling away our weapons.

Again; another reason, of not relinquishing or disvsing this most excellent
Epiphoneme; is, that which now we have in hand: even the oftener repetition and
more frequent commemoration of the Glory of God, the Father the Son and the
Holy Gbost; A reason sufficient, if it had been even of the first ordeining of
it.

And so drawing nearer to my Text, and to you too, Beloved: Beloved, I beseech
you, that you would be very frequent in giving Glory unto God by your words
and communication; and to be so far from thinking it tedious and tiresome
unto you, to be always co^versant in this one Subject: as that you would
esteem it the chief Glory of your Speech, to have it seasoned Col. 4. 6.
with the often mention of Gods Glory: thinking your lips so much the happier,
the oftener his Praise, the praise of his Glory, passes through them: Hor. de
Art. Poetic.
Haec placuit semel, haec decies repetita placebit.

For how else may you be thought loath to be always conversant in setting
forth Gods Glory by your good Conversation! (to which also we are all bounden,
and of which we spoke before) to whom it shall be so tedious to be tied, but
in words only, to so Glorious a Subject; About which we should be always
turning and returning, tanquam rota Sim. de Cassia lib. 4. c. 1.
versa and reversa semper circa idem centrum, like a wheel about the same
point or center continually: yea and which ought to be unto us as a charmed
circle, where all our spirits for ever should be enchanted. So should we be
reputed worthy instruments of Gods Glory: plectratum semper instrumentum Simon.
de Cass. ibid.
etc: and like an instrument always ready strung, obediently to sound forth and
to resound what song our master requires, the song of his own The word of God
twofold
Praise and Glory, though he demand it never so often.

One Day tells a word unto another.] The word of God: and so the Glory of GOD
too.

The Word of GOD is either De hoc duplici verbo, vid. Damascen. de Ortb. fid.
lib. 2. cap. 21. and alios.
(...), or (...): Mental, or Enuntiatiue. This word of God, is The revealed
will of God As Damascen defines the word of God. Each related by the Days.
:That the Inmost word, the Qui dicit Deum mentem, dieit eius prudentiam.
Theophil. Antioch. lib. 1. ad Autolyc. c. 1.
Mind, or Essential will of God. This, Verbum Ita etiam Ireneus (l. 4. c. 3.)
Moysilitere, in quit, verba sunt Christi. and paulo post: Moysi, and reliquorum
sine dubio prophetarum sermoncs ipsius sunt.
Christi; That, verbum Christus, as S. Austin In Ps. 118.
speaks. Either of these words is by One Day told unto another.

1 For the first, it is manifest: first, out of that Ps. 119. Lamed. v. 1. O
Lord, thy Word endures for ever in heaven. Then; Revelatio fit non solum per
doctrinam, sedetiam per opera Vid P. Lomb. sup. Romans 1.
: The will of God is revealed not only by Doctrine, but by the works of God
too. According to that in the 19th, and 20th Verses of the first to the
Romans: And that in the 17th and 18th Verses of the tenth to the Romans;
where the Apostle says, Hearing is by the Word of God. But I demand, have they
not heard? No doubt their sound went out through all the Earth, and their words
into the ends of the World; alleging the 4th Verse of this Psalm.

Where we may note, how the Apostle proves The Hearing of the Word of God, by
The Hearing of their words: as if their Words were the Word of God. Their
words, that is, The Days Words too, among the rest: which necessarily, and
most naturally, must be meant by that place in this Psalm.

How they had any Word of God, which they might be said to hear, who happily
were not within hearing of the Prophets or Apostles, S. Chrysostom teaches
us: as in the already alleged places out of him in my second Sermon, so also
at large on the first chapter to the Romans; where he says, (...); etc: Did
God send down a voice from heaven unto them? No. (says he) But that which
might prevail more with them, then such a voice, that did he; he set forth
his Creatures and displaied them openly to the view of all; that they by their
sight understanding the sightlinesse of things visible, might so mount up to
the invisible God. And again, in that which next shall be alleged out of S.
Chrysostom. As also Athanasius (in the Fragments of him) says: (...). And
afterward, (...) Sc. (...).
(...). Have those works and creatures of God, which are mute and dumb, yet no
voice or speech at all? Yes, (says he) their admirable feature is a kind of
talking of theirs, and their beauty and Eutaxie, or goodly Order, is as it
were a sound or voice of theirs.

Hence arise two Observations. One touching our Word of God reported by the
Days, we may note how negligent we are, or else how ignorant of the Whole
Word, the whole Revealed word of God (The things revealed belonging to us, and
to our children for ever. Deuteronomy. 29. 29.) for, as if there were no Word of God,
but only written in paper: so pass we over lightly Opera Dei no^ intuentur,
and opera manum eius non considerant. Isai. 5. 12.
what ever of Gods word is written, imprinted, stamped, and engraven in his
works. Whereas this also ought highly to be esteemed and regarded by us.
Especially, whereas the Book of the Scripture is the renewing Vid. Bonave^
tur^tom. 1. p. 44 and 54. and Eras. in Paracles. pr^fix. operibus Athanasii.
and Theodoret. de prouidentia. Sermon. 6. paulo a principio.

Eccles. 3. 11.


, repairing, and restoring of the Book of the World; like unto the renewing of
the two Tables of the Testimony, (Exodus 34) after that the first were broken.
And it is no good part in a Scholar, as soon as he has a new Book, straight
ways to fling away the Old: especially he having not yet thoroughly learned
the old. For GOD has, indeed, set the World in their heart, yet cannot man
findout the works that GOD has wrought from the beginning even to the end.
Which one S. Frauncis Bacon, in his book of the Advanceme^t* of Learning, page
4. 6.
of late, though no Divine, yet divinely has interpreted of the Supreme and
Summary law of Nature. And when we have done all that we can to find out Gods
Glory by his Works: we may still say with Job Job. 26. 14.
; Lo, these are part of his ways: but how little a portion hear we of him?
And, as it is in Ecclesiasticus, (cap. 43. v. 30, 31, 32) There are hid yet
greater things then these be, and we have seen but a few of his works.

Word of God reported by the Days makes them. An Observation drawn by S.
Chrysostom out of my Text, and the Texts about it: as appears by his
exposition on the twentieth verse of the first to the Romans: where, having
alleged the first part of the first verse of this Psalm, he says: (...)
(...); etc. What will the Heathen say at that Day? can they say, O God, we
knew thee not? we heard not of thee? No did? (says he) never heard ye the
Heavens speaking unto you by their sightlinesse, and the excellently composed
harmony of all things sou^ding shriller then any trumpet? never saw you the
manner of the Day and of the Night, how still they continue on their course?
etc. Athanasius also Ad inscriptionem Psalm. 18. in Fragment* and ^^periu^; p.
83. (...) etc.
, upon the Title of this Psalm, says: (...); What says he to the Heathen?
etc. to the Heathen. For, because it is the Word of God too, which One Day
reports unto another, and yet for all that they have not believed The Days
Report: therefore are they altogether without excuse, for not Believing when
they heard the word of God.

O but if we had heard That Word of God which you have heard, the Revealed
Written word of God, then we might have believed. O, no, it is not likely: GOD
at all times and in all ages providing for all men the fittest means* in
respect of themselves and of their times, to bring them unto GOD because he
would have all men saved. Therefore as it was said of the Jews As Lyra there
interprets it sed vide I^en^u^. lib. 4. cap. 3. vbi dict^ interpretatu^, de
his omnibu^ qui adhuc era^t in vi^a.
,(Luke 16. 31.) If they hear not And Christ says. (^^ h. 5. 47) If ye believe
not Mo^es writing^* how s^a^^ ye believe my word^?
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from
the d^ad a gain And Christ says. (^^ h. 5. 47) If ye believe not Mo^es
writing^* how s^a^^ ye believe my word^?
. So may we say of the Heathen; If they would not hear the works of God, if
not the Report that the Days, and other of Gods Creatures, gave forth touching
Gods Glory: neither would they have been persuaded, if they should have had
and heard Moses and the Prophets. That which was made manifest in many of the^,
who questionless had been made acquinted with the Books of Moses, and yet
continued still in their Infidelity.

Then how much more inexcusable are the Atheists The like has Athanasius of
the Jews, in respect of the Gentiles of forme^ times: Dudum* n. Iudeorum
populus amplioris doctrinae gratia reficiebatur: quippe qui non solu^ ex
creaturae operibus, verum and ex divinis literis Dei scie^ti^m hauriebat.
Athanas. contra Gentil. lib. 1. fol. 218. C. circa initium.
and Infidels of these later times? who have heard The Report that one Day
makes to another of The will of God Revealed not only by his Works, but per
doctrina^ and per inspirationem, by Doctrine and hy Inspiration too. For the
whole Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable to Teach etc.
2. Tim. 3. 16. Which whole Scripture they have had long ere this, by One Days
Report unto another, promulgated and proclaimed unto them. And so have they had
Another word to teach the^ too; another Word of God; another Word which One Day
tells to another. Nor only have they had the Doctrine of Moses and the
Prophets to instruct them, but of the Apostles too: nor of those only, but of
him that taught them too, even of Christ himself: and therefore as yet of
Another word of God too; another Word which One Day tells to another.
Another? Yea, and anothergates Word of God is this, of which we are now to
speak in the next place: being now as it were carried back again into the
maine Sea of GODS Glory; The Days here in my Text seeming to smile out a
certain willingness, to have the whole course of their Discourse there
determined: like as when Virgil.
-- Oceano properant se tingere Soles.
One Day Tells a word unto another.


A Word] By Telling of whose Glory, the Days have gained the greatest Glory of
their whole Report. Report, now iumping and joining hands with that Report of
the Prophet Isaiah, where he says; Lord, who has believed our Report? etc.
which Report, to report unto you of whose Glory it was, I leave to S. John,
chap. 12. v. 41.

A Word] of which (as in his Common place, and as his Expanse and Pertingencie,
together with GODS Glory, is extended over all, and beyond all Encomiasticall
Explication) much already has been spoken. And yet, as in his Proper place of
Circumscribing Glory, I have more to say of Him, which I have thought upon.
(Ecclesiasticus, 39. 12.)

A Word] more Significant, then (...) (Da^ar) is in Hebrew. A Word] that
signisieth a Thing, whereby all Words do Signify. A Thing, before All things,
and in who^ All things consist, Col. 1. 17.

A word] Strong, of Almighty Operation, Cause of All things, and by whom All
Words and Works Arose, and were Raised up from Nothing.

A Word] that is The Day Spring from an High, that has visited us. (Luk: 2. v.
78.) and out of whose Strength comes forth Sweetness See Judge. 14.
.

A Word] that is a Branch, or Sprout (Zach. 3. 8. and 6. 12 and Isa. 11. 1.
)overspreading the whole world, aimed at by the Branches of Signification of
the Days Telling, and that (as the Prophet Zach. 6. 12.
says) shall Grow up out of his place, and shall cause Others to Malach. 4. 2.
grow and Arise up by Him and with him.

A Word] that is the Standing Isa. 11. 10. and, Romans 15. 12.
Standert Root of Iesse, that being John. 12. 32.
Lifted up draws all men unto him, into his Glorious Rest Isai. 11. 10. and
Romans 15. 12.
Us especially The Gentiles, that Trust, and Seek unto his Ensign; whom also
he has received, to The Glory of GOD, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 15. where
he withal makes Christ's Arising a Refuge to the Gentiles, A Light unto Them,
and a Ruler over Them, to be an Especial point of GODS Glory; That the
Gentiles might Glorify GOD for his Mercy, etc. And therefore I might by no
means omit, to touch this point in this Relation of GODS Glory: no, nor to
touch the minds of us Gentiles with This Points Admonition; how that upon iuse
cause it is especially required of us Gentiles to Glorify the Lord. And
therefore let us all hereunto for ever, by your Amendment, in Obeying his
Commandments, say Amen.

A Word] That is Alpha and Omega, The Beginning and the End, of all the
Alphabet of all the words and works, that we, or any other, can Speak, or Do
unto GODS Glory.

A Word] So Beginning, That So was In the Beginning, and Before The Beginning
of All Worlds: That In him, By him, and Through him, is not only the Source and
the Beginning, but the very Being, of Days and Nights, and the rest of GODS
Creatures. And So, that never will any Day or Night, nor should any of his Of
spring make an End of Talking, and of making Show and Declaration of His
Beginning. His Beginning, that causes the Creatures Perfectst Being. His
Beginning, and making of an End, To whom and For whom are All Things, and their
Ends. Whose Making of an End, shall give Beginning to their Greatest Glory and
Happiness: which is an Everlasting view of The Greatest show of GODS Glory,
when in the End of the Alphabet God shall be All in All (1. Cor. 15. 28.) Most
Admired for his Great Goodness, (O how Great, and O how Good!) Most Richly and
Gloriously Beseene, and Seen of All.

One Day tells a word unto another] (...), This Word is the Lord; says
Clemens Alexandrinus (...).
. So Justin Martyr Apolog. 2. pro Christianu.
understands (...), The Doctrine and the Appearing, or Coming of Christ, to
be here uttered, revealed, and reported. S. Austin also, on the Title of this
Psalm, says: De Jesus Christo haec dicuntur, These things are spoken of Jesus
Christ. And on my Text, by the word, [Word,] he understands Plenitudinem
^ncommutabilis Sapientiae Det, quod verbum in principio Deus a pud Deum est:
The Fullness of the unchangeable Wisdom of God, which word was in the
Beginning GOD with GOD. In like sense Arnobius and many others have taken the
Word, which here One Day is said to tell another: Especially those, who have
interpreted these words Allegorically, whereof ye heard in my first Sermon.

To this Exposition are fitting (among other things) the Springs of the Arabian
Root, There page 28.
also bespoken for this Service. Neither is the Word [Omer] thereunto unsuitable,
being (as has been said) only of the Singular Number: Even as Christ also
himself is The Word Christ. a true Union VNE SANS PLUS, One and no more.
One and Singular. One Seed, (Gal. 3. 16.) One Mediator, and One Savior. One,
as he is GOD: One, as he is Man: and One, as he is both GOD and Man. One, as
GOD: One, as The Only Begotten Son of GOD: And therefore One too, in the
Assumed Humanity, by unity of Person See, the Divine Creed of Athanasius.
.So, still One; and But One word, as before ye heard: but such a One as is
better then all others; and, being well Learned, will make you the greatest
Scholars in the world. Ye need not, nay ye must not, go so far as to the
Plural Number, to Learn more then One Phil. 3. 8. 1. Cor 2. 2.
such word, to become as Singular Scholars, as S. Paul was: who Esteemed not to
Know Any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified.

Si Christum Discis, satis est al. quod.
sicaetera Nescis:
Si Christum Nescis, nthil est al. quod.
sicaetera Discis.
Learn Christ, and thou art Blessed, no matter for therest:
Save Christ, Learn All the rest; to Save thou wa^tst the Best.
And no marvel, for this Word is Proper only unto him, who Knows All
things: and to know the Proprieties of this Word, is a true Impropriation of
the Benefit of All Knowledge. Yea the very Etymology of this Word, is True
Reason, Word-Truth, and Word of Truth: enough to make True Schollership. And if
the Words of Men do so further us in the way of Learning and Knowledge: how
then shall not this most Curious and Exact word, this Lordly Word, this Word of
the Lord, and Proper word of God, being once learned, prosper with us, to the
Command of commendation for our Learning?

If Men and Scholars words Or; for skill such.
such Skillful Or; for skill such.
praises have:
What must Lord Master Makers word, that All Skill gave?
If Made words of Made Men such skill make-praises have:
What word, that skild Skild Me^ to Make, and Killed to Save?
In this and every respect, Apolinarius does well render this Word here in my
Text, (...), an Honored, or, a precious word. (...), Chosen, or Choice, and
Precious, S. Peter 1. Pet. 2. 4, 6
calls him: and he is called by Hermes As he is alleged by Lactantius, Div.
instit. l. 4. c. 7.
, (...), a Holy word.

Of this indeed most Choice, most Holy, most Honorable, and most Precious Word
of GOD, Two things.

1 The One; How this word is by One Day told unto another.

2 The other; That the Days by recounting this word, do most of all recount
Gods Glory.

1 Touching the first; it is an excellent place of Athanasius, against the
Gentiles, where he says: Vel (secunda^ P etrum Nannium) Sufficit, (...).
Iuvat creaturam ipsam contra illos citare testem clamantem (...), propemodum.
Nan.
quodammodo, and autorem opificemque sum Deum Patrem Domini nostri Jesus Christi
aperte praedicantem. And a little after: Nempe enim haec ipsa constantia
praedicat, insinuatque Patrem verbi suum esse opificem ac Deum, dum absque vlla
Vid. Graec. and versionem Nan, nii.
co^tradictione ipsius paret imperio: sicut divina quoque Lex admonet, dicens:
Coeli enarrant Gloriam Dei, etc: It likes me well (says he) to produce, as
witness against the Heathen, the Heavens and the Firmament, the Day and the
Night, yea and the whole state of things created: as it were (or, well near)
openly proclaiming and pronouncing, God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ to
be their maker and creator. For this their stablenesse and continuance always
after one sort, signifies and denounces the Father of the word to be their
maker and their God: whilst they still obey his saying of the word, without
any word of contradicting, or gainsaying. That which also Gods word tells us,
where it is said: The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handy Work: One Day tells a word unto another, etc. See more
hereof there, about a leaf after; from those words, Porro veritatis, via an
eum, etc. unto those. N si forte sicuti Deum negaverunt, etc. and fol. 218. ^,
from Porro ipsom in omnibus etc. unto, Haec autem and omnis divinitus inspi
rata etc.


Diverse and sundry ways is this Word by One Day told unto another. as by the
Resembla^ce that every Day has of the Creator, and therefore of this Word
also. This being that word of the Lord, by which the Heavens and the Days were
made. (Psalm 33. 6. and Ioh. 1. 3.) and this Word being that Wisdom of the
Lord, by which he has laid the foundation of the earth; and that
Understanding, through which he has established the Heave^s. Prove. ^. 19. Of
the Resemblance of the Creatours Glory enstamped in the Days, already In the
third Sermon.
has been spoken. To which we may add that of Theophilus Antiochenus, (lib.
2.) Who says, that those three first Days, which were before the creation of
the two great Lights, (...) Are types and models of a Trinity* of God, and of
his Word, and of his Wisdom. So that this Word was that Day first declared,
in which Gods Wisdom first declared it self unto the world, by making the
first Day, and the works thereof, by such a I^a etiam Irenaeus (l. 4* c. 17)
Sapientiam Spi. ritui attribuit. So is he called by Hermes, (...). Lacta^tius.
word of Wisdom, and in such wisdom of his word. And in like sort was this
word declared by the rest of the Days of the Creation, and declared was it in
their According to an Exposition before in the first Sermon.
Creation. Also afterward this Word was that Day excellently published and
pronounced, in which he first was Genesis 3. ^5. See the last Point.
promised for the Redemption of the world. Then again from time to time, from
Day to Day continually, how often by types and figures, by shadows and
resemblances, by visions and by prophecies, was this Word still forshewed, yea
and showed forth unto the world?

So that it was no marveile, if, by the Days so and so reporting this Word
unto the world, the very heathen men themselves had such knowledge of this
heavenly word, as they had. For, Fuerunt and Prophetae non ipsius, in quibus
etiam aliqua inveniuntur, quae de Christo audita ceeinerunt: sicut etiam de
Sibylla dicitur, etc. says S. Austin, in his begun Exposition on the Epistle
to the Romans. There were certain Prophets, and yet none of Gods Prophets
nether, in whom are some things found concerning Christ: which after they had
heard, they also sang of and reported: among whom was Sibylla. Which (says S.
Austin)* I should not easily have believed, but for that of a certain famous
Poet among the Latins, (meaning Eclog. 4.
Virgil) Vltima Cumaet venit ta^ carminis aetas, etc. And S. Austin has
afterward in the same place, how that the Apostle knew, ea in libris gentium
inveniri testimonia veritatis, that there were such testimonies of the Truth
found in the books of the Gentiles. And again, alittle after: In literis
Gentiu^ superstitiosae idololatriae plenissimis aliquid quod ad Christu^
pertinet invenitur. There is something found concerning Christ, the^ in the
most superstitious and Idolatrous books of the Gentiles. Norknew the Gentiles
something only concerning Christ. For they had knowledge also of this Word,
even as he was the Word; as appears by that of Serapis unto Thulis king of
Egypt:

(...). And Lactantius (in his 4th book of Divine Institutions, the 9.
Chapter) says, That the Philosophers were not ignorant of this Word; and
alleges there to that purpose Zenon, predicating this word: and Hermes, often
describing virtutem maiestatemque verbi, the virtue and majesty of this word.
Besides, Lib. 11. de Evang. prepar. cap. 10.
Eusebius, and Cyrill write, (and the like is also showed by S. Chrysostom,
and S. in Sermon in verba illa [In principio crat verb^ m] H^cego (Sez^illa
verba Ioannis) inquit, novi multos etiam extra veritatis rationem mundana^
sapientia pr^ditos, iactantes, etc.
Basil) That Amelius a Platonist, and Heraclitus approved it to be well said
of that Barbarian, (so called they S. John, because he was a Jew) In the
beginning was the Word, and the word was with God, and that word was God. S.
Austin also Lib. 8, confess. cap. 2, in principio. Commemo ravi legisse me
quosdam libros, in istis autem omnibus modis insinuari Deum and eius verbum.
affirms, that he had read this beginning of S. John's Gospel in the books of
some of the Platonists. And in his tenth book de civitate dei, cap. 29. Iuxta
finem.
he says, That a certain Platonist (as Simplictanus, a reverend old man, and
which was afterward Bishop of Myllane, was wont to tell him) said, That that
beginning of S. John's Gospel was worthy to be written in Aureis literis
conscribendum, and per omnes Ecclesias, etc.
Golden Letters, and to be set up and published in every Church and
Congregation, and that in the most eminent and conspicuous places.

Out of all which we gather still more and more, how inexcusable the Infidels
and unbelievers are, for not Believing this word of God, yea and for not
Believing in him, of whom by every Days Report they had heard so much. And so
much of the first thing here observed, touching this most honorable and most
precious Word of God.

Gods Glory by the word Christ Jesus Best of all Reported.
2 The other, and last thing is; That the Days by recou^ting this word, do
most of all recount Gods Glory.

The Reason hereof is plain. For God speaking diverse and sundry ways unto
us, that we may see him; and there being Three miroirs, in which God shows
him self and his Glory unto us to be known: to wit, his word by his works,
his word by the Scriptures, and his word Christ Jesus: by this last word only
is God best known, and shines perfectly unto us: In as much as it is by him
too, that God is by those other two ways, or any way whatsoever, revealed
unto Whereof see Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 14.
us. And in as much as he is the Best word of all; as S. John labors to
prove; both in his Gospel, and in his Epistles: in both which he calls him
The word of Ioh. 1. 4. and 1. Ioh. 1. 1.
life, atque in vita concludit omnia Dei beneficta, under Life he compriseth
all Gods Benefits, says one Naogeorgus in 1. Ioh. 1, 1.
there.

Gods Glory, by the Day, or, Time of our Redemption.
Among the which, the chiefest, and redou^ding most to GODS Glory, is our
Redemption, both promised, and performed. So here we have a word*] out of whose
Incarnation, asof the most rare and excellent, most Divine and wonderful Babe
and Suckling, the Praise of God is best perfited. Out of whose Nativity, but
much more out of the effusion of his Blood, as of the Best wine Reserved to the
last, and the infusion thereof into our wounds; out of the aspersion and
inspersion thereof, and out of the virtue of his most Glorious Resurrection,
do the Sparkles of Gods Glory arise and mount up into the Highest.

Hereof; and how Sweet, how Graceful, and how Glorious, the Speech is, the
Hearing, the Report hereof: has, in this poor speech of mine, already been
reported to your hearing.

In Respect of all which, yea All Gods Benefits toward us, Christ is most
worthily called [Omer] a word.] A word in Deed: or, a Doing word. A word] of
Greatest Power, to Do Such things. A word] of most Faithfulnesse] to Do what
was said, in Things of so hard Belief; and for Those, who were so Unfaithful
in their Deeds and Sayings. A word] of Greatest Comfort: a true (...), or
Homer, unto us, according to all Greekish Derivations. A word] a pledge, of
Gods Good will toward us. A word,] our true Hermes, and Interpreter, by who^
GOD and Man came to parle to together. A word] by whose words we must be
Guided, and all our words and works must be Directed. Yea and, (to say it
again) A word] of most True Direction; which we must (...), Follow, as the
Guide of our feet into the way of peace. A word] whereby GOD did (...), Follow
after man that had Forsaken him; Seek him, that was Lost, until he Found
him; Made him, and, after he was Marred, did Remake him. And therefore too A
word] for us to put our Trust and Confidence in, above all Things and Works in
the world. According as David often says: In Or, His.
thy word; not, In my Works, is my Or, Hope. Vid. page 31.
Trust.

A word] to whom, having hidden in him all the Treasures of VVisdome and
Knowledge, (Col. 2. 3.) do most truly and principally belong those exceeding
high Elogies, or Reports of Commendation, which very many have given unto
Homer. Among the rest, That of King Alexander, calling him (...), a Kingly
Poet. That of Aristotle In Art. Poet.
, (...): He only of all Poets (or, Word-Works contrivers) is so wise and
witty, to Know what is Fit for him to Do, and to observe a Decorum in every
thing Vid Ecclus, 39. 17, 21, 33, 34.
.And that of Velleius Lib. 1.
: Magnitudine Verse. 1 bulus Psalmi, Opera Manuum eius: Grec (...).
Operum, and fulgore Ordinem seculorum tanquam pulc^errunum Carmen, etc. p. 68.
and vid p. 45.
Carminu^, Solus appellari Poet a mer uit: He only, for the Greatness of his
Works, and Resplendent Glory of his Words, (...), Xenoph. Memorab. lib. 1.
(...), Themist. (...) etc. A^^st^^. in Art. po^t. In ver^is, etc. Fabius.
has deserved the name of a Poet, or, a Word-Work. Maker. In the Words of the
Lord are his Works. Ecclus, 42. 15. By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens
Made Psalm. 33 6. 9.
.etc. He spoke the word, and it was Done Psalm 148. 5. and, in Effect, Mo^^^
(Ge^ 1) (...). Clem. Alexand* Strom. 5.
. He spoke the Word and they were Made; he Commanded and they were Created.
Yea, He Spoke the Word too, and Men they were Remade; he said Amen, and Men
they were Recreated, and Amended. Who See Ioh. 7. 46. and, Luke 4. 22.
ever Spoke as This Word Speaks? Who ever Writ, or Wrought, as This Word
Works? Yea and writes too in the Tables of our Hearts, and writes ^ookes
too of GODS Glory; of larger volume then the Heavens, and of more contenting
Contents then the Creation.

One Day Tells another] This Word to be Their Maker. And more then that: This
Word to be Man's Maker and Remaker.

Word, worth His word, for work of Day of worlds Rede^ptio^,
Worthy Worlds All-Dayes words and works of Redamation!
More worthy word, of words and works of Commendation,
Then All-Dayes Glory-words and work^s can make R^lation!
And no marveile. For here we have a Day, Telling, and Told of, of Joy
unspeakable: The Day, or Time, of our Redemption: By and through a Word
unspeakable.

A Hymn for the Day of ou^* Redemption.
O how we Loose the Day, and truly do the Truants play,
When nothing we assay, as Treasure Or, Troveurs; or, Trov^^s.
Trovants of That Day,
Which to Kings Treasuredue of Heave^s Praises may accrue*
Whilst Day is still in view, when Word did Happy Days renew;
Such Word of Such a King, Word King, Word God, Or, Of.
and Such Being:
King, End, and Beginning of Words, Works, Worlds, and Every thing.
O might Lives Thankful Ryme in Or, deeds.
Deed, to us Vid. Ephesians. 5. 16. and, Col. 4. 5*
Redeem the Time
Lost by Unthankful crime, In Words, For Words Redeeming Time!
O word of our Redemption! o Omer, our true (...)
Rome, and (...), Fobur. and see the last verse of this Psalm.
Strength of our Redemption! o our Redeeming Homer too! And therefore our true
Divine Homer too: most worthy of so high an Aspiration; most worthy of the
Attribution of Divine (...). Plato in Ione. (...), Arist. in Art. poet.

Immortale^ hanc Coelestemque Naturam. Quinti^. X.


Titles, and of the (...). Plato in Ione. (...), Arist. in Art. poet.

Immortale^ hanc Coelestemque Naturam. Quinti^. X.


Immortal and Heavenly Nature. Which if by a profuse Hyperbole (to make the
best of it) they have been ascribed, and that by some Christians too, to Homer
of the Infidels, to the Almost Adoring of him: The^ much easier, I hope, it
will be to persuade all men, to ascribe, and that without any Hyperbole, to
this Christ-Homer of us Christians, True Divinity, the Divine and Heavenly
Nature, perfect Deity, and Equality with God: and so to proceed from Almost,
to Altogether worshipping of Him.

This also is enforced, by virtue of his being, as every Day exceedingly unto
Gods glory Reports of him, 1, Cor. 2 11.
the (...) word of God, the word of his Mind, the word of his Counsel, the word
of his Wisdom, and Intelligence. For, says the Apostle, What man knows the
things of a Man, save the spirit of man, which is in him? Even so the things of
God knovveth no Man, but he that is of the same Nature with God. No, not Those
Deep things of God, which are Revealed unto us, are Searched, or Revealed, but
by the Spirit of God. much less are V. 10.
All things, yea Those Deep Things of God, which are Concealed from us and
Unsearchable, and the Inward and Essential Things of God; much less, I say,
are they Searched but by GOD; who knows the^ without Searching. Who knows
the Romans 11. 34. and 1. Cor. 2. 16
Mind of God, but Himself? Who has been his Counselor, or mata Heo. isai
40. 13.
Man of his Counsel, but Himself? Who of His Knowledge and Wisdom, but
Himself? In a word, who is in the (...) Iatrinsecis Diuinitatis habens ^an^^m
Notitiam cum p^tre. Lyra there.
Bosom of the Father, (as S. John speaks) but such a one His Son, as is of
the Same Nature with Himself?

Moreover Saint John says plainly, and without Trope or Figure, that That
word was Ich. 1. 1.
God. God? And what more can be said, to show the excellency of this word?
Word? And what less then is a word, to be a God? And therefore he must needs
be (...), Noted by S. Chrysostom, and Theophylact. by S. Chrysostom, homil. in
loan. 1. and 2.
the word, or, that word, a word (...), in an eminent sort. Whose Glorious
Eminency, as it is at once deciphered by S. John, (Ioh. 1. 14.) When he says,
we saw the Glory thereof, as the Glory of the only begotten Son of the
Father: so also shall it be showed in all that follows. Whilst we shall
farther declare, how by this word, or, Son of God, we are brought to the
rightest knowledge of God, and that in him is Gods Glory most resplendent.

Isai. 9. 6. He is called Counselor. As who only is pri vie to Gods Counsel,
and can best Counsel us in things concerning GOD. He is (as ye have heard)
our right Hermes, and our Homer too. To whom both Princes and Peoples Muses
should be addicted and affixed. Whose Healing Rev. 22. 2.
Leaves and words of wisdom ought still to lie in and underneath Nosti ^illud
Alexandri Macedonis, qui Homerum ad verbu^ edidicisse, ac do, miens etiam
cervicali suppositum babu^sse fertur.
our heads. On whom our best way and Method is ever to rely, and set up our
Rest for Knowledge, and for Learning. On whose Supportation if we recline our
dull and heavy heads, as S. John did, when he Ioh. 13. 25. and, 21. 20.
lay and leaned on his Breast: we shall both take Sweet, and Safe, and
Satisfying Rest; and also take Best Counsel of our Pillow. For that is our
true Sibylla too, out of whose Words and Works we are best instructed in the
whole Will of God: In as much as GOD himself is best able to Declare his own
mind unto us.

The Poet Claudian (de laud Christi) speaking of the coming of Christ, makes
this to be the End thereof:

Vt possis monstrare Deum, ne lubricus error,
Et decepta diu varij solertia Mundi,
Pectora tam multis sinerent mortalia seclis
Autorem nescire suum. That men might rightly know God their maker. Which
knowledge of GOD by Christ Jesus, we that are indeed Christians know to be as
much worth, as Felicity it self; according to that Ioh. 17. 3. This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ.]: To know thee by Jesus Christ. In whom, whatsoever the Father has, he
would have heaped and hoarded up, that so he might both communicate himself
wholly unto us, and might glorify his name. Hence says Ioh. 10. 30.
Christ, I and my Father are one. And, Ioh. 14 9.
He that sees me sees my Father. And, Ioh. 14. 6.
No man comes to the Father, but by me. And, Mat 11. 27*
No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him. And, Ioh. 14 6.
I am the Way. And, Ioh. 10. 9*
I am the Door. And, Ioh. 8. 12. and 9. 5. and 12. 35. and Ioh. 1. 4, 5.
I am the Light. And, Ioh. 1. 9. He was the true Light, which lights every man
that comes into the World. For it is by him that the luster of his Fathers
Glory best of all bebeameth the whole world. Hence the Apostle (2. Cor. 4. 6.)
places and reposeth the Light or Illumination of the knowledge of the Glory of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ: when he says, God has shined in our hearts,
to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ. In the Face of Jesus Christ. For he is the lively Image of his Father.
The Image of the invisible God. Col. 1. 15. and 2. Cor. 4. 4. The Brightness
of his Fathers Glory, and the very Image of his Substance. Heb. 1. 3. And, as
it is in the 7th of Wisdom, verse 25, 26. He is a pure influence that flows
from the Glory of the Almighty: the Brightness of the everlasting Light, The
undefiled Mirror of the Majesty of God, and the Image of his Goodness.

We spoke before In the third Sermon.
of other Images and Resemblances of Gods Glory. All which come infinitely far
short of this Image. For Man himself hereunto compared is not so much the
Image of God simply, as he is said to be made rather after the Image of God.
Indeed 1. Cor. 11. 7. Man is there called, The Image and Glory of God. But
elsewhere he is said to be made after the Image of God. Why, The Image? And
yet, why After the Image? The Image: because he is indeed like unto GOD.
Again, After the Image: because of the unlikeness or imperfectness of this
likeness: in that he does not perfectly resemble GOD, as Christ represents
his Father. According as D^ Operib. Dei l. 3. c. 1. parl. 3.
Zanchius has delivered out of S. Tom. 3. de Trinit. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Austin. Philo, followed by many others, says: (...). Christ, or The word, is
indeed the Image of God: but Man is but the Image of that Image, or, the Image
of Christ.

Certainly Christ is the true, the first, the Substantial, and most Perfect
Image of GOD. And that, (as vbi supra.
Zanchius at large proves) both as he is the Eternal Begotten Son of GOD,
of the same Substance with the Father: (whence he is called, The Character of
his Substance Heb* 1. 3.
)And also, as he was manifested in the flesh. For in him, when he was made
visible by the flesh (as S. John 1. Ioh. 1. 1. And Tertull. de Trinitate,
says: Filius est hic qui videtur, Dei autem filius Dei verbum est: etc. See
also H^lar. in Psalm. 51. and Iren^. lib. 4. cap. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 21, 22.
says, That which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon of the
word of life) was the whole Perfection of the Father, and as it were The
Fathers Face confpicuous. For having most perfectly in himself the full and
complete Nature and Substance of his Father: That, as it were to the eie-sight,
did he exhibit and represent also in his flesh, and by the Glorious Effects
thereof revealed it. For Col. 2. 9.
The Fullness of the Godhead, which is in the Son, being (...), bodily united
to his flesh, and as it were imprinted in it, did by diverse ways and works
perfectly resemble his own and the Fathers Nature and condition. And therefore
in him truly was that Fair Form and Beautiful Face as it were, Quae
sioculis cerneretur, mirabiles amores excitaret Ci^ offic l b. 1. (...).
Sapientiae: which if we could see with our eyes, would make us wonderfully in
love with Wisdom.

We showed ^specially in (...) second (...) on.
heretofore out of Saint Chrysostom, and otherwise, how the sight and
sightlynesse of the Heavens and the Firmament, the Day and the Night, and such
like, uttered a voice (of GODS Glory) more shrill then any Trumpet. What then
may we think of the Sight and Sightlynesse of him; Vid. Iren. lib. 4. c. 15.
and lib. 3. cap. 18.
Whose Day Abraham savv but a far of, but by the eyes of By the Spirit of
Prophecy, says Irenaeus, l. 4. c 15.
faith, and Ioh. 8. 56.
yet rejoiced. Whose Day of being Presented in the Temple when Luke 2.
Simeon saw with his bodyly eyes, he was even ravished with the sight of him,
and thought himself had lived long enough, And no marveile. For he had seen
a Glorious Presentation, yea a Representation of the Glory of GOD. Whose
Birthday when the Shepherds saw, and saw him too, they Gloryfied and praised
God for all that they had Luke 2. 20.
seen. All that they had seen. They had seen An Angel, yea a Multitude of
Angels: they had seen The Glory of the Lord shine round about themselves; yet
was all this but a Glorious Flourish as it were, in respect of that Flourishing
Glory which afterward they saw, when they saw Christ the Lord. In respect of
whom, and for the greatness of the Glory revealed by him: as if men were not
able, not so much as in Words only, sufficiently to express and blason GODS
Glory: And as if none but Angels were fit to be attendants: none to be
Heralds at arms, but the host of Heaven: none, but those that stand Luke 1.
19,
in the Presence of GODS Glory, to present the World with such Glorious
tidings, yea and to present the Worldes-maker too with Praise, for making that
his Great Glory so to be presented and represented to the World: The Angels too
themselves Praise God, and say, Glory in the Highest to God, etc. So also, See
page 28.
Hosanna in the highest. (Matthew. 21. 9. and Mark. 11. 10.) In the Highest. And
why so at Christ's Birth? And why so in respect of Christ? To intimate unto men,
That in and by Christ Jesus is Gods Glory best set forth: and therefore that
from henceforth they should Glorify GOD in and by Christ Jesus. Deo enim
silet, says Saint Lib. 1. expos. in 1. Reg. cap. 2. Ad canendum and Christo
and Deo. Tertullian. Apolog.
Gregory, qui Patrem laudans, Vnigeniti laudem tacet. He prayseth not GOD at
all, who prayseth not the Father by the Son, or, who prayseth not the
Father and the Son together. Ad Donatum de Fide Orthodoxa.
Fulgentius says farther; Neque enim fas est sic adorare Deum Patrem, vt Deum
Filium non adoret. It Is no lawful worshipping of God the Father, where God the
Son is not also worshipped Non potest ille summus, ac singularis Deus nisi
per filium coli. Qui solum patre se colere putat; sicut filium non colil, ita
ne patre quidem etc. Lactantius divin. instit. lib. 4. c. 29.
. Yea it is Gospel it self, (Ioh. 5. 23.) That all men should Honor the
Son, as they Honor the Father: He that Honors not the Son, Honors not
the Father.

If therefore, Beloved, we will Glory in GOD, (as; He that Glories, ought to
Glory in this, that he understands and Knows God. Ier. 9. 24.) it must be
by Christ Jesus; according to that of S. Paul, (Romans 5. 11.) Glorying in GOD
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And if we will Glorify GOD, it must be by
Christ Jesus too: Especially, as he is our Lord, our Strength, and our
Redeemers which David here, a Day-like Actuarie of the Days Relation, makes
the sweetest and most Glorious close, or Exit, of this Psalm. For The Days,
as ye see, here in my Text, do after their manner so Glorify GOD, as that
they do it too, and do it then best when they so do it, by uttering the
Word, and Glory of God Christ Jesus. Or if they did not so; yet S. Paul would
teach us so to do, and so to conclude The Days Report of Gods Glory: To God
be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all generations for ever,
Amen. Ephesians. 3. 21. And, (which shall be my last words, and the vpshot of our
Daily Shouting for Salvation See. p. 28.
) the last words of the Epistle to the Romans; To God only Wise, be Glory
through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

(...).

Ecclus. 51. v. 29.

Ps. 118 v 17.


Be not Ashamed of His Praise.

I Or, shall.
will not Dye, but Live, and Declare the Works of the Lord.

Ps. 119. v. 175.
Let my Soul Live, and it shall Praise Thee.

O mihi tam longae maneat pars vltima vitae,

Spiritus and quantum sat erit Tua dicere Facta.


