: Examples how mortal sin makes the sinners inobedyentes to have many
pains and doloures within the fire of Hell.

And first Example of a Father of an household the which saw two pondes and
the tourmentes of Hell.



The Examplayre upon the pains of Hell.
MEN find by writing this that which follows how ye discyple recites in
the Book of his promptuarye and says yt the father of a household yielded his
soul to god / and al his household watched him and kept his body by night by
the dyuyne mercy he reuyued and yode unto the church to yield thanks unto
god. And all that he had he gave to the church and to the poores. Afterward
he yode unto an hermytage and by a water made his dwelling and entered within
the said water and let his clothes to be ysye and frosen nere to his
flesh. And after that he entered into a bayne right hot and sustained such
pain till unto the death. And when he was repreued to endure such pain he
said. If ye had seen that that I have seen ye should do with me that I do /
or more greater thing. And he recounted terryble things of the pains of hell
in saying that when his soul departed fro his body an Angel led him into a
valey of infinyte greatness. In the which there were two pondes / the one was
full of worme^ and of flambes of fire eygrelye brynnynge and hot. And the other
ponde was frosen / and there was terrible coldness of snow and of half And
these two pondes were full of ^oules terryble tourmented / the which when they
might no more sustain the great cruelte of the fire they passed in to the
cold. And they that might not sustain the coldenes passed in to ye hot. etc.
Afterward the Au^gel fed him by darkness right thycke and there saw little
flambe^ and little hepes and assemblementes of fire the which proceeded from the
furneys of hell and mounted as hye as sparkles of fire and men of fire through
them proceeded / and there felt stynke intolerable / and there hard wepynges
/ waylynges / and howlings in comporables and saw the deuyls right terrybles
that held hooks of fire the which coueyted to catch thee Father of the
household to cast him in the furneys / but the Angel defend that they should
not touch him. For the Judge had commanded that he should return in to his
body for to do penance. And there he did such penance that it passed man's
reason. After he dyed ioyouslye. etc. To the purpose of this example that
speaks of the fyry ponde saint John^ says. Qui non est inuentus in libro vite
scriptus missus est in flagnum ignis ardentis and sulphuris He the which is
not found written in the Book of life when he is deed is sent in to a ponde of
fire brynnynge and of sulpre. This po^^e here whereof speaks saint John^ is not
of cold water or boylynge wherein the syn^ers be ^songed / drowned / or boiled
as false money makers / but it is by symylytude as a po^de or a cawdron of fire
and of sulphre molton brynnynge and boylynge wherein the dampened be sent there
to be plonged smored / brent and boiled the which is the second death that
comes after the death corporal whereof speaks saint Gregory in his moralles.
Fit miseris mors sine morte / finis sine fine / defectus sine defectu. etc.

Example of a Father and his Son the which were seen in hell in tourment of
fire brynnynge boylynge as does the peason in a pot on the fire. Quere.lxxiii.
Also saint Johan says in the appocalyps that the homycides / fornycatours /
enuenymours / ydolatres / and all ly^rs shall be sent in to a ponde brynnynge
of fire and sulphre the which is the seco^^e death. Vn^. appoca. xxi. Pars
illorum erit in stagno ardenti igne and sulphur quod est mors s^cunda. Unto
the purpose of the secon^e ponde the which was frosen and that the dampened
passed from the ponde of the fire in to yt of the cold. It is written Job.
xxiiii Ad calorem nimium transiet ab aquis niuiu^ And from the great cruelte of
cold and of torments that the dampened have god says in the gospelles that
they shall weep and grynde their teeth of great pain that they shall endure.
Vn^ Math. viii.xxiiii. Ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium.

Another Example how a rich man was put in a Chair of Fire.
THE disciple recyteth how a devout man saw by vicyon a rich man led in to
hell that had be much honored in this world and exceded in worldly glory /
in glotony / lecherye / in songs / and in dyue resolaces. And the prince of
the deuylles rose up from his chair / came before him and made him to sytte in
a chair all of fire and said unto him Sit thou here for the honor that thou
have had i^ the world. And was constrained to drink of lycoure right bitter /
stynkynge and foul. And they said to him that it was for that he had dro^ken
in the world the drynk^s full of swetenesses and two deuylles were there with
trompettes the which blewe in his ears that the slambes of fire yode out by ye
eyes / nosethrylles / mouth and ears. And it was said unto him that it was
for the bayne and songs that he had hard in the world And they put serpents
about his neck and unto his arms / and said unto him that it was for ye
embraceme^tes of women yt he had had in living lecherously. etc.

Another Example of a woman that saw the pains of her husband and of other
dampened.
THe discyple recyteth i^ his sermons thie the which follows the which is
also written in other Books and says that a Knight right puyssaunt was
abandoned in torneymentes the which lived miserably / and myscheuously dyed.
His wife the which abode wydowe was right devout and holy. The which
recompted unto her brother Albert master of the order of the prechours that
after the death of her said husband she was rauysshed in spyryte and saw by
the soul of her said husband great multitude of deuylles assembled. And the
one of them the which appeared to be master commanded unto his companyons and
felawes that they should put a pair of hosen on his fete of the which the
pryckes otherwise called darts perced him from the plant of the fete till
unto the brain. Afterward he made him to be clothed in a haubergyon whereof
the prickynges perced al his body on all parts before and behind. Afterward
he made to put on his heed a helm of the which the pryckes in discendynge
perced him till unto the plant of the foot. Afterward he made to put upon his
sholder a shield otherwise called a mark or toke^ the which was so heavy that
all his members were frusshed. After that the Prince of the deuyle had made al
these things to be done to the said cursed soul he said again unto the
said deuylles. The custom of this man was that after his tornementes that he
used baynes / and after his baines that he was laid in his bed and by him a
tender maiden the which he enbraced and with her meddled / appropre him
semblable things. And without taryenge the said soul was much tormented
bayned in a bayne of fire / and afterward laid in a bed of fire brynnynge and
fast by him a tode of the greatness of the bed the which was so horrible and
had so terryble eyes that of the enbracynge and of the touching and of the
^yssynge that the said tode made and of the horrible lokes he was more burnt
and tourmented than he ne had be before of the said armoures / of the bayne /
and of the bed. Alas what pains have those the which in such wise ben
tormented. That blyssed won an that saw by the dyspensacyon of God the things
beforesayde unto the Soul of her said Husband was so much tourmented that
marvel it was all thee days of her fyfe of the recordacyon of the vysyon
before rehearsed of her Husband.

Another Example how a s^^uaunt saw his master the which was led in to
pains.
MEn find by writing this the which follows how the dyscyple recyteth in
his promptuary and says that there was a noble man oppressor and persecutoure
of poor people and loved thee world. The which as he rested him i^ his bed
his servant the which lay before his chamber was rauysshed by vycion before
thee throne of god. And there saw his said master that was accused of all
the things that he had done / and for them sentence of dampnacyon was given
and was led of deuylle^ before Lucyfer with great daunsynge. Unto whom
Lucyfer said Approach unto me mine own faithful seruau^te that I may kiss
him. And when he was before him Lucyfer said peace be not with the in eternyte.
Again Lucyfer said. He had of custom to bathe him / l^be him to the vain.
Than was he bayned of a bayne infernal and much tormented with the nails of
the deuyls / and some leest fire upon him. After he was laid in a bed
infernal. And Lucyfer commanded that after the vain men should give him to
drink i^ the chalyce of the ire of god. And he was constrained to drink of
fire and sulphre molton to gyders. And as he cried it suffysed Lucyfer said.
He had of custom to here symphonyes. So there arose up. ii. symphonyatours the
which were two deuylles with Instruments full of fire the which blew against
him in such manner that from his eyes and his mouth and fro his nose the
flambes of fire yode out. After Lucyfer made him to be brought and said to
him. Thou have song of songs singe me one and he said. What shall I sing /
but that cursed be the day that I was borne. And Lucyfer said unto him Sing a
better song. And he answered. What shall I sing / but cursed be the father
that begat me. And Lucyfer said unto him / sing yet a better. And the
accursed said / but that cursed be that god the which has suffered that I was
borne upon the earth unto this purpose says the psalmyst. Non mortui
landabu^t te dn^e: neque oe^s qui descendunt in infernum. And Lucyfer said /
here in the song that I would have / led him unto the place that he has
deserved. And he was cast in to a pytte of fire. Than the deuylles made so
great dau^synge that it seemed that all should fall. And at the said dau^synge
the servant of the said man awoke. The which ran unto the chamber of his
said master and found him deed. Than he told the said vysyon. etc.

Another Example of a scoler of Paris the which appeared unto his master after
his death in great torments.
IT is written in ye legende of the deed that one of ye masters of Paris named
Scilo prayed right greatly his scoter that if he dyed that he would appear unto
him after his death for to denounce unto him of his estate if it pleased unto
God. And one time after he appeared / the which was clothed with a cloak of
parchemente all written without forth of sophyms / and within enflombed with
fire / and the said master demanded him what he was. He answered I am he the
which has promised to come again unto the and he was axed of his estate he
said. This cloak weyeth more on me than a great tower / the which is given me
to bear for the vaynglorye that I took in the arguments / of sophystrye / that
is to say fullacyons. And the slambe of fire the which brynneth me is given
for the furtes delycyousses that I wore. And as the said master said that
such pain was light to bear. The dead body said unto him that he should
stretche out his hand and that he should f^le the lightness of his pain. And
when he had stretched out his hand the said dead body let fall a
drop of his sweet the which perced the said hand more sooner than should
do an arowe / and said unto him. I (...) all such. And the said master
felt so horrible tourmente that he was so ferde that he f^fte the world and
entered in to relygyon. In like wise a^telleth the chaunter of parye. etc.

Another Example of the Soul dampened that wept the time that he had lost.
IT is written in the book of dread that as a holy man was in oraison he herd
by the will of god a voice horrible weeping. He demanded who it was that in
such wise wept. Answer was made the which said. I am a soul dampened. And
he demanded wherefore wepest thou so bytterly. He answered and said that one
of the things wherefore he and all the dampened sorrow most for is that that
they have lofte and consumed the time of grace vnprofytablye in synnynge /
wherein an hour by repentance they might have gotten grace and escaped the
torments wherein they be and shallbe eternally. By this example these sinners
should understand yt it is the most great good deed that may be in them as to
be in the estate of grace well confessed / and repentance of their sins.
Also by that that this soul wept in hell is unto the purpose of that that the
Eua^gylles say that the dampened weep in Hell. Vnde. Mathei. viii. Et luce.
xiiii. Ibi erit fletus et stridor dentium. Unto this purpose tongdalus the
which saw the torments of hell and afterward was brought again told that
he saw in hell a torment of an yzye ponde where the souls the which therein
were tormented cried so horrible that they were herd unto heaven. And after
where the said tongdalus spoke of the pytte of hell he herd great cries and
howlings of souls and thondre so horrible that no man ne might think no
tongue declare the horrible cry and the noise thee which was in thee said
tormente. etc.

Another Example of two men the which were in pains when S. Taurayn areysed
them.
IT is written in the legende of saint Taurayn that tidings wear browghte unto
a right honorable man that his Sone and his Squire were deed. And for to
abredge the matter saint Taurayne areysed the said sone. The which yode
incontinent on knees before saint Taurayne and required him to be baptized.
And after yt he was baptized said unto his Father. Halas Father thou know
what miserable life we led and what pains those sustain the which ben
semblables unto us. And what glory is unto those the which love and serve unto
ye god the which is to be honored of man. Certainly I have seen him to be in
the company of Aungelles and to pray unto god for us And when the said sone
areysed had spoken these words and many other unto his Father he yode on knees
before saint Taurayn and caused him to baptyze him. And also his wife mother of
the said raised. And for to be short in that day so many of great lords as of
little people a thousand and two hundred persons were baptized. And
afterward at the request of the said sone areysed S. Taurayn areysed also
afterward the Squire the which wytnessed that he was in great pains when a
messenger came to tell him of the sovereign master that he were brought again
and taken unto saint Taurayn. And this said squire areysed said unto the
said sone. He the which has brought me again hither commands the that
thou dyspose the to return unto him. And in contynente a Fever took him / and
after the commandment dyed

Another Example of iii. dead men areysed the which recompteth of the pains
of purgatory and of hell / and how they were in Judgment before God.
IT is written in the Epistle of the holy Bishop named sitillus that by the
merytes of saint Iherome yt which appeared unto saint Eusebe three dead bodies
were areysed for to take away a great error the which reigned in that time
among the greeks that it came in the latyns of the heretics that said that
the ill persons ne should have of torments in hell till unto the day of
Judgment that the body and the soul should be remyt togythers. The three deed
bodies yt were areysed lived. xx. days / the which were demanded why they
wept so sore. And ye one of them said unto him that asked it. If thou knew
the pains the which before yesterdaye I endured thou should have evermore
cause to weep. And he was required to tell what pains he had endured and
suffered within ^ell. He said that the dampened and those in (...) have so great
pains that if a p^^son^ s^uld endure in this world all the pains / torm^nt^s
/ and afflyctions that a man may t^yn^e / that n^ should be but consolacion to
endure all that / in regard of the see pain of purgatory / or of hell.
Also he said. If any living had felt the experyence of the dolor the which
is in hell or in purgatory / that he should love better to endure till unto
the end of the world wihout any remedy togythers all the pains and torments
that all the men and women has endured one after another sith Adam unto now /
than to be tormented one day in the leest pain that is in hell or in
purgatory. And therefore if ye axe me what the cause is wherefore I weep. It is
for that that I knowledge me to have sinned against god / and that justly he
punysseth the syn^ers wherefore I weep to have deserved such punycyon.
Afterward he was ax^d wherein dyffereth the pains and torments of purgatory
/ and those of hell. He answered that they ne dyffre as unto thee qualyte and
quantyte of pains they ben of one self greatness / but they dyffre in as much
as ye pains of hell have none end. And also the dampened shall have
augmentacion of torments in Judgment when they shall there be tormented in
body and soul. And the pains of purgatory shall have an end. For when the
penance is accomplysshed / those of purgatory ben delivered Also he was asked
if those the which ben in purgatory and in hell have egall torments or
diverse. He answered that the one have more great torments and diverse than the
other after the quantyte and greatness of sins that they have committed. And
also the dampened albeit that they ben in a place of pains / yet feel^ they
more great torments the one than the other / after the qua^tyte / and qualites
of sin^es yt they have committed. For in the person where there is more of
matter of sin / and more stro^gely the fire him takes and brynneth more
cruelly. Also he was demanded how he bare the deed when the soul issued out
from ye body. He answered / when mine hour of death came in place where I was
he found so many of deuylles that a man might / no^bre them for the great
multitude the which were so horrybles to behold yt a man ne can think more
great pain than it is. Any man had lever cast him self more sooner in a fire
fla^bynge and brynnynge than to behold them with the eye / the which deuyls
came unto me and brought again unto my mind all the cursed operacyons that I
had done again god esmouynge that I ne had more of esperaunce of the dyuyne
mercy the which I have greatly offended. And certes know ye that if the mercy
of god ne had aided me I ne might have resysted unto them. For wha^ my spyryte
was destytute of all force little and little I me consented unto their words /
and saint Iherome arrived more clear than the son with great multitude of
Angels the which came unto mine aid. And the said saint Iherome blamed them
/ and they departed with great howlings and clamours. etc. For to abrydge this
matter the said are ysed said that his soul was borne before god in
Judgment in like wise as a man may shyt the eye / but how ne of whom he ne
knew. Moreover he said all the sins that he had done / spoken / and thought in
all his life appeared clearly unto the Judge and before all in likewise as they
had been present / so that there ne abode the most little thought but that it
appeared so it had be thought. Also he said that he was replenysshed with so
great fear that meruayl it was. And that great multitude of deuylles were
there present the which witness the ylles that we have done in declarynge the
place / the manner and the time and the ylles that men spoke against us / we ne
may again say the^ in no manner. For the Judge knows and sees all. Also the
Iustes and presents it seen and know. Alas what shall I say / we ne abide
more than the sentence to be brought forth again us. For all the presents
^^ye unto the Judge that we bendygne of torments. And almooste no good deed
appeared wherein we had esperau^ce to have the mercy of god. And wha^ he ne
resysted more as to bring forth the sentence the which is justly given
again the sinners that blyssed saint Iherome was present. Also were present
saint Johan baptyste / saint Peter / and great multitude of Angels the which
required of the Judge yt our sentence were yet dyffer^ed a little of time for
the reverence and devotion that we had made unto the said saint Iherome. And
for to dystroy the error the which reigned in the world. And he was accorded
unto ye said saint Iherome that that he required. The which led us with him.
And showed us ye glory of the blyssed souls and the pains of hell and of
purgatory / to the end that we might wytnes certain that thing that we have
seen. The which things be not here written for because of shortness. And would
that we were put within the pains of purgatory to the end that we should prove
ye experyence of the pains the which there ben in the which we were put. For
to abrydge the said saint Iherome us commanded that we should come again in
to our bodies. And yt we should wytnes that / yt we had seen / and us promised
yt on the.xx. day if we did dygne penance of ye sin^es yt we had committed yt
we should dye again with saint Eusebe ye which should dye on the said day
and we should have glory. And so our souls were incontinent within their
bodies. etc.

Another Example how a devil said that the soul of the Earl Guyllaume was
in horryhle pain.
IT is written in Dialogo Cesarii this the which follows how the discyple
recyteth in his Book and says that as a knight was at the death in his bed
al alene the devil appeared unto him vysy^ly in form and s^mblaunce of a
sheep the which had the horns of a got. And when he se him there in such
wise he had fere and him demanded what art thou and what sekest t^ou. He
answered I am a devil the which am come for to fetch the soul. Unto whom
the said Knight said / depart thou from cursed thief / I have commanded it
unto Ihesu Christ that I have received in the sacrament. And the devil said.
Varled if thou will do me homage I shall yield unto the health and I shall
enryche the above all thy parents. And the knight him demanded where ben thy
tresours. He answered treasours infynyte ben hyd nere unto the court. And the
said knight asked him / tell me where is the soul of the Earl Guyllaume that
which is lately deed. He answered. It is in hell in so great fire that if the
most great mountain were there it should be consumed in less of time than to
close the eye. And that pain there is but a bayne of myl^e in the regard of
the day of Judgment where he shall receive the pain. And he asked him of
another man. And he answered he has be.xxxi. years i^ pains but a Monk and
Mynche^ has delivered him by good deeds. And again he demanded the devil.
From whens came thou wha^ thou came to me. He answered. I and my fellows were
at the death of an abbess awaytynge her soul. And the knight him demanded.
How many ben ye. He answered that the most great forest of the world has
not so many of leaves as we were. And the knight demanded him. What have ye
done. He answered / Alas nothing she was a good religyous and saint Michel came
thither yt which beat us and departed i^ likewise as departs the poudre
before the wind / and he was axed if he were at the death of such an abbot.
He answered that there is not so much of gravel in the sea as there was if
deuyls / but we ne did nothing / for the vyllaynes Monks the which there
were and groned as hogs ne would let us to approach. And the said knight
said. How dare ye go unto the death of so holy a man. And the devil said I
was at the death of the sone of god / and set me on the arm of the Cross /
wherefore dare I not than go unto the death of such a man. etc.

Another Example how a relygyous would more sooner enter into a fire than to
behold the Devil.
THe disciple recyteth in his pro^ptuarye and says that one time a relygyous
came unto the death the which cried horrybly cursed be the hour that ever I
was relygyous / and after held his peace. And within a little while afterward
he began to laughe with a Joyous face and said. Nay. But blessed be the time
that I entered into the order. And blyssed be the glorious Mother of Jesus Christ
that I love and again held his peace. The freres yt which were by him and
herd these words wept and prayed for him. Two hours after he said unto a
friar the which was by him / call my brethren. For god has exalted their
prayers And he said unto them when they were entered. My bret^ren ye were
trouble^ of ye first wor^e I s^^de unto you / but the cause of the word was
for that that the deuyls horrible appeared unto me / the which would rauysshe
my soul. And for the dread I was rauysshed out of my self and cursed the
hour that I entered in to relygyon I tell you that if a great fire were here
melled with brymstone / and that I had to chose to put me within it or else to
behold again the deuylles in the form that I have seen them / I shall be chose
more sooner to put me in the f^re than to behold them / afterward^ the Queen
of heaven and of mercy came the which chased away the deuylles. And when I se
her I conceived esperaunce / and for the great Joy that I had I have
laughed and blyssed the hour that I entered in to relygyon and the vyrgyn Mary
when he had spoken these words he dyed debonayrely. etc.

Another Example how the vysyon of the Devil is horrible.
IT is written in some Bok^s this the which follows that the dyscyple recyteth
in his prompt^ary and says that the abbot of saint agathe came unto coleyne
with one of his Monks and a converse with a woman demonyacle. And when the
abbot asked the devil of some things he ne wol^e answer. The abbot said
afterward. I conjure the by him that I have trayted in the Mass yt thou
answer me. And incontinent the Devil answered unto those things that men
demanded him. After the abbot coniured him that he should go forth of the
woman. The devil answered. And whether shall I go. The abbot said / I have
opened my mouth to the end that thou there enter. The devil said I ne may
there enter / for this day the right hault god there entered. Than the abbot
said. ^epe upon my two fyngers my thombe and the next it. The devil answered
I will not for thou haste this day traycted the right hault with them. And he
said unto him that he should go forth. The devil said the right haulte ne
will it not / I shallbe yet two years in her / and than she shall be delivered.
And so was it done. Than the Monk and the converse prayed the abbot that he
would show him self unto them in form natural. And he first refused it
aft^rwarde he would it and said unto the devil. I command the in the virtue
of Jesus Christ that thou appear upon us in thy natural kind. And the devil
said. And will ye not depart if ye se me not / and the abbot said nay. Than
the devil showed him self so horrible within the body of the woman that it
was meruayll to se / his eyes sparkeled as a furnayse embrased in fire
smokynge. Wha^ the said Monk and converse saw that they fell unto the earth
as dead for fear / the abbot had also fallen if he had not commanded the
devil to take his first form. The which things he did and the devil
said. Thou never commanded me so folysshe a thing / know thou for certain
that if thou had not received this day the dyuyne things / none of you ne
had reported unto any man that that I have showed / wenest thou that a man
may se me and live / nay. In the end the Monk and the converse were reuyued
by cold water. etc.

Another Example how a man consydred if after a hondreth thousand years the
dampened should be delivered from hell.
THe disciple recites in his pro^ptuarye and says that as a man much
seculer and delycatyue thought one time unto him ses^e if after a ho^dred
thousand years the souls of the dampened should be delivered from pains. And
his thought answered him that nay. And after a hundred thousand y^res nay.
And if after as many of years as there are of drops of water in the sea /
nay. And in thinking such t^ynges he was much troubled. And as he was f^reful
he began to understand and to apperceyue yt the loue^s of ye world accursed
and in dar^enes the which run in pains eternall^s for a little of time that
they live in this world in joys transytoryes in the will of the flesh. A
man should here understand that when the sinners dye impenytentes / obstynate
/ and abide in their syn^^s an^ them bear with them with taking away the gift
of the said sins by contrycyon and penance ne without asking any grace ne
mercy of as much as when they live in this world and that they have the time
and and the place that to do. And for as much as the soul is eternal and
immortal the which shall be sent in to the fire of hell there for to abide /
and that she s^all have with her evermore sin the which is the matter of the
fire that it shall brenne. I^ like wise ye soul shall evermore suffer pain and
evermore shall brenne with the said fire the which never shall have mercy nor
grace. etc.

Another Example that is enjoined unto a person to be in a good bed without
departing.
IT is written in the promptuarye of the dyscyple yt the Bishop of Marseyll
said unto him self. When I was a lover of the world / and had given me unto
worldely vanytyes I began to think one time of the eternyte of the p^ines of
hell. And I said in my heart. If thou were establed to lie the evermore in a
bed soft and delycatyue in such manner that thou should not depart for
any occasyon so ever it should be / with great pain shuldes^ t^ou sustain
that. How may thou than lie and brenne in such pain eternal^ / in
tolerable in hell if it fall that thou be thither sent. By this occasyon I
left all and made me Monk. etc.

Another Example how a young man made him relygyous for to think if his fair
members should be the pasture and the matter of the fire of hell.
IT is written in some Books this the which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his promptuarye and says that one time as master Iordayn persuaded a
young man noble fair of members that he should enter in the order of preachers
/ he found him that he was not prompte that to do. And he said unto him in
the end of the word^s. I pray the that thou do it incontyn nt for the love of
god (...) behold thy hands and the other fair members / what damage s^all
that ^e if so fare members shall be the pasture of the fire eternal. And he
did it. For this thing he entered in to the order and so contempned hyms^lfe
for the love of God.

Rapina. Another Example of the punycyon of a knight the which took away the
Cow of a woman wydowe.
SOme Masters has written this the which follows how the dyscyple recyteth
in his Book of sermons and says that one time a knight took away the Cow of
a woman wydowe / and as she wept and prayed him to restore it for to nourysshe
her children. The knight answered. If I took her not another after me should
come the which should take her. After her death by the suffraunce of god the
said knight was seen that first many great deuyls hedeous and black him
tormented right cruelly and horrybly / and specially one amongst all the other
ceased not to beat him and to tormente him without being weary / or without
leuynge him. Than the said knight him demanded wherefore tormentest thou the
more than all the other deuylles the which ben here. He answered / if I
tormented yt not another should the tormente as thou saydest to the good woman
of h r Cow yt thou tokest away / if thou tokest her not another should take
her. etc By this Example it ^s to understand that the said knight was right
dygne of pain and punycyon. For he did unto the good woman that that he ne
wol^e a man should do him again the commandment of god the which is love
thy neighbor as thy self / ne do unto another no more than thou would a
man should do the. Vnde Leuetici. xix. and Ma. xxii. Eiliges proximum tuum
secut teipsum. Et Tho^i^. iiii. Quod ab alio tibi odie fieri / vide ne tu^liqn^
alteri facias. Et ysido. Quod no^ vis p^ti no^ facis quod no^vis tibi fieri
alteri nu^quod i^f^ras. No^ i^teras alu mala ne patiaris simi^^a. The said
knight had no will that a man should take away his cow as he did unto the
said wydowe. And for that was he punysshed. etc.

Another Example of a rauyssher in pain the which took the got of a woman
wydowe / and did of great oppressyons unto his subjects.
THe dyscyple recyteth in his promptuarye and says that a relygyous of the
order of cysternen^is labored unto the death / he saw. S. Benet the which
came unto the seperacyon of his soul / the which showed unto him many houses
of the saved and of the torments of the dampened. And among ye other he saw
a great prince borne brynnynge and resydent in a chair of fire. And before him
there was of fair women the which put their faces of fire in his mouth / and
he brynned till unto the nombryll / and he was bette horrybly. This said man
had be a puyssaunt princes lecherous. After ye said lecherous he saw another
that the deuylles did fle / And afterward they cast and spryncled of salt
upon him. And upon a gyrdyron of fire brent him and roasted. This said man had
be a lord cruel the which made of great oppressyons unto his subjects / and
made of demaundes unjust unto the poores. Afterward the said relygyous saw
another the which rode a horse of fire and had a token of fire the which
otherwise men call a bokelet / and bare a got of fire. And after ye tail of
ye got he bare an habyte of amo^ste. This said man was a rauyssher the which
took the got of a woman wydowe. And when he was sick he received the habyte
of a monk / not by charity ne by will to abide in the order if he might be
hole. But by the admonycyon of his friends / and for that he drew the habyte
of a monk after him. Afterward the said relygyous saw many other people the
which sustained many other pains after the symylytude of the manners that they
had sinned in this world. It is that whereof the sage speak. Sapie^. xi. Perq^
peccat homo: per hec and torquentur. By the thing that a man synneth by that
shall he be tormented to the end that he have evermore remours in his conscience
that ill yt he endures is given unto him for his proper sins. Vnde Ysaye
vltimo: it Marci. ix. Vermis eorum. s. morsus co^scienti non moritur and ignis
no^ extinguitur.

Another Example how a Myller was borne to se the torments of hell and after
was brought again in to his body.
MEn find by writing this the which follows how the discyple recyteth in
his promptuary and says that as a man preached of the cross a carle vseret
bought again a vow for money that he had made unto ye sepulcre of Iherusale^.
And yode unto the dyspensatour fraudelently / and gave unto him for his said
vow an hundred shyllynges as he might well give xlviii. li. without
dysherytynge his children And as this said carle sat at the tauerne^ he said
unto the other the which had made of vows. Ye fools shall pass the sea in
peril of your lives and shall dyspende your substance / I have boughte my
vow for five pound / saved my life and dwell sure in my house. And also I
shall have semblable reward as you. And in a night as he was in his bed with
his wife he herd in his mylle mouynge tempeste In likewise as ye wheles
gryndynge. And he said unto his sone go se who is in the mylle. He yode and
returned anon with great fear. Of who^ the master demanded. what have thou
seen. He answered I had so great fear at thee door of the mylle / yt I must
nedely come again. And he said if the devil were there yet should I go to se
what it is. Tha^ he cast his vestyme^t upon his sholders and yode unto the
mylle / he was all naked but of the said vestyment He opened the door and
looked within / and saw two horses right black / and a black man by them and
said unto the carle host the lepe upon this horse the which is brought unto
the. That carle had fere and the blackeman said unto him / what taryest thou /
cast away the vestyment and come / there was on the vestyment a cross. He
was dyspeyred all the voice and calling of the devil kest always his vestyment
and lepte upon the horse And the black man lepte upon the other horse / and
they were led incontynente in dyuer^ places of pains. In the which the
accursed saw his father and his mother. And many other yt he had known. And
he saw a knight named Helye of the castle Horst the which was mounted upon a
cowes back toward the horns The which Cow ran on the one side and on
the other and tormented horrybly the said knight in strykynge him with her
horns on the back. And the catle him demanded wherefore he sustained such
pain / and he answered. I have rauysshed this Cow and taken away from a woman
wydowe without mercy. And therefore she me tormenteth without mercy. Afterward
there was showed unto the said carle a sege of fire and it was said unto him.
Thou shalt return even now in to thy house. And after three days thou shall
come again in to this place here / and thou shalt take thy reward in this
syege. After these words here the devil brought him again in to his myllt.
And he found his wife and his household as half deed / unto whom he told
that / that he had seen. And how it hapened. The Priest was called for to
chere him and to counsayll him to confess him / and to have contrycyon. And he
answered wha^ profit me these words here I ne may repent me. For I se that
in vain I should confess me. And I know that of necessyte it is to
accomplysshe in me that the which is dysposed and the accursed dyed so without
receyuynge the sacraments of the church. etc.

Another Example that a knight dyed / and after wos brought again into his
body / the which recompted of a bridge right strayte upon a water by the
which him behooves to pass.
IT is written in the Dyalogue of saint Gregory that a knight dyed and within a
little after came again into his body the which told that he had seen a bridge
under the which bridge ran a water stynkynge and dark. And on ye other side
of the bridge there was meadows smelling sweet and adourned with all flowers.
And in those meadows were assembled of people clothed in white the which were
fulfilled of swetenes and odours of the said flowers. And at the said bridge
there was such probacyon that when any of the unjust there passed he fell in to
the black water stynkynge / and the just passed till unto ye place
delectable. And the said knight saw there without the bridge a man named
peter bound with great weight of iron. And he demanded wherefore he suffered
such pain. Answer was given that when men gave him any for to do vengeance
he desired it more to do by cruelte than by obedyence. Also the said knight
said that he saw a pilgrim the which passed upon the bridge all over of also
great auctoryte as he had lived in the world clenely. And he saw another
named steven the which as he passed the said bridge his foot stood in such
wise that he than fell of the said bridge in like as half. And tha^ some me^
right black lift them up from the said water the which drew him downewarde
by the thyes. And some men right fair clothed in white took him by the arms
and they drew him upward / and as this strife was the said knight was put
again in to his body. And he ne knew which of them should vanquysshe / but
saint Gregorye says that it is to understand that ye ylles yt he had done
strove again the almesdedes. And by the other the which drew him downewarde
appeared that he had not parfytely resysted unto the sins of the flesh. This
Example ought to draw all persons to live clenely / purely / and holyly to
the end yt they may pass ye said bridge unto ye place delectable without
falling in to the torment beforesaide. And ye sinners should also correct the^
of ill and to do penance / or they shall fall of the said bridge in to the
said water / wherein they shall be punysshed.

Another Example of the vysyon of Tongdalus the which suffered many pains in
purgatory and saw of the torments of hell and after was brought again in to
his body.
IN the years of our Lord a thousand xlix. There was a man named To^gdalus in a
City of the land of Irlande. This said Tongdalus was noble of lynage / a
fair man young of age / curleys of all goodness and of great honor. He was
great and right appert of the art of chyualrye Also he was well speaking / and
good in dysportyng / and of as much more as he trusted in his beautye and his
force of as much the less was it unto him of the health of his soul And if
any man said any thing to him for the health of his soul he was grieved with
him / he despyted the holy church / he ne daygned to behold the poores in
their indygence / Moreover he gave that that was in his palayes for to have ye
praise of the world and many he had of friends and of companyons And it came
one day that he satte at table with one of his companyons for to eat. And
incontinent that he had taken of the meat he dyed of death sudden and the body
fell unto the earth / In like wise as it never had had soul. The servants
ran unto him / the meat was taken away / wepynges / and lame^tacyons were
made / men range the belles. The people was much ameruayled of the death the
which had taken this noble man so sodaynely. He dyed the wednesdaye about the
hour of noone. And from that hour till unto the saterdaye at noone he abode
so the body without buryenge for that that in the lefts party he had a little
of hete. And on the saterdaye at noone the soul came again unto the body. And
so by the space of an hour he beheld those the which were by him / unto whom
he made a token that he should have the body of god. And after that he had
received it he began to praise god and to yield unto him graces and said. Sir
all puyssau^t more great is thy mercy than all my sins. And afterward said
this word the which is written in ye Psalter. That is to say. How many
trybulacyons and ylles have thou showed unto me / and I being converted thou
have quyckened me. And have brought me again from the depnesse of the earth.
And incontinent that he had spoken those words he departed / and gave unto the
poores ye that he had / and promised above all things to love the life that he
had before led / and all that he had seen and suffered he recompted it unto us
and said. when my soul issued out of my body she knew and saw the sins
that she had done. And so began she to doubt. But she knew not what it was
that she should do. And she would rentre within my body / but she might not.
But she ne durst go out / for she dredde her sins of al parts / and she ne
had trust in no thing but unto the great mercy of god. And so began to weep
and to tremble / and she knew not what she should do / and anon after / she
saw come unto her so great nombre and multitude of deuylles that all the house
streets and place of the City were full the which enuyro^ned her on all
parts / the which deuylles said. Sing we unto this soul the song of death
/ that we unto her should sing / for she is the daughter of ye death pardurable
and the vyande of ye fire extynguyble enemy of the light and friend of
darkenesses. And afterward and again her they gryn^ed and wheted their teeth
and said unto her. Unhappy soul here is the people yt thou haste chosen with
who^ thou shall enter in to hell in parbura^ylyte. Thou haste ben a nouryce of
sclaundre / a lover o^ dyscorde that we love. wherefore art thou not proud /
wherefore ne know thou not thy lecherye / where is thy vanyte and vain
gladness / where ben thy laughynges right vnte^pred / where is thy face wherein
thou trustedest so much. wherefore ne shyttest thou not the eye / wherefore ne
tryppest thou with thy foot. wherefore ne thynkest thou the great malice that
thou were wont to do in vanytyes and sins. And as these foresaid deuylles
said these words I looked toward the heaven and saw a far of a light
dyscended in like wise as it had been a sterre right clear and shynynge. In the
which I had esperaunce that there was some aid that god sent unto me. And as
it approached unto me I apperceyued well that it was the Angel of god the
which had kept me in this world. And when he approached unto me he also
greted me swetely and said. God the salve Tongdalus. And when I saw so fair
a young man the which greted me so swetely by my proper name by great Joy I
answered. Alas my Lord ye doloures of hell has beset me about. And the panges
of death has occupied me / as it is written. Dolores inferni ci^cumdederunt me:
preoccupauerunt me la quci mortis. And the Au^gel answered. Thou call me
now lord I have be evermore with toe / but judge thou not yt I were dygne of
such great honor The soul answered. Sir I never se the before. And the
Angel said. From the hour that thou were borne I have evermore be with the
in all places where thou were. And thou ne would never believe my cou^sayll.
Than the Angel lift up his hands among the deuyls and showed unto him one
the which did unto him worse than the other and said unto him that is he the
which cou^sayled the which thou believed and did his will / but be thou sure that
thou shall have the mercy of god / and thou shall suffer a little or torments
that thou haste deserved. Come thou after me and that ye I shall show yt so
keep thou it and put thou it in thy memory / for thou shall return again
within thy body. When the soul had herd this she was much ferefull and she
approached unto the Angel when the deuylles herd this word they were mad.
For they saw that they ne had of puyssau^ e to do ill unto the soul and
blasphemed god in saying that he was not ryghtfull / for he yielded not unto
every man after his de^^^^ And of the great woodnes whereof they were full they
beteche other. And they departed from thene sorry and heavy as enraged Than the
Angel said unto the said soul. Come after me. A sir thou go before /
these deuylles shall take me behind and shall led me in to hell. The Angel
answered. Have thou no fere for we have more great aid tha^ they ne have.
Sideus pro nobis quis contra nos. If god be for us there is none that may noye
us. It is written by the prohete David. Cadent a latere tuo mill et december
millia a dexteris tuis: ad te autem non appropinquabit. Veru^tamen oculis tuis
considerabis et retributione^ peccatoru^ videbis. That is to say a thousand
shall fall on the left side / and ten thousand on thy right side. Certaynely
they shall not approach unto the. Albeit thou shall consydre by thine eyes and
thou shall se the retrybucyon of thy sins. And when he had said these
words they yode forth.

Of the valey.
When they were gone longely togythers by so geeat darkness yt they had no
light / but that the which praceded of the Angel / they came in to a valey
much horrible / the which was right deep and full of bryn^ynge coals. And
about that (...) there was a covering of iron bre^nynge of thyckenes syxt
fadome the which was more hot than that which brent underneath. From thens
issued so great stenche the which grieved more the soul than all yt that he
had before suffced. Above the said covering dyscended many chetyues souls
the which there were fried as a man fryeth bacon in the pan. And afterward
they were strayned through the covering as wax and fell and dyscended in to
the well of the said valey / upon the brynnynge coals where they were
tormented of a new torment / thus said ye Angel. This pain suffers those
the which have killed fathers or mothers / or other people by delyberacyon or
deed. And after this torment they shall beled into more great / but thou ne
shall suffer this said torment albeit that thou haste well deserved it.

Of the beast horrible.
AFter they entered in to a way much horrible crooked and hard. And when they
had long gone in darkness / the soul saw a far a be much horrible and
ferefull of the greatness incredyble / more great than all the mountains that
he had before seen. She had the eyes as great fyres bre^nynge / and had the
mouth so great that it seemed unto him that there might well enter. x.M. men
of arms / there issued out of his mouth fire inextynguyble / and stynke
incomparable. Great multitude of souls entered by the mouth in to the womb of
the said be the which souls cried horrybly of torments that they were
in* And before ye said be there was great multitude of deuylles the which
bette and tormented the said souls and after put the^ within the said be.
And when the soul had long beholden the said be she was much ferefull
and said to the Au^gel. Sir wherefore approach we unto this torment. The
Angel answered. we may not go by other way / for none escapes this torment
but those ye god has chose^ to be in his company. This be that thou see
is called Acherons the which tourmenteth all the auarycyous. Of this be it
is written. Absorbebit fluuium et no^ mirabitur / et habet fidutiam quod influat
Iordanis in os eius. That is to say. He shall swalowe a streme or water and it
shall be no marvel / and also have affy^unce that the w^ter of Jordan ronneth
yet through her month. And when they had spoken this they came before the
said be, and the Angel departed and left the soul among the deuylles.
And incontynente the deuylles besette her about and there tormented her with
great tourmentes as wood dogs. And afterward they fed her with the^ in to
the womb of thesayde be. Therein she suffered many bytynges of dogs / of
beres / of lions / of serpents / and of other beestes that she had never seen
ne known before / and there had of great torments of deuylles / brennynge of
fire / sharpenes of sulphre / and darkness / wounds to plundge / to cry / and
great haboundaunce of disease and of trybulacyon. There was the said soul
accused of her sins that she had committed. And for the great heauynes whereof
she was full she struck her seffe on the chekes tare them with the nails of
her own hands / and wend there to be dampened pardurably / and anon she
found her self out of the said be / but she wist not how she came out
and she was laid far of much feeble. Afterward within a while of time she
opened her eyes and saw her Angel by her. Than had she great Joy albeit
that she was much tormented and began to give praysynges unto our lord of his
mercy. And the Angel touched her and comforted her. etc.

Of the oven with the flambes.
Afterward they yode another way / and when they were gone longely by
darkness / they saw an house much high the which was round as an oven. In
the said house there was well a thousand wyndowes / from the which issued
fire / strong / sharp / and much hot. when the soul saw the said house
she had great fere and said unto the Angel. A sir we approach to the gates
of death. Alas caytyfe who shall deliver me fro this torment. The Angel
answered. From the fire ye which yssueth out by these wyndowes thou shalt be
delivered / but in to the house it behooves to enter. when they were approached
they saw within the said house in the mids of the fire great multitude of
deuyls the which held axes / knyues / hachettes / and othee Instruments of
iron sharp for to tormente the souls that were there of the which souls
there was great multitude. Than said the soul unto ye Angel. Sir I pray the
if it please the that thou deliver me fro this torment / and in all the other
where thou shall sede me I grant me to be there tormented. And the Angel
said. This torment is greater than all those that thou have seen / but yet
shall thou se greater. Now enter here for the deuylles tarry for the as dogs
enraged. Than the soul began to quake and to tremble of the great fere that
she had and prayed the Angel much that he would make him to pass the said
torment / but it vayled him nothing. And when ye deuyls herd that she was
granted unto them for to torment they took her with their Instruments and
tormented her sharply. The master of this house had to name Physternus. His
house was full of fire brennynge in the which souls strayned their teeth and
wayled for the great doloure that they suffered. And there were men and women /
not all only of people of the world / but also of relygyon. There was this
soul tourmented the which said that she had well deserved that that she had
suffered. But when it pleased god she found her self out of the said torment
and she wist not in what manner. Than she aduysed her Angel by her to whom she
said. A sir where is the word that the prophet David speaks. Mi^a dn^i
plena est terra. That is to say. The earth is full of the mercy of God. Than
the Angel answered and said. By those words many souls be deceived. God is
ryghtwyse though that he be full of mercy / and many sins he vengeth and
punyssheth / and also he pardons. If god pardoned all ye sins wherefore
should the men be just. And if a man ne dredde the torments / wherefore should
he dread to do sin and his will. And what should it need that these sinners
should repent them and confess them of their sins if they ne dredde god. God
by his great mercy spares the sinners in their life and taryeth them for that
they should do penance But if they ben obstynate in their sins and will not
reuerte / he them punysshed for their sins after their death. And God sometime
takes away ye gooddes te^poralles from the Just for to punysshe the^
te^porally of some outrages yt they have done / and also to the end yt they
enpryde the^ not. But he keeps unto them ye gooddes pardurables of his glory.

Of the cruel Be and of the ysye ponde.
After the Angel led the soul in to another place wherein they saw a be
much meruaylous the which had two fete and.ii. wings and the neck right
long. And his nebbe and his nails were as iron / and from his said nebbe
issued a flambe of fire by right great sharpenes and force. And the said be
was upon a ponde full of strong yse / the which be devoured the souls
within his womb in such manner that they became as unto nothing by the
torments that they suffered. Afterward he put them out of his womb within ye
yse of the said ponde. And there were they tormented of new torment. And all
the souls the which in to the ponde dyscended were in throws in likewise as
women with child. And not a lonely the women / but also the men as the women.
And within their belyes they felt the sharp bytynges that the serpents made
of the which they were engryped. And there were the caytyues souls
tourmented. And when the time came and approached that they should child they
cried so horrybly that they filled hell of noise and of hon synges. Than they
chylded serpents as well the men as the women. And the said serpents issued
not only by the me^bres whereby the women child naturally. But also by the
arms / the feet / and all the other me^bres issued out the horrible beestes
the which had heade^ of fire brynnynge much sharp / wherewith they tormented
right cruelly ye said souls from whens they issued. And the said beestes
had horrible tails and nedles and about their tails made as they were
crochettes and hooks made as if they were crochettes. And when they issued
from the said caytyues souls if they might not draw their tails after them
for the hooks they returned their nebbes and smote ye souls and gnawed then
unto the synewes and bones and of the great pain and tormente that they
suffered they keste so great and horyble cries that they were herd unto heaven.
Moreover the said souls were replenysshed of diverse manners of beestes on
their members the which did them eat and gnawe unto the bones. And they had
tongues y^ which fastened within the said souls till unto the lights. This
pain sustain the false Monks / chanons / the false Nonnes / and these other
benefyced of holy church the which have not well kept their bodies from evil
doyng^ / ne their mouths from evil saying and speaking. Also those the which
has used Lecherye sustain this pain and torment. And for that that thou art
cuspable it behooves the to sustain this said tormente. when the deuylles
herd this word they took the said soul and gave it to the said be to
tourment and to devour. And when she was in torment as the other souls and
that she was engryped with serpents as the other / and when the time came that
she should child the Angel came to her and touched her / and she was
incontinent hole / and said unto her / come after me.

Of the valey of smythes.
Afterward they yode in to another way much horrible and dyseasefull full of
so great darkness that they had no light but of the clerenes of the Angel.
And it seemed yt they descended from a right high mountain in to a great and
deep valey. And them ore yt they yode the less had the soul of esperaunce for
to return unto life. Than the soul said unto the Angel. Sir whyther gowe.
The Angel answered. This way ledeth unto death And the soul said. what is
that than that the scripture says ^ata est via que ducit ad mortem / et multi
sunt qui intrant per eam. That is to say that the way the which is large
ledeth unto death: and many there ben the which enter and go by that way. The
Angel said. Of this speaks not ye scripture / but of ye cursed way of the
world whereby me^ common in to this way. And when they were descended into the
said valey much deep they saw there of forges. Than the Angel said unto the
soul. The master of this valey is called Vulcane the which by his engyn and
falsenes has casten many souls in to pains and torments. Than said the
soul unto the Angel. Sir shall I suffer this torment. The Angel answered /
ye / thou shalt suffer this torment. And when the deuylles herd that word
they beset the soul about and took it with their Instruments of iron yt they
held / and said unto the holy Angel none harm / and keste it in to a
chymney full of fire brynnynge. And began to blow the fire of their furneys in
likewise as men blow when the iron is in the furneys. And so they tormented
the souls the which were there till that they came ^^to nothing. And when
they were so burnt and tourmented they took the said souls with their
Instruments of iron.xx. an hundred or two hundred and laid them on a h^pe
upon an anuelde of iron and the deuylles the which were in other forges said.
Cast unto us these caytyues soul^s we shall yet torment them again. Than the
d^u^ls kest them unto them again the which were in ye other forges. And after
that they had been there strongly payned and tourmented they kest them vyolently
unto those of the first forges. And before yt they came to the ground they
were taken again and so they kest them from one unto an other and tormented
till unto that / that the skynnes / the flesh / and the bones came as unto
nothing. Of this matter is written. Prouerbioru^. ix. Parata sunt derisoribus
supplicia / et mallei percutientes stultorum corporibus. After that the
caytyues souls were so tormented a^ it is said they desired ye death but they
might not dye. Unto this purpose it is written. Apocalipsis. ix. In diebus illis
querent homines mortem et non inuenient eam / et desiderabu^t mori et more
fugiet ab eis. And when ye said soul had suffered longely these torments the
Angel came unto her and took her and had her out of the fire where she was /
and said unto her. How felest thou thy self now. Remember the that for as
much as thou have done thy will and ye delight of thy body thou have suffered so
great torments. But the soul had not so much force yt she might answer one
word for the great torment that she had suffered. Than the Aungel said unto
the soul. Illud psalmi. Dominus mortificat et viuificat deducit ad inferos et
reducit. Comfortethe / for our lord quyckeneth and mortyfyeth / ledeth in to
helles and brings again. And albeit that the torments that thou have seen
ben much great yet shall thou se much more greater from the which thou
shalt be delivered by the mercy of god. And know thou that all those souls
that thou have seen here abides the Judgment of God. But those the which
thou shalt se from hensforth ben all ready Judged. Gowe now forward for thou
art not yet comen unto the pains of hell. And the Angel touched her and
heled as he had been accustomed for to do. etc.

Of the pytte of Hell.
After that they entered in to a way / and when they were a little gone
forward in speaking one unto the other there came to the soul sudden horror
and cold intolerable and stynke and darkness more thycker than those before /
trybulacyon and anguysshe so great that it seemed unto the soul that all the
foundementes of the earth trembled under her fete and said unto the Angel.
Sir wherefore is it that I ne may hold me on my fete as I have accustomed to
do. And when she had said this she ne might remene from the place for the
great fear that she had / and incontinent the Angel departed in such manner
that she might no more se him / and forthwith she began to dyspayre. For she
found that the which is written. Ecclesiastes. ix. Nec opus / nec ratio / nec
sapientia / nec scientia erunt apud inferos que tu perperas. That is to say
that in hell there ne is operacion / ne reason / ne wysdom / ne co^nynge whereby
man may aid him. The caytyne soul was in likewise / for she might not help
herself / the which herd terryble cries and howlings of souls / and
thondre so horrible yt no man may think it ne tongue declare the horrible cry
end the noise that there was. Unto this purpose God speaks in the Gospel.
Illud Mathe. xxii. and.xxiii. Ibi erit fletus and f^r^dordentium. Than the
soul looked about her for to know if she might se ye way whereby they were
comen / and she saw a great square dytche in likewise as a cysterne. And from
that dytche issued out a pyller of flambe and of smoke togythers much horrible
and stynkynge. And the pyller of fyrs was so high that it stretched unto the
heavens. And in the f^a^be there was great multitude of souls and of deuylles
togythers the which mounted with the said flambe in high in like wise as
little flambes. And of torments the which they suffered they came as unto
nothing and after yt they fell again in to the dy^che till unto ye botom. Unto
ye purpose of this says the Psalmyste. Tu vero reduces me in puteum
interitus. And when the soul had beholden this she would have drawn her a
back / but she ne might lift her fete from the ground. And when she had
assayed many times to remove her and that she might not she was much ferefull
/ and of the great woodnes that she had she tare and rent her chekes with her
own hands and nayses and cried. Alas caytyue wherefore may not I dye. And the
deuylles the which mounted with the said flambe herd the said soul in such
wise cry so they beset her about with their Instruments of iron wherewith they
tormented the souls and said in this wise. Caytyue soul worthy of pain and
torment from whens art thou comen hither / thou ne have yet nothing felt ne
suffered / thou shall endure now that that thou art worthy by the sins that
thou have committed. From the which torment thou ne may never depart ne
within it dye / but evermore thou shall live and brenne in torment without
light / comfort ne help. And from now forth thou ne may have mercy. For
thou art comen unto the gates of death / and thou shall be borne straight in to
the torments of hell. He that has brought the hither has deceived the / now
let him deliver the from our hands if he can / for thou shall se him no more.
And they said the one unto the other. wherefore tarry we so long that we ne
give this soul unto Lucyfer for to devour it / and so they thretened it of
death perdurable. And these deuylles abouesayde were black as coals with
horrible lobes and their eyes were as the la^pes bre^nynge. And their teeth as
white as the snow / and they had tails like as scorpyons / and their claws
of iron and great large wings. And when they had said these words the holy
Angel appeared unto the said soul and said to her. Enjoy ye daughter of light
for thou shall have mercy and not Judgment. Thou shall se of great torments
and pains / but thou shall suffer none Come tha^ after me and I shall show
unto the / the right cursed enyemye of humayne lygnage. Those the which ben
there have no light / and they shall not se the / but thou shall se them well
and their torments.

Of the Princes of darkness and of their cursed fellows the which ben in
pains.
After these things spoken and seen the soul approached unto him and saw the
prince of darkness in the botom of hell / and what and how great torments she
saw there the entendement ne may comprehend it / and man ne may express it
ne declare. That is to say if he had an hundred heads / and that every head
had an ho^dred tongues / yet they might not recompte the pains of hell. There
was one the right worst devil yt which was more greater than all the beasts
that he had seen before. The which was black as Raven, He had the form of the
body of a man from the feet unto the heed except that he had well a thousand
hands. And he had atayle well an.C. cubytes long / and.x. of greatness. And he
had nails of iron great and long as well on the feet as on the hands longer
and greter than the speres of knights. His nebbe was much long and great.
His tail was right long and sharp all full of pryckles sharp poynted for to
grieve and torment the miserable souls. And that most horrible devil lay
upon a gred iron of iron / under the which there was great habundaunce of
bre^nynge coals. Also there was great multitude of deuyls the which blewe and
kyndled ye fire. About the enemy there were so many deuyl^ and of cursed and
miserable souls that no man might believe that of all the world from the
beginning might be issued and brought forth so many souls. And the devil was
bound by every Ioynture of all his me^bres with great chains of iron and of
copre bre^nynge. And of great torment and vehement woodnes whereof he was full
he turned him from the one side unto the other / and stretche^ out his hands
in the multitude of the said souls and took them and strayned the^ in
likewise no men may do a clustre of grapes in their hands for to make the
wine come forth. And in such manner he strayned the^ that he either brake their
heedes / or their fete / or hands / or some other members. Afterward he
syghed and blewe and dysperpeled the said souls in to many of the torments
of the fire of hell. And incontinent that pyt or well whereof we have before
spoken keste stynke and horrible flambe. And when that cruel be drew again
unto him his breath all the said souls that he had shed with fla^bes and
sulphre fell and entered in his mouth / the which he devoured. And when some
souls escaped him by adventure between his hands he smote them with his
tail. And ye devil the which in such wise tormented the souls horrybly was
tormented above all other. Than the Angel said unto ye soul. This devil
that thou see here is called Lucyfer the which is the first creature that
god made the which was in the delyces of Paradyse before that he descended
from heaven / and if he were not bound he would do many euylles and
parturbacyons. And they the which thou see the which be with him there are a
party of the Aungelles of darkness. And the other party ben men and women the
which ben descended from Adam the which ben all ready Judged the which abide
many the which have renyed Jesus Christ / or does ye operacyons of them the
which renye him. Here be the ill Prelates and Princes of whom it is written.
sapientie.vi. Potentes pote^ter tormenta patientur / fortioribus autem fortior
instat cruciatio. That is to say yt those that be mighty in dygnyte and in
power shall suffer torments with great puyssau^ce. That is where as they have
mysche nouslye used the puyssaunce that god has given unto them. All the other
torments that thou haste seen albeit that they be right great yet are they
nothing to compte in regard of this here. And the soul said. Certessyr thou
say true / for I am more grieved and tormented to se alonely the torment and
to feel the stynke the which is there than all the torments that I have
suffered hither to wherefore I prayethe if it please the yt thou take me from
hen^. Also I se many of my fellows yt I loved much and held their company
much dear where as I have now great horror for to se them. And certainly I
understand and know yt if the great grace and mercy of god w re not my
succoure yt I have deserved for my sins to be punyssed and tormented
eternally as they ben. And the Angel said unto him. O my blyssed come and
convert the in thy rest / for god has done well unto the / thou shalt not
suffer these tourmentes here. And thou shall se them no more if thou forget not
the things that thou have seen / and if thou deserve them not again. The
soul of the said Tongdalus saw many other tourmentes / and of the Joys of
the saved the which has be left by cause of shortness for they ben much
long to recounte and write. By the scryptures and Examples beforesayde it does
appear that the sinners in obedyentes unto god should correcke them and amend
whiles that they live in this world if that they will escape and eschew the
inestymable tourmentes of hell and get the Realm and the glory eternal.
Unto the which glory we may go / cum illo qui est benedictus in infinita
secula seculorum. Amen.

Thus ends the Examplayre upon the pains of hell.
Jesus. Hereafter follows an Example that the name of Jesus does many
goodnesses. And how it delivered a man fro many perils and tourmentes.
IT is written in many Books that as saint Patrycke preached in Irlande he
prayed God devoutly that he would show him some token by the which the wicked
euyllmen might have fear and also repent them. And suddenly a right great hole
or pytte appeared and it was reveled unto him that the place of purgatory was
there. In the which place if any would descend he should have none other
pain. Many the which herd this thing therein entered the which came never
again. And a man named Nycolas the which had committed many sins there
descended to the end that he might repent him of his sins. And he found
first an oratory and white Monks the which said unto him. Be thou steadfast
and constaunt. For it behooves the to sustain many te^ptacions. And he them
demanded what remedy he might have against the said temptacions. They
answered when thou f^lest thy self tourme^ted with pains cry hastily. O Jesus
Christ adiuua me. That is to say. O Ihesu Christ help me. And when that he
was departed from them the deuylles ran sodaynely upon him in likewise as
wild beestes famysshed. And as they did in this wise unto him he recorded him
of his counsel and said. O Jesus Christ adiuua me. And incontynente he ne
wyste where the beestes became. He yode furthermore and found a tyght great
fire in to the which the deuylles kest him. And incontynente that he had
said. Jesus Christ adiuua me / forthwith the fire was put out and quenched. He
walked yet further and saw a well right deep from the which issued smoke and
great clamoure of souls the which were tourmented. And wha^ the deuyls had
casten him within it he cried. Jesus Christ adiuua me. That is to say. Jesus
Christ help me / and forthwith he was delivered. At the last he saw a bridge
that was right narowe and strayte. And there he had great terrors / the which
bridge him behooves to pass / but he might not. And he set one of his fete
upon the bridge and said. Jesus Christ adiuua me. And so he said at every
step till yt he had passed the bridge on the other side. And wha^ that he was
past he came unto a fair medowe wherein grew many fair and delectable flowers
/ of the which flowers and medowe proceeded good odoures and smelles. And
afterward he came again unto life and.xxx. days passed he came unto Paradyse
by the Inuocacion of our blessed sauyoure and redemptoure Jesus Christ. Unto the
Example of the abouesayde man the which was delivered from al tourmentes and
pains incontynente that he had called the help of Jesus. In lykewy^^ thou man
and woman call devoutly the name of the blessed Lamb Jesus in all aduersytyce
/ fortunes / tourme^tes / losses / temptacions / sickenesses / necessityes /
anguysshes / perils / infyrmytyes / and things doubtables / and well shall
come unto the. This name Jesus is interpret savior. Jesus interpretatur
saluator. For by the merit of his passion he saved all the world. He brake
hell / saved and delivered afthe good persons the which were in the lymbe of
ye holy fathers and opened Paradyse unto all good chrystyane. Also Jesus is the
king of kings / the Judge of Judges / and of all great and little. It is he
that gives Joy and beatytude eternal unto the good / and that punyssheth and
dampneth the evil / Jesus is holy and debonayre unto the good / and also he is
terryble and cruel unto the evil. And therefore says the psalmyst. Sanctum and
terribile nomen eius initium sapientie timor domini. Also the name of Jesus is
in excellence above all other. Vn^ Paul. ad Phyl. Docatu^ est nome^ eius super
omne nomen. Also the name of Jesus is loved and dred above all names / and in
namynge him all creatures resonables should bow the knee / be it in Paradyse
in this world / or in hell. Vn^. Paul. ad Phi. In nomine Jesus om^e genu
flectatur celestium / terrestrium / et infernorum. The men and women of this
world call him in their besynesses and necessytyes / and the deuylls of hell
dred him. For to be short the name of Jesus ought to be loved / honored /
called dred / and redoupted / for it is replenysshed with bountye / beautye /
and holiness infynyte and in enarrable. That is the which passes all
entendementes. etc.

Finis
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer: dwelling at the Sign of saint John^ Euangelyste
in saint Martyns Parysshe, beside Charynge Cross.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ROBERT WYER^



