THE REWARD of the Wicked.

Preached in a Sermon at Linfield in Sussex, and publis^^^ at the request of
some well di^^^sed Christians.

By HVMPHREY EVERENDEN.

The second Edition.

ECCLE. 11.19. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer
thee in the days of the youth and walk in the sight of thine eyes, but (...)
all these things, God will bring thee to judgment.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM JONES for ROBERT BIRD, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bible in Cheape-side. 1625.

To the Christian Reader.
THe means of edification in the holy Scripture (gentle Reader) may all be
referred to three heads. Instructions for all. Consolations for the oppressed.
Threats, for those that err and are obstinate. These make a threefold cord,
whereby God labored to draw mankind to this end. Here have thou one strane
twisted, viz. the judgment or death of the damned. If therefore Gods mercies
cannot alure thee to love him, here have thou his judgment to scourge thee,
that thou may fear him, that beginning thy wisdom in fear, thou may so
learn to love him, that his judgments being bitter to thy taste, may cause
thee to seek to try how good he is in his mercies. God give his blessing to
his own ordinance, for thy good.

Thine in Christ. Humphry Euerend^^.

THE REWARD of the Wicked.
A SERMON PREACHED at Linfield in Sussex.
MATH. 25.46. And these shall go into everlasting pain.


THe recompense of the righteous and the reward of the wicked described, in
this verse are both declared to be everlasting, the one embraceing, the other
despising an eternal Majesty; these that shall go into everlasting pain,
are the merciless, the cruel and hard hearted and with them all that go not
into life eternal, all those that shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 2.
Cor. 6.9.10.

Our Savior Christ describing the punishment of the damned, ^^th. 13.^^.
in the parable of the Tares, shows that by his Angels they shall be bound up
into bundles to be burned, teaching that they that participate in sin, shall
be partakers in punishment, and further, that their judgment shall be
irreuocable, their misery remediless their estate helpless, for whom God
binds, who can be able to loose.

Curious division of the words I purposely omit, observing the general
instruction which arises out of the words, without wresting of them, or
digressing from the true meaning of them.

The ungodly shall assuredly receive the punishment of eternal damnation at
the day of judgment.

This Doctrine it further confirmed by sundry places of Scripture.

In the 13. of Matthew is taught that the Angels shall gather together the tares
that is, ^ath. ^3.^0.42.^
the children of the wicked and bind them into bundles to burn them.

In the 20 of the Revelation is showed that death and hell (that is, the heirs
of death and hell) were cast into the lake of fire: which is the second death.

In the 21 of the Revelation is threatened that the fearful, and unbelieving,
and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and
idolaters, and all liars shall have their part in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Tribulation and anguish (says Saint Paul) shall be upon the soul of every
one that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Grecian.

And in his Epistle to the Thesolonians, that Jesus Christ shall show himself
from heaven, with his mighty Angels, In flaming fire, rendering vengeance to
them that do not know God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Because the Justice of God does exact and infer, that as every man does sow,
1 Res.
so he shall reap, and therefore he that sows to the flesh, of the flesh
shall reap corruption, as one the other side, he that sows to the spirit,
does of the spirit reap eternal life.

How does it stand with Gods Justice to punish a temporal offense with an
eternal punishment.











For the opening of this doctrine. 2 things are to be considered. 1 Wherein
the damnation of the wicked consists. 2 How far their punishment extends.


For the first, The damnation of the wicked stands in a twofold punishment
called paena damni, et paena sensa, the punishment of loss, and the punishment
of sense.

The punishment of loss is a separation from the presence of God, and from all
joys and pleasures attending the same. This is that which the Apostle
teaches, that they shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: And how great a mystery
this is may appear in that they that are separated from Gods presence are
separated from all joy and pleasure, between which and extreme sorrow and
misery there is no mean, for in Gods presence (and not else where) is
fulness of joy, and at his right hand (and no where else to be found) are
pleasures for evermore: and for this cause our Savior Christ accounts it the
greatest happiness of the pure in heart that they shall see God, and Cain
accounts it not, the least judgment that should befall him here on earth,
that he should be hid from the face of God. It (...) were so greiuous to Cain
to be separated from the place of Gods worship here on earth, which is but a
tipe of the separation in the life to come, oh how greiuous then must it needs
be to the damned in the life to come, to be indeed excluded from the glory of
God, and happiness of the glorified.

The punishment of scense is the infli^^ing of torments and miseries, both one
soul and body, for this shall be the misery of the damned, that they shall not
rest without joy and sorrow, but as they shall be deprived of all happiness,
so shall they be oppressed with all unhappiness, as they shall be debarred of
all delight and pleasure, so they shall be filled withal unspeakable torments.
By many things are their torments expressed in the holy Scriptures most
terrible and most painful our Savior Christ says, their worm never dies,
and their fire never goes out, and again, cast that unprofitable servant into
utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Math: 25.30.
with many the like paraphrases and denominations expressing the like. Now if
nothing can be more terrible then utter darkness, being that plague of Egypt
which next to the death of the first borne most of all moved Pharoahs hard
heart, if nothing more painful inwardly then the gnawing of the heart, with the
teeth of the serpent, if nothing outwardly, then the heat and burning of fire,
yea, if nothing more intolerable then the continuance of these torments
without ceasing or intermission, then suredly by these descriptions the Lord
would have us know, that the punishment of the damned is most intolerable, and
so great as the fury of Gods wrath against sin can kindle, and the rage of
Satan can inflict.

Now the reasons that the damned do suffer, not only the punishment of loss,
but of sense, that is, that they do not only loose the benefit of comfort, but
are also tormented, are these.

First, of the punishment of loss. 1 Reas.
Because they neglect and despise the true good grace and glory offered unto
them, yea, and God himself, the fountain of all good, and therefore it is
equal and just that their punishment extend to this, that they be separated
from God and his glory, from all good and happiness. For God will forsake them
that forsake him,

Secondly, of the punishment of sense. Because they have chosen to follow that
which is evil and forbidden unto them, 2 Reas.
therefore it is just, that the reward of their own hands be given unto them,
yea, it is equal, that his own iniquities take the wicked himself, and that
he be holden with the cords of his own sin.

As for the second consideration, how it is evident that it extends.

Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does evil,
Romans 2 9. And Tophet is prepared of old: it is even prepared for the King; he
has made it deep and large. Esaias 30.33.

Secondly, to every part of the damned Dives tongue can be free from the heat
of this torment. Luke 16.24.

Thirdly, to the uttermost extreamitie, Esa. 30 33. and being without any
pitying or commiseration: For there shall be judgment merciless to him that
shows no mercy. James. 2.13.

that there worm^ never dies, and their fire never goes out: the worm biteth
so long as he lives, and the fire tormenteth so long as he burns. ^ifthlie,
to eternity, for it shall be everlasting Math: 25.41. Which causes me to
remember what one says in his meditations, if the damned were to continue in
their torments but a thousand ^housand years, yet had they some hope, ^f but
so many years as there are stars ^n the sky, sands on the sea, grass on
the ^round, and dust on the face of the earth ^n the greatest drought, yet
there should be ^n end, nay if but so many thousand thou^and years as are
stars in the sky, ^ands on the sea, grass on the ground and ^ust on the
face of the earth, yet should ^here be one day an end of their torments, ^ut
their misery is far otherwise, for so many thousand years being ended, so
many thousands of thousands are again to ^egin, which also ever shall begin,
and never shall have end.

Now if it be demanded by the way ^hither there shall be in hell material
fi^ to the torment of the damned;

I answer, it is no point of faith, or matter necessary to salvation to know,

1 Use.
This doctrine may be a powerful motive to all wandering sinners, that go
astray after, the corruptions of their own hearts, in the desert paths of
disobedience, to return unto their God by true repentance, least they dye the
death for their dis^bedience, if the poor sheep in the wilder^^^^ did but
know, that if they continue ^ng from their fould, they should as^uredly be
devoured of the Wolf, they ^ould surely (although wanting reason) ^y the very
conduct of sense make have to ^he custody of their Sheep-heard, this then ^eing
most certain, that all that go a^tray from the ways of God, and so con^inue
wandering, either till their day of their ^isitation be past, or till death take
away ^^e time and place of repentance, shall be ^euoured of hell and
destruction, oh how should this move us, speedily to return to ^he fould of
Christ, to wash away our sins ^ith the tears of repentance, to redeem ^^e
time, and to be warned, that they ^ome not into this damnation.

Hence may all obstinate and impeni^ent sinners, to their terror, see the
assu^ed end of all their wicked courses by the ^ternall damnation both of body
and ^^ule. 4 Use.
What then shall become of all Ido^^ters, Adulterers, Drunkerds, Swear^^s,
breakers of Gods Saboths, covetous ^arth-wormes, Usurers, Oppressors, and ^^ch
like, that live and dye in their sins. ^urely they shall be bound up in
bundles to be burned, they shall go into everlasting pain, malefactors one
earth hau^ some hope after sentance to escape (...) temporal punishment for
men are dra^ne by many means to revoke their sentences, and to grant their
gracious pardons, but in this judgment the damned have to go with God, who is
feared by no man's dreatnesse, altered by no reward, with whom is no changing
or shadow of turning, and therefore his sentence is vnreuocable neither after
this life is there any time, place, or liberty of repentance: but as the tree
falls so it lies, either to life or destruction. Amen.

FINIS.

