SATAN'S Sowing Season. By William Est Minister and Preacher of Gods word in
Bydeford.

1: PET. 5. 8. Be sober, and watch, for your adversary the Devil as a roaring
Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Richard Bonian, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Flower de Luce. 1611.

CLARISSIMO, ET OMNIBVS VERAE NOBILITATIS ORNAMENTIS HONORATISSIMO DYNAstae,
Domino Guilielmo Comiti Bathoniensi, bonarum Literarum, and verbi diuini
Proeconum Patron singulari: GVILIELMVS ESTVS HVNCSVVM LIBELLVM, IN GRATI ANImi
testimonium, dedicat, consecratque.

To the Christian Reader.
IT is not long ago (courteous Reader) that I handled the same subject in
substance, as in this succeeding Treatise in my Book entitled The Scourge of
Security, or the expulsion and return of the unclean spirit: which after it
passed the perusing of some of my learned and sincere friends, they wished that
I had been more copious, and sharp, then therein I was, in scourging the
carnal security that is so far spread abroad, in all sorts, in this
pampering and self loving age. Which sparingnesse in reproving, I have in this
following discourse in part amended, according to my simple and single talent,
not hiding it in the earth, or keeping it to my self, but opening it to thy
view, and desiring the exchange of thy fervent and faithful prayers for this
my well wishing to thy salvation, and that it may, at the general account, be
returned to him that first gave it, with increase of true zeal and knowledge,
both in thee and me. And I humbly pray, that I, who reprove this sin of
security in thee, (which is the open gap to let in all thy spiritual enemies
into thy body and soul) may my self fly it, and thereby be the more
careful how we displease so gracious a God, and grieve so loving a Father as
we have in heaven.

Thine in the Lord WILLIAM ESTH.

SATAN'S Sowing Season.
MAT. 13. 24. unto ver. 39. The kingdom of heaven is like unto a man which
sowed good seed in his field, etc. THIS parable consists in genere
didascalico, for instruction, and doctrine, painting out the estate of the
Church militant in this life, in which the good and the evil, the wicked and
the godly, are mixed together, and suffered until the end of the world, when
they shall for ever be separated by the Lord.

The general division.
The whole may be reduced in general into a (...) and (...) a proposition, and
application. The proposition is contained in the whole pericope of the parable,
the application is added by Christ himself, from ver. 36. unto verse. 44.

The particular division.
But more fully and particularly all may be distinguished into these four heads
or members.

The first expresses with what provident care this heavenly householder
watches over his Church, in manuring, tilling, and dressing the field thereof,
and in sowing the seed of all virtues therein, verse 24.

The second shows the wonderful industry and subtilty of the enemy of
mankind, in seeking and laboring by all means to work our destruction, by
sowing in our hearts the poisoned and noisome seed of all iniquity, and the
fit opportunity he watches for the effecting thereof, v. 25

The third contains a question* with an admiration of the servants about the
plucking up of the same, v. 27.

The fourth expresses the answer concerning the time when God shall separate
and divide the good from the evil, and the different state of them both, verse.
29. and 30.

Every part thereof I will (for your better edification) explane and apply by a
several Protasis and Apodosis, and afterward set down the observations and
doctrines.

The first part.
Now for the first part the Protasis, or proposition is thus: Even as a man that
sows good seed in his field, and uses all means that it may fructify and
bring forth good fruits. Apod: So Christ the son of man sows in his Church
the good seed of his word, that it may bring forth good fruit to the joyful
harvest of eternal life, that he may purge us, to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works, Tit. 2 Tit. 2. 14.
14. And herein is the Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, and become
my Disciples, says our Savior, Io. 15. Ioh. 15. 8.


The kingdom of heaven what
By the kingdom of heaven is understood the state of the Church militant in
this life: for all things which are spoken in this parable, are expressly said
of Christ to go before the time of harvest, or of the end of the world* It is
called the kingdom of heaven, by a metaphor taken from an earthly kingdom,
because God by the preaching of the Cospell, begins his kingdom in the
hearts of men, which Luke 17. 12.
is within us, Luke 17. 12* and is righteousness Romans 14. 17
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.

Secondly, he is compared unto a man sowing good seed in his field: This is
the Son of man, verse. 37. that is, Psalm. 8. 4. Dan. 7. 13.
Christ, who is called the Son of man, Psalm. 8. 4. Dan. 7. 13. because he is
the only begotten Son of God, from all eternity very God, who in time took
flesh of the virgin Mary, and was made man.

Thirdly, the field is the world, where per metonymiam subiecti, are understood
the men living in the world. Again by a Synecdochen generis pro specie, not
promiscually every man, but the Church to whom the Gospel is preached, is
signified.

Fourthly, the good seed are the children of the kingdom, verse Ibid. that is,
the faithful and elect which are called here the good seed, per metonymiam
effecti, for the isntrumental cause, because by the word of God, that
immortal seed, they are borne anew, 1. Pet. 1. 23. 1. Pet. 1. 23 Ioh* 1. 12.
and are made the sons of God, Ioh. 1. 12. And they are called the children
of the kingdom, because in this life by faith they enjoy the kingdom of
grace, and the benefits thereof, and in the life to come, they shall be heirs
of the kingdom of glory.

Obser* and doctrines.
First, we here learn in this the Lords husbandry, that our heart by nature is
that barren and unfruitful field, which brings forth nothing but the thorns,
brambles, and weeds of vices, For it is evil from his youth, Genesis 8. which
Genesis 8. 21.
drinks iniquity like water, Job. 15. in it dwells no good, Romans 7. 18. out
of it proceed murders, adulteries, fornications thefts, slanders, etc. which
defile the man Matthew. 15. 19. But Christ is the good husbandman, which sows
the good seed in the field of our souls, and makes it grow and increase
therein.

1. By plowing and turning up this spiritual field, when he stirs up in
our minds the knowledge of our sins, and rooteth up the thorns and brambles of
vices by the preaching of the law.

2. He dungeth and dresseth the same, when with the sweet shower and heavenly
dew of his Gospel he reuiueth our hearts, nourishes us with his holy spirit,
and irrigateth and waters us with the celestial influence of his graces and
blessings, that we may bring forth the fruits of faith, piety, and all other
christian virtues, and fruits worthy Luke. 3 8
of repentance, Luke 3. 8. And this he works by the means, and faithful
diligence of his ministers and preachers of his word, for they are (...) some
way or other laborers with God in this husbandry. Ye are (says the Apostle)
(...) Gods husbandry, we are 1 Cor. 3. 9. 2 Timothy 4. 2 Phil. 2. 13. Ioh. 15. 16.
Dei cooperarij, we together are Gods laborers. Their office the Apostle
sets down: Improve, rebuke, exhort. And all this by the grace of God which
works in us both the will and the deed, who has ordained us that we should
bring forth fruit.

2. We have here a strong motive of thankfulness to our loving God for this his
fatherly care of his Church, which gratitude the Lord expects at our hands,
and which we must manifest in bringing forth good fruit. We should resemble
the good ground (says Seneca) Sene^*
quae vno accepto dat centu^, which renders an hundred for one it receives.
God sows his seed plentifully, and requires of us a plentiful harvest. For
even as we seek fruit of the ground whereon we bestow our seed, and curse hat
ground which yields no reco^ence: so God requires but the fruit of obedience,
piety, and holy conversation, which if we yield not, we are subject Heb. 6. 7.
to the curse, Heb. 6. 7. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes
often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives a blessing of God: but that which bears thorns and briars is
reproved, and near unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.

And I would to God that cursed Deuteronomy. 32.
fruit were not found amongst us mentioned Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 32. Their vine is
the vine of Sodom, and of the vines of Gomorah, their grapes are grapes of
gall, their clusters be bitter. Adest dominus Amb* super Luke 3.
qui fructum expectat, facundos viuificat, steriles damnat, Amb super Luke 3.
The Lord is present which respects fruit, the fruitful he quickens, the
barren he condemns.

Surely, there is no sin that more displeases God then ingratitude for
benefits. The first sin wherewith the Prophet Esaias by Gods commanddement,
Against ingratitude.
vpbraided the people of the Jews was unthankfulness for so many benefits
received. For thus he begins his prophecy: Hear O heavens, and hearken, O
earth: For the Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up children, but
they have rebelled against me. Esaias. 1. 1. 3
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe: but Israel has
not known, my people have not understood, Esaias. 1. verse. 2. 3. As the memory
of no virtue is more firm then of a benefit received: so scarce is there any
vice worse then ingratitude.

Among the Romans, if a bondslaue were set free, and afterward found to be
justly taxed of ingratitude, it was lawful for this fault to revoke his
liberty again, and to retain him in his former servitude.

We wonder at monsters, as repugnant to nature, as are the Centaurs, Satyrs,
a man with four heads, and such like, but we wonder not at Dogs, Wolves,
Foxes, Hares, Cats, etc. because their form and proportion An example.
is agreeable to nature: So we marvel not at other vices which proceed of our
frailty, and are incident to our natural corruption (though we loath them) as
gluttony, drunkenness, lust, wrath, envy, etc. and such other damnable Simile.
vices: but ingratitude, as an odious monster, an unnatural vice, a prodigious
exorbitant, all good men detest and wonder at. For as it is a thing natural,
amantem redamare, to repay love for love, because love is only requited with
reciprocal love: So it is a monstrous thing not to love again, and show our
selves unthankful to our loving God, who is such an infinite benefactor to
mankind.

The very Ethnikes and Paganes shall rise in judgment against Christistians,
and condemn them for their ingratitude toward God. When the Tarentines were
besieged of the Romans, and were in danger (through famine) to yield
themselves and their City into the hands of their enemies, the Rhegians
(ordeining a feast every tenth day) sent relief unto the Tarentines, for which
benefit (when they were delivered from the Romans) and in memory of their
former misery, they instituted an yearly feast, which they called Ieiunum
(says Elianus (...) hist. lib. 5.
Aelianus variae hist. lib. 5. Profane histories are full of such like
examples. And is it not a shame that Ethnikes, and men without God in the
world, should condemn Christians of ingratitude, and that the sparkles, and
dark glimse of reason and honesty, should work more with them, then the light
of faith, and bright beams of piety can prevail with us?

Whosoever is thankful for small benefits received, deserves to receive greater
of his friend: and God hates ingratitude not so much for his own, as for our
sakes, because t does as it were close up Gods hands of liberality, and turns
his face from us. For the hope of the unthankful Wis. 16. 29.
shall melt as the winter ye, and flow away as unprofitable waters, says the
wise man, VVisdome. 16. 29. Qui grate beneficium accipit primam eius pensionem
soluit. He that thankfully receives Seneca de benefic.
a benefit, has made the first requital, says Seneca.

Nothing did more win the love of Augustus Caesar to Furnius, and made him
facile, and willing to grant other things unto him, then that when he had
obtained pardon for his Father, who took part with Anthony, he said: Haec
Eras. apoph. lib. ^
vna (O Ceasar) abs te mihi facta est iniuria, effecti, vt viuerem and morerer,
ingratus. This only injury (O Caesar,) thou have done me, in that thou make
me live and dye as an vnthannkefull man. Signifying that so great was this
benefit, that he was insufficient ever to requite it. Eraesmus Apophth lib.
7. Take we heed therefore brethren, of this barbarous sin of ingratitude
toward God.

Thirdly, all Pastors are here taught by this example of Christ, who spoke
unto the people by easy and familiar parables and similitudes, studiously and
wisely to frame their Sermons according to the capacity of the people, and not
to affect a a strange, style and phrase of speech, or to use verbis
sesquipedalibus, (as Eusebius, Libr* 4. Cap. 11. writes of the Marcionites)
high and lofty Eusebius.
words. For, nihil frigidius doctore qui verbis duntaxat philosophatur. Neque
enim hoc doctoris sed hystrionis est, says Chrysostom. Homil. 1. Act. 1.
Nothing is more cold and foolish, then that Chrysostom. hom. 1. act. 1.
Teacher which disputes only in words: neither is it the part of a Teacher,
but rather of a player. And verbis ludere, and apud imperitu^ vulgus
admiratione^ sui facere indoctoru^ hominu^ est. Hier. in epist ad Neop.
Hier. in Epist. ad Neop. By playing and dallying in words, to bring the
unlearned people in admiration of him, is the property of ignorant and
unskillful men.

1. Cor. 2. 1. 3.
Far otherwise did the Apostle Paul, which came not in excellency of words, nor
in enticing speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit, and
of power, 1. Cor. 2. 1. 3. Praedicator enim (says Bern.) plus intendere debet
ad imbuenda Ber ser. 16. in Cant.
corda, quam ad exprimenda verba. For a preacher should seek rather to
instruct the heart, then to express eloquent words, which is but to feed the
ear.

Psalm. 78. 2.
Psalm. 78. 2. I will open my mouth in a parable, which the Evangelist also
alleges to the same purpose in this chapter, ver 3^. 2. That (as Greg. says)
ex his quae animus nouit surgat ad incognita quae no^ nouit. That the mind by
the things it knows might mount up to those things which it knows not.
These parables therefore are not carelessly to be passed over, but zealously and
religiously to be pondered, that we may observe the doctrine thereof, to our
comfort, institution, and instruction.

The second part.
The second part sets down the malice and industry of Satan, in corrupting
the good seed with the darnel and tares of vices. And this is the Devils seed
which he sows in the furrows of iniquity. The protasis or proposition is:
even as a man sowing good seed in his field, his enemy whiles he slept, sowed
tares among the wheat. Apodosis: Even so Christ the son of man, sows his
word the good seed, in his Church, but men being secure, careless, and
negligent, the Devil came and sowed heresies, deprauation of good doctrine,
scandals, and all kind of vices, that he might corrupt the The tares* what.
same. By the tares are signified the children of the wicked, verse. 38. that is,
all hypocrites, and the whole rabble of wicked men, which are the children
(...) illius mali, of that wicked, that is, of the devil, which (...)
Synecdochica^ is called wicked, a causa efficiente procreante, because he is
the principal cause of all evil, both to himself and to otherrs. The wicked
are called the children of the devil, not from the efficient procreant cause,
as if the devil* had created them, neither from the formal cause, as though
their very essence were destroyed and changed into evil: but first ab
adiunctis, because in their malice and wickedness they resemble, and are
compared to the Devil. Secondly, ab effectis, because in their lives and
conversation they imitate the Devil.

Obseru. and doctrine.
First, we here learn that Satan is the infatigable enemy of mankind, and
that this is his perpetual practice, by all means to work our destruction.
And that he may the better effect this, he labors chiefly to supresse the
first beginnings of godlilines, to corrupt the very seed, and to choke up the
corn in the blade, that it never may grow to maturity and ripeness. Semper
primordia pulsat, captat Chrysostom. in Mat.
rudimenta virtutum* sancta in ipso ortu festinat extinguere, sciens quod ea
fundata subuertere non possit, (says Chrysostom.) His policy is ever to be
striking at the beginnings of goodness, he catches at the first rudiments
and principles of virtues, holy desires, at their first budding, and springing
he hasteneth to extinguish, knowing that if they take deep root, he shall not
be able to subvert them.

1 Pet. 5. 8.
And therefore he walks about like a roaring Lion, 1. Peter chapter 5. verse
8. Yea, among the Sons of God, Job. chapter 1. verse. 6. having Job. 1. 6.
great wrath, knowing that he has but a Apoc. 12. 12.
short time, and the nearer the end of the world approaches, the more fiercely
he rages, as it appears by the ouerflowing seas of all iniquity upon the
whole face of the earth in these later times. And even at the beginning, as
soon as God had sown original righteousness, he cast in the seed of
original sin, wherewith he infected the recent purity, and choked with his
tares the seed of God, which was the seminary of all evil. And this he
effects not only by inward suggestions, but also by outward enticements of
wicked men, and that not by their filthy and corrupt communication only, but
also by the pestilent seed of evil examples he labors to infect the minds
of men, and to catch them in his net: yea, in those that hear The Devil three
manner of ways hinders the fruit of the word.
the word of God, he hinders the fruit thereof three manner of ways: Either
through wandering and idle cogitations, whereby he takes away the attention of
their minds from the word, or through the tumults of persecutions, or at least
through covetousness, and the cares of this life: and which is worst of all,
he permits not the seed that fell in the good ground (if by any means he
may) to be long uncorrupted: and to this end he has many false Apostles which
wrest and pervert the sacred Scripture, and in stead of the natural milk it
gives, wring out the blood of subtle and violent interpretation, and cause it
to walk a mile or two further for their fancy, then ever the holy Ghost meant
it: as it is usual this day with the Papists, for the supporting of the
kingdom of Antichrist.

He does also captare occasionem, take his opportunity, and therefore it is
said: while men slept, a metaphor taken from the bodily sleep, in which all the
senses are consopited, secure, and at rest. The definition of sleep.
This sleep is not a corporal, but a spiritual sleep of the soul, which is
shadowed out by the bodily sleep, which Aristotle, and out of him Galen thus
defines: Somnus est quies virtututum animalium, per antiperist asin ob fumos
in caput ascendentes, vnde frigiaitate cerebri repercutiuntur, hinc redeuntes
ad cor, obstruunt sensuum organa, that is: Sleep is the rest of the animal
powers, through an Antiperistasis, or repulsion on every part, (whereby heat
or cold is made more strong in it self, by the restraining of the contrary) by
reason of the fumes or vapors ascending into the head, from whence returning
back to the heart, they stop the organs of the senses.

This then is the spirtuall veternum and lethargy, when men are altogether
careless, negligent, and secure of their souls, and as if their senses were
asleep or dead, they have no feeling of any godly motions in their heart.

Two things to be considered.
But for your better edification, let us first see what sleep is in this place.
Secondly, how great a sin and detriment this is unto us.

First, men slept, having reeeiued the good seed in the fields of their
heart, when in vain they receive the grace of God. Therefore the Apostle
rowseth up the Corinthians, that they sleep not: As workers 2 Cor. 6. 1.
together we beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain* 1.
Cor. chap. 6. verse. 1. A thing is received in vain, when it is not applied to
that end for which it was ordained. In Simile*
vain do thou buy a garment, if thou never put it on. In vain have thou
received thy soul, the grace of God, the good seed, if thou directest not the
same to the desires of heavenly things, to the fruit of good works, for the
obtaining whereof the soul was created, and other graces given of God. But to
come to some particular men are said to sleep when they neglect and abuse the
grace of God, and the good seed, whiles they hearken not to the counsel of the
Apostle: Take heed that no Hob. 12. 15
man fall away from the grace of God, Heb. 12. 15. that is, that he abuse not
the good seed, and neglect the use thereof* Let no root of bitterness spring
up and trouble you (says he) For even as through the negligence of the husband
man many noy some weeds spring up, which hinder the growth of the good seed,
and fret away the corn: so the growth of the tares of vices hinder the
operation of grace. Wherefore said the Apostle a little before. Lift up Verse 12.
your hands which hang down, and your weak knees* that is, shake off all
drow*sinesse, and negligence. Who would not judge that their faith sleeps,
yea that it is dead, which never shows forth the vital motions of
godliness? Ephesians. 4. 14.
which are wavering, and suffer themselves to be carried away like children with
every wind of vain doctrine, by the deceit and eraftinesse of men* whereby
they lay wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. Of which number are they that revolt from
the Gospel to Papistry, and wrest religion and the Scriptures, vt Lesbiam
regulam (as the proverb is) or frame their profession as a nose of wax unto
all fashions, to please men's humors, and to serve their turn. Does not their
hope sleep which is not fixed on the invisible and heavenly good things, which
should allure them to the love of a good life? Seems not their charity to be
extinct, which kindles no sparks of the love of God, and of their neighbor
in their hearts? Does not their wisdom and reason, only proper to man, sleep
(whose office is to foresee imminent dangers, discern betwixt good and evil,
and to provide for the life to come) when they live so supine and careless of
their souls, and willingly suffer themselves to be caught in the snares of
Satan?

He sleeps, yea he is in a dangerous sleep, which lives in envy, hatred,
and malice of his neighbor: He that 1 Ioh. 2. 11.
hates his brother is in darkness (says Saint John.

The carnal, filthy, lecherous, and licencious liver sleeps, which is not
ashamed to commit that filthiness, Ephesians. 5. 12.
which a good Christian should be ashamed even to name (says the Apopostle)
Ephesians. 5. 12.

The covetous worldling* sleeps, yea and that sweetly, as he thinks, Luke
12. 19.
when he says: Soul, live at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pleasure, thou
have much goods laid up in store for many years, Luke 12. 19. but the spirit
of God intituleth them by the name of fools saying: Thou fool, this night
shall they fetch away thy soul from thee, and then whose shall those things be
which thou have provided? verse 20.

The glutton, drunkard, whose God is his belly, sleeps, whom the Apostle
Peter stirs up with the consideration 1. Pet. 5. 8.
of his danger, saying: Be sober, and watch, for your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour.

The negligent, secure, and sluggish Christian sleeps, who takes no care of
his soul, but sets it upon sixes and seuens, of whom says Solomon: Pro.
22. 13.
The slothful man says, a Lion is without I shall be slain in the street.
Pro. 22 to him all things seem hard, all things pertaining to godliness and
devotion, seem impossible: he can find no time as yet to arise from his
sins, no time with him is fit for repentance.

But (beloved) the spirit of God, who best knows the importance hereof, is
in nothing more frequent and earnest, then in exhorting us, us (I say) which
are regenerate in Christ, the good seed, the children of the kingdom, to
vigilance and watchfulness, that we give not place unto the Devil. Christ
cries out, and repeateth it again, that he might impresse it in our
memories: VVatch (says he) and what I say unto you, I say unto all me^: watch.
Mar. 13. 37.
Again, if the good man of the house had Luke 12. 39.
known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his house to be dug through. Luk 12. 39. So that vessel of
election, Saint Paul, reasons and exhorts Gods children, saying: Ye are
all children of the light, and of the day: we are not of the night, neither of
darkness. Therefore let 1 These. 5. 5. 6.
us not sleep as other do, but let us watch and be sober. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5. 6.
And our Savior again counsaileth, saying: Be Luke 12. 36
ye like unto men that wait for their master when he return from the
wedding, Luke 12. 36. Nothing truly might more significantly be spoken to
incite us to perpetual vigilance. Servants do never with greater carfulness
wait for their master, then when the solemnity of his marriage being ended, he
returns home to dinner, that nothing be wanting, but all things necessary
be provided, and in reedinesse for such a feast: So should all true Christians
be ever vigilant, waiting for the coming of the Lord, that they be not found
unprepared: For the son Luke 12. 40.
of man will come at an hour when ye think not.

Now let us see how dangerous and hurtful it is unto us, not to watch, but
live securely, whiles we are in the warfare of this life. The enemy now seeing
our supine negligence, and stupide carelessness of our souls, now bestirreth
him, he will not loose this fit opportunity, this is Satan's sowing season, now
he casts abroad his tares, now he prepares his ground, that is, the hearts
of the wicked to receive his pestilent seed, as thou may easily perceive if
thou observe the manners of wicked men, if thou seek at that time to awake
them, and admonish them of their dangers, they will (perhaps) hear, and
approve thy sayings, but being pressed down with the weight of wicked custom,
they betake them again to their sleep, and as the wise man says, who so
tells a fool of wisdom Eccles. 22.
is as a man that speaks to one that is asleep, Ecclesiasticus, chap. 22. As
one that is sick of a fever, to whom Simile.
sleep is very hurtful, if thou pull him, and with noise stir him up, and
tell him that sleep nourishes and increases his disease, he lifts up his
drowsy eyes, and hears thee, but being overcome with the force of the
hurtful humor, he is drowned again with sleep: So it happens to those
that are plunged in the sleep of sin, and pleasures of the world: if we
call upon them, lay before them death, judgment, hell, perpetual torments,
prepared for the wicked, their sins committed, the danger of sudden death,
etc. Heaven, and the most blessed reward prepared for the godly, etc. they will
hear this, and confess it to be true: but being overcome with the violence
of evil custom, they still proceed in their sinful courses.

The enemy all this while is spreading his net, he knows his opportunity: now
is the time he may most prevail: he enters thy house like a thief when thou
sleep. Blessed therefore (says the Spirit of God) is Apo. 16. 15.
he that watches, and keeps his garments, least he walk naked, and men see
his filthiness, Apoc. 16. 15.

Consider (beloved) and with a careful heart consider, that none were excluded
from the marriage of the bridegroom, the heavenly joys, but such as were not
prepared, which slept, and wanted oil in their lamps, Math. 25. If Matthew. 25.
those servants be blessed (as the Lord witnesses) whom the Lord, when he
comes, Luke 12. 37.
shall find waking, Luke. 12. 37. Then surely, cursed, and most wretched shall
he be whom the Lord shall find sleeping, secure, and careless. If thou will
not watch, I will come upon thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know Apoc* 3.
3.
what hour I will come upon thee (says the Spirit of God) Apoc. 3. 3. As the
bird is hardly taken which is flying, and in motion, but when she sits, she
is in most danger: so the adversary catches none but such as are negligent and
careless of their souls. As the sweet waters are ever in motion and running:
so the standing waters are neither sweet nor wholesome, and engender nothing but
hurtful and poysosoned Simile.
things. In a forsaken house, where none do inhabit, unclean beasts increase,
as rats, mice, serpents. Beasts which lie long on the ground, and walk not
(they say) loose their hooffes. The birds which sit long in their nests, loose
their feathers. And it is a proverb: Priuilegio non vtentes vel abutentes
perduni illud. A privilege may be lost by not using, or abusing it: So he
falls from Gods grace, is deprived of the good seed, easily admits the
tares of wicked desires, which sleeps, is idle, and negligent to keep
careful watch over his soul.

Now for how many causes this spiritual negligence is dangerous, let us
briefly unfold. He that is to make a In how many respects this negligence is
hurtful.
long journey, and the time short, he comes not to his iourneyes end except he
keep continual walking. We are all traveling toward heaven, our Similiun
congeries.
eternal country, the way is long, because many temptations and difficulties
are to be overcome, many good deeds are to be done in the work of the Lord,
many evils are to be suffered in the way before we come thither. Our time is
the time of this life, instans est, momentum est, ictus oculi est, but an
instant, a moment, the twinkling of an eye: yea, the time wherein we live,
(which is but the present time) is so short, and fleeting, that it cannot be
circumscribed. Why then are we careless? why loyter we? why sleep we in the
way? why are we so negligent in our journey?

Again, when a man is expected meet that he should make haste, be careful
and vigilant? but all the Saints of God, yea God himself, expects us in our
heavenly country.

Luke 14. 16
Supper, the banquet of eternal glory, the everlasting feast of all
blessedness, and shall we show our selves careless, and not rather hasten
with all alacrity, and cheerfulness of heart?

and expeditely? But in the way toward heaven are many temptations, many
devils lie in wait, many difficulties laid before us: let us therefore cast
away all sleep and negligence, and speedily go forward in the way of eternal
life.

If thou should have a friend

Lastly, he that omitteth the oportunate Front capillata, post est occasio
calua: Occasion has Old father Time has haity locks before, but not behind
long locks before, but is bald behind, to teach us not to slip the present
occasion, least being past, we can take no hold to pull it back again. And
this life is the time that God has in mercy Cato.
given us to work in: The night (of Ioh. 9. 4,
death) comes, when no man can work, Ioh* 9. 4. Behold now is the accepted
time, 2 Cor. 6. 2, 2 These. 5. 6.
behold, now is the day of salvation, 2. Cor. 6. 2 Let us therefore watch and be
sober, 1. These. 5. 6. For while men slept, the enemy came and sowed tares,
says this text.

The third observation.
Thirdly, I observe, in that it is said this enemy of mankind watched his
opportunity to sow his tares while men slept: That our own negligence and
security gives the devil advantage and victory over us: for not by his own
power, but through our slothful carelessness he sowed tares among the wheat.
Therefore says S. James: Iamees 4.
Resist the devil and he will fly from you. Iamees 4. If any man by his
adversary should be called into the law, and be in danger not only of his
goods, but also of his life, the which adversary has no power of himself, but
is such a one that if he resist and oppose himself against him, he is easily
vanquished: Who is so mad, so blockish and slothful, as not no resist, and
stoutly withstand such an adversary? who is so sottish to fear such an enemy,
and to suffer himself to be overcome? but such an adversary is the devil, by
his temptations and suggestions he labors to bring us to the bar, and
tribunal of Gods severe justice: but if we hold up the shield of faith, the
sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, the breast plate of
righteousness, continual and devout prayers, etc. and other parts of our
Christian panoplie, mentioned Ephesians. 6. like a Ephesians. 6.
dastard he betaketh him to his heels, and flies from us. It is therefore our
own fault, and negligent slothfulnes that we are overcome, that he sows his
tares in the field of our soul. And therefore the Apostle Peter says to
Ananias, Acts 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thine heart? He does not say, why
did Satan tempt thee? for that is his perpetual practice, but why did thou
give way to him? why did thou suffer him to enter in, and to fill thine
heart? And as Jeremy said once of the rebellious Jews: That they had taught
their enemies to be captains over them* (speaking of their captivity. The
same may be said of us, we our selves do teach the devil which way to
assault us, because we be sleepy and negligent, Simile.
fearful, and distrustful of Gods providence, covetous, and carnal livers,
and so it chances to us, as unto the birds, which gaping greedily after their
prey, are caught in the snare before they see it. Hence it comes, that our
desires, and inordinate affections expose us to the snares of the enemy, and we
are caught inconsiderately in his net, whiles we are greedily gaping to
satisfy our sinful lusts and affections, having no other mind, but upon the
fulfilling thereof.

Obser. 4.
When Satan had sown his tares, (it is said) he went his way: For when he
has sown his pestilent seed, he faineth to depart, he knows well the
operation thereof, how it will work, it will in his time grow so rank, that
it will corrupt quickly the seed of godliness. He sows the seed of pride
in thine heart, and goes his way, knowing that in time it will grow so high
that the spirit of God will take no pleasure there. He casts in thy mind the
seed of lust, and goes his way, he assures himself, that at last it will
break forth into the fire of fornication, and all uncleanness. He casts
abroad the seed of envy, and goes his way, he knows well that in time it will
grow to malice, strife contentions, and murders, so fruitful is this noisome
seed where it has once taken root. Take heed therefore how thou once admittest
this seed into thine heart, cast it presently out, suffer it to take no root,
for if it stay there, i^ will spring up, and yield most pestilent fruit.
Vigilat hostis, and tu dormis? says Augustine,
Augustine, thy enemy ever watches Greg. lib. 32 moral. cap.
and do thou sleep? yea, great is the malice of this enemy, that as Gregory
says: Art sese palliat vt ante decept^ mentis eculos, culpas virtutes fingat,
vt inde quisquam quasi expectet praemia vnde dignus est inuenire aeterna
tormenta. He makes himself by art, that before the eyes of a deceived mind,
vice might seem to be virtue, that a man might expect a reward for that, for
which indeed he deserves eternal torments, he so vaileth himself under the
vizard of virtue. Diabolus est serpens lubricus, the devil is a slippery
Isidor, lib. 3. de summo bano.
serpent, whose head, that is, his first suggestion, if it be not resisted,
totus in intimacordis, dum no^sentitur illabitur, says Isidor, he windeth
himself wholly in before thou be aware. Semper viscosa sunt carnis desideria,
fleshly desires be ever viscous, for of suggestion, if you give way, springs
cogitation, from cogitation (if ye resist not there) he proceeds to
affection, from affection to delectation, from delectation to consent, from
consent to action, from action to custom, from custom to obstinacy, from
obstinacy to hardness of heart, from hardness of heart to boasting, from
boasting to desperation, from desperation to damnation. And thus by degrees he
climbeth to the top of perdition. Resist therefore (brethren) betime his fury
and suggestions, steadfast in the faith, 1. Pet. 5. 1 Pet. 5
putting upon you the whole armor of God Ephesians. 6. James 4.
Ephesians. 6. and he will fly from you, Iame. 4 If in keeping our riches against
the lying in wait of thieves, against superfluous expenses, against future
wants, that we may have whereby to support our state, we bestow a thousand
cares, we use great circumspection. If we so carefully stop, bind, hoope,
and place, our wine, or oil vessels, least they should leake, or be
corrupted. If we so diligently look unto our garments, and other household
stuff, that they be not consumed of the mothes, spotted with any liquor,
stained with the dust: what an absurd thing is it, and unworthy of a Christian,
not to have the same care of the good seed of graces which we have received of
God to our salvation, and eternal glory, that it be not choked and corrupted
with Ser. 12 sup. Psalm. 91.
the tares of Satan* Viae diaboli (says S. Bernard) sunt circuitio and
circumuentio, circuit terram and perambulat eam, vt nos circumueniat. The ways
of Satan are circuition, and circumuention, he compasses the earth, and
walks through the same, that he might circumuent us. Neither if sometimes he
seem to cease, should we therefore be unprepared?

Simile
The wise Captains in the time of truce, do fortify their holds, and repair
their bulwarks* so should the Christian Soldier do in the peace of his
conscience. It is true that he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor
sleep; but neither does he slumber nor sleep which impugneth Israel. Shall
we be secure (says Bernard again) because we be assisted on every side?
Nay, for this cause should we the more studiously watch, for God would never
take such care of us, if he did not know our necessity and danger to be great.
Non Ibid. Ser. 11
tam multiplex nobis custodia, nisi ob multiplices insidias poneretur. Gods
custody and succors would never be so manifold toward us, if the snares of
Satan were not manifold. Laert. lib. 1.


Solon made a law, that he that lived idly should be exposed, for every
one that would to accuse him. The like law has God made, that he that
follows idleness, and is negligent of his salvation, should be laid open
to all temptations, and accusations of the Devil.

Obseru. 5. Two causes of all evil.
Seeing this envious man the devil, sowed his tares whiles men slept, we learn
that there are 2. causes of all evil that is in the world: the malice of
Satan, and our own negligence. Evil Lib, 1 de summo bono. cap. 2.
(as Isidor says) non est a Deo creatum, sed a diabolo inuentum, is not created
of God, but devised by the Devil. He Ioh. 8*
was a murderer from the beginning, and the father of lies, Ioh 8. As I live,
says the Eze. 33. 11
Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Neither is there any
fatal necessity to be imagined: for God in calling, so calls, that withal
he inclines God not the author of evil.
the will, he so forsakes the reprobate, that they themselves otherwise will
not. And this is manifest in Paul the Apostle, which was a persesecuting enemy
of Christ, til the hour came of his calling: then Christ so called him, that
withal he gave him a mind to will, and he cried: Lord, what will thou have
me to do? Contrariwise, he so forsook Judas* that his will was still
delighted in his wickedness. So that here is no constrained necessity, for the
nature of cut will is not hindered: yea it assenteth to good or evil: those
being willing, he draws: others, being also unwilling, he passes over,
neither of them against their wills he constrains. Far be it from us
therefore that by any means, directly or indirectly we should affirm God to
be the author of evil. Optimi est optima facere* it is the property of the
best, to do always the best things: but God is optimus, the sovereign good,
for he is essentially good, of whom are all other good things, therefore it is
of the nature of the divine goodness, to do always that which is good.

Object.
But why then (will some say) is God said in scripture to harden the heart of
Pharaoh, for thus it is in the Hebrew, Exodus 4. 21
Exodus 4. 21. Vaani achazek. I will harden his heart. Again, vatachazek, the
Lord Exodus 11. 10
hardened Pharaohs heart, Exodus 11. 10. This is attributed unto God, not that
Answer.
God is the author of induration, insomuch as it is evil, and works that
which is evil: but because God uses well these evils, and does govern them
that are hardened to some good end.

Satan hardens by suggesting, and persuading: man hardens himself when
he consents to the entisements of Satan, and by his own will turns
himself from God. God hardens by forsaking. So says Saint Aug. con. Faustum.
Augustine: Diabolus suggerit, homo consentit, Deus deserit. The devil
suggesteth, man consents, and God forsakes. And this to a modest mind may
suffice.

Obseru. 6.
Here note that the devil sows three most pestilent seeds in the world. which
are signified in the nature and property of tares, which the Arabians call
Zizania, the Greeks (...), and (...) in Latin Lolium, in English Tares, Iuray
Iefoelix lolium ^^r steri^^ ^^minant^^ au^^e.

Virg.


or Dainell. The Physicians say, that tares have these three properties* vim
acutam, ventosam ac vene^^sam, an acute, a windy, and a venomous qualicie.

In that they have an acute or subtle quality, they resemble covetousness,
which ever carries with it the very mystery of deceit, fraud, and subtilty, to
deceive the simple. They are Hos. 5. 1.
compared unto Fowlers, Hose. 5. 1. the simple and plain meaning men are but as
birds for their nets: Whoso flattereth Prou. 29.
his neighbor with his lips, spreads a net for him. They are like a sharp
rasour, which quickly shaueth away the hair: so the crafty covetous man soon
spoyleth the simple of all that he has.

So great at this day is the growth of this pestilent tare in the world, that
it has almost choked up the good wheat of simplicity and plain dealing
among men. Such has been the wonderful industry of the envious man in sowing
his tares.

But let these crafty Foxes remember, yea, let them with a feeling heart
remember the terrible woe pronounced by God himself against them, Hab, 2. 9 VVo
be unto him that coueteth an evil coue Mab. 2. 9. 11 12.
tousnesse into his house, that he may set his nest on high, and escape the
power of evil. For the Hone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam of the
timber shall answer it: woe unto him that builds a Town with blood, and
erecteth a City by iniquity.

Eccles. 10, 14.
this saying of the wise man is: Pride is the original of sin, and he that
has 1. Pet. 5. 5. James 4.
it shall power out abomination until he be over the own, Eccles 10. 14 For
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Which, if
we consider the different end of pride and of humility, we may plainly see in
proud Lucifer, and in humble Christ, in aspiring Eve, and in the lowly virgin
Mary, in the high minded rich glutton, and in vlcerated poor Lazarus, in the
proud Pharisie, and in the penitent Publicane. In these we may easily see
Matthew. 11.
how well God likes of this filthy tare of pride. There was not a greater by
Christ's own testimony, among women's children, then John Baptist, yet behold
his wonderful humility: he answered to the Jews in negatiues, Ioh. 19. 20 21.
Non sum non sum, non sum, (says a Father) I am not, I am not, I am not. But
contrariwise, the proud man and woman (which are indeed the worst and least
among all women's children.) stand all upon affirmatiues, and say still in their
own conceits: I am, I am, I am: they will not loose one inch of their
conceived reputation. Well (says Augustine) Excelsa est patria, humilis est
Augustinus super Ioau.
viatqui quaerit patriam, quid recusat via^? Our heavenly country is high, but
the way is lowly, he that seeks his country, why refuses he the way?
Again, O quam excelsus es Domine, sed In Epist.
humiles cord sunt domus tuae. O how high art thou O Lord, yet the humble in
heart are thine house. O that these proud peacockes would set before their eyes
the example of the Son of Phil. 2. 6. 7. 8.
God: Who being in the form of God, made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto
the death, etc. Philippians, chap. 2. verse. 6. 7. 8. Quid tumescis homo? (says
Augustine.) Augustiue
O pellis morticina quid tenderis? O sanies foetida cur inflaris? why art thou
proud O man? why art thou extended O thou dead skin? thou stinking
corruption, why art thou puffed up? thy Prince is humble, and art thou proud?
thy head is lowly, and shall the members be high minded? A certain
Philosopher being asked of one, Quid sum, quid fui, quid ero, what I am, what I
was, what I shall be, answered: Sperma foetidum, vas stercorum, and esca
vermium. Stinking sperme, a vessel of dung, and meat for worms. Surely, me
thinks, it should be sufficient to cut the comb of pride, and strike the
sails of ambition, if we would but call to mind that our conception is sin,
our life misery, and our end rottenness and corruption.

In that the tares have in them vim venenosam, a poisoned quality, (as it may
appear, in that whosoever takes the same into his body, it makes the head light,
and the body to swell) is noted the infectious sin of whooredome, and fleshly
lust, another filthy tare wherewith the Devil has poisoned and killed much
seed of virtue in the world: This noisome tare so infecteth the mind, and
choaketh all graces, that it breeds a consumption of all goodness in the
soul where it is sown.

In corpore Lentum protrahit, heu moriens qua carperis hectice febrim. Job. 20.
It is as Lenta phtisicorum febris, like a fever hectike, which cleaves to the
marrow of the bones, consumes the body, and never ends but with life it
self: His bones are full of the sins of his youth, and it shall lie down
with him in the dust, (says Job.) chap. 20. which is by the just judgment of
God, that they which have been the destuction of many souies by alluring them
to the consent of their filthiness, should also make wrack of their own souls,
and so animam pro anima redda^t, pay soul for soul. Hereof speaks a
certain Father, that the Devil has espoused iniquity to himself, and of her
he has begoten many daughters, as Hypocrisy, which he has married to all
dissemblers and false brethren: Rapine and oppression, to great men: Usury to
Citizens: Craft and deceit to Advocates: Pride to rich men, etc. But his
daughter Letchery he has appropriated to none, but prostituted her unto all,
that so she might draw the the more unto hell with her.

For the rooting up of this hurtful tare, it shall greatly profit, if (among
many other places of holy Scripture, which show Gods hatred of this sin) we
would diligently ponder in our minds the Apostles most patheticall reasons, 1.
Cor. 6. The sum whereof is: By whooredome great injury is done to Christ our
head, to whom Reasons why wre should fly fornication.
our bodies are sanctified: great reproach to God, who shall raise us up to
glory, as he has done the body of Christ: Great indignity done to the holy
Ghost, whose temple we are, and which dwells in us. Our bodies themselves are
hereby dishonored and damnified, which are by whoredom pulled from Christ our
head, joined to an harlot, and made one body with her. To conclude, thereby we
are made sacrilegious thieves, in defiling and giving of that unto another
which is not in our power. This is the sum The horriblenesse of this sin.
of the Apostles reasons, which show the horriblensse of this sin, and the
incomparable loss that comes to the whore monger thereby, and should be
sufficient to win the most refractary mind, if there be left in it one spark
of the fear God.

Having in some sort delineated the malice and industry of Satan the enemy of
mankind, in corrupting the good seed with the tares of vices, and the
opportunity he watches for the same.

Now the order of prosecution requires that I should set down also the
weapons and armor which every good Christian should have in readiness to resist
the fury of this enemy, and withstand his assaults, which the blessed Apostle,
and expert Champion of Jesus Christ, out of Gods armory most excellently
prescribes, Ephesians, 6. 14
Ephesians. 6. verse. 14. unto verse. 19. Stand therefore (says he) with your
loins girt about you with verity, etc The Apostle said before: Take unto you
(...): the whole armor of God. Now particularly he expresses the parts of
this armor. He sets down two kinds of armory necessary to every Soldier
against his enemy. Some which are needful for the defense of our selves, and
other to strike and repel the enemy. Of the first kind he speaks, verse 14.
15. 16. and part of the 17. Of the other, verse 17. and 18. He armeth the
whole man from the head to the feet, that he might in no part be hurt of his
enemy, and of this kind of armor he names five. The Girdle, the
Breast Plate, the Shoes, the Shield, and the Helmet.

He begins with the loins, which must be strengthened with the girdle;
and the breast, as the principal parts in which the life and strength
consists, and which the enemy chiefly assaulteth; and therefore the soldier
is wont especially to arm those parts in which the strength and life abides.

He says therefore, Stand: he requiquireth here three things.

First, that every one should keep himself in his station or calling, that
he yield not, nor turn his back to the enemy. And this calling is twofold,
Casling twofold.
the one general, whereby we are all called into the Church militant, that is,
to the army of Christian Soldiars, under the conduct and ensigns of Jesus
Christ. The other is a special calling whereby a certain station and office
is assigned to every man in the Church, as it is in a military army. Every one
ought especially to keep himself in the army of the Church, and next in his
private station. First therefore he requires that every one abide in the
Church, and that he depart not from the army for if he depart, actum est,
farewell to him: as to him that going from the army is either slain of the
enemy, or of his own company by the command of his Prince.

ataxia and confusion. First therefore every man must constantly remain within
the limits and bounds of the Church: and next, in his own proper condition, to
which he is peculiarly called, and not to give place to the Devil, which
diligently labors to draw him from both.

Thirdly, vigilance and watching is stand. This is necessary also, and opposed
to security: For while men slept this enemy came, and sowed tares. Be sober
and watch, 1. Pet. 5. 5.
for your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion goes about, seeking whom he
may devour. Therefore we must watch, every one in his several station, lest
Satan oppress us at unawares.

The first part of the armor.
But that we may stand in the battle and overcome, these things are required.

First, Constancy in doctrine, or in the this first is necessary, that we stand
fast in the truth of religion, grounded upon the word of God, for this is the
first thing which Satan seeks to shake, and take from us, namely, the truth
of doctrine, and obtrudeth unto us lies, and false doctrine.

This then is the first part of the armor of God, the Girdle of truth, upon
which the Church is founded: to 1 Timothy 1.
which pertains this of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1. 19. Having faith, that is the
truth of doctrine, upon which faith rests: and a good conscience, which is
the second part of this armor.

The second part.

The Breast Plate of righteousness,


The second part he calls the Breast Plate of righteousness: for after that
the mind is fortified with the verity of doctrine, there must follow the
Breast-plat of righteousness, and of a good conscience, that is, of a holy
life. For even as the breast plate defends the breast of the Soldier, so the
care of righteousness and holiness fortifieth the mind of a Christian man, and
conserueth his heart against the assaults of the Devil, that he be not
wounded with his darts. The Saints of God do slide and sin, they receive
wounds, but not to the heart, they sin, but not from the heart, according to
this of Saint 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
John. Whoso is borne of God, sins not, and why so? because his heart is
armed with the love of righteousness, holiness, and of a good conscience.
David which at first had his heart fensed with the knowledge of the truth, and
did set his love upon righteousness, yet he fell, and that shamefully, and
was wounded with the weapons of the devil: but these weapons did not pierce so
far as his heart, they remained but in his flesh, and why? because his heart
was fortified with this Breast Plate of righteousness. This place of the
Apostle agrees with that of Christ, Luke. chap. 12. Let Luke 12. 35.
your loins be girded about and your lights burning. These lights are the
holiness of life, and the works of righteousness, and a good conscience. And
this is the breast plate of righteousness.

The third part our feet shod.
The third part of this Christian panoplie is expressed in these words, ver. 15.
And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. The metaphor
is thus: They that go to the wars provide themselves of good boots and
shoes, and with them do fence and arm their legs and feet from the cold,
wet, and stripes of their enemies, and that they may be the more prompt and
ready to fight: So the Christian Soldier should arm the feet of his mind
with these spiritual shoes, to wit, readiness in all places, to confess
(and if we be called of God) to preach the Gospel to all men. It is called the
Gospel of peace, because it preaches reconciliation with God through Jesus
Christ, and because by the name peace among the Hebrews, are signified all
felicity, and all good things, and the Gospel brings all happiness unto us.

The fourth part of the armor.
And above all, take the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye may quench all the
fiery darts of the wicked. Here is the fourth part of the spiritual armor. In
the war (ye know) that the shield is necessary, with which the whole body is
covered, the strokes repelled, and the darts received, if a man knows in
battle how to use it. And in our spiritual fight the shield of faith is most
necessary above all the rest, but to what end? The Apostle adds, wherewith ye
may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked? (that is of the Devil) When he
says fiery darts, he alludeth to the ancient manner: for in old time (as it is
yet in use among the Indians, and other barborous nations) they were wont to
cast their darts infected with poison against their enemies, by which the
bodies of the wounded were so inflamed that they might hardly be cured. The
darts of the Devil are all temptations, and his tares wherewith he labors
to draw us unto all manner of sins, against which we pray in the Lords
prayer: And lead us not into temptations, but deliver us from evil. They are
called fiery, because they are dangerous, and deadly if they be admitted, and
do easily kindle the heart unto infinite sins, so that it cannnot easily be
cured: for one sin inflameth the heart unto another: as drunkenness, to
wantonness, wantonness to murder. We see in David, who for 2 Samuel 11.
the love of Bathshaba, he devised how to slay her innocent husband Vrias, 2.
Sam* 11. The darts of the Devil therefore are indeed fiery, but they are
quenched with a sound faith in Christ 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Jesus: Whom resist strong in the faith, says the Apostle Peter. And Saint 1
Ioh. 5. 4.
John: This is the victory that ouercometh the world, even our Faith, 1. Ioh.
5. 4.

Here we see that all temptations of the Devil are as artificial fires,
more to be feared then all the fires or fireworkes in the world, which if they
enter once into our hearts, they kindle a most deadly fire. Mark but them that
are wounded with malice, or wrath, do they not burn with a desire to be
revenged? And those whose hearts avarice has seized, how they are inflamed
with a desire to have all? Those who once are pierced with the flames of
fornication and whooredome, do we not see how they burn to have their fill
of their most infamous, filthy, and inordinate lusts? Those, who are inflamed
with anger and wrath, do they not cast out fire out of their mouths? their
eyes do sparkle, their nosthrils smoke, their mouths breath out fiery
threatenings, and railing speeches. And those who are carried away with ambition,
desire of honor, or vainglory, etc. But if thou Question*
say, that thou never did feel any pain, but rather pleasure in thy
passions, how then can they be so fiery? Answer,
I answer, so much the worse is it with thee, for this argues thy wound to be
incurable, when thou art past feeling, and that this fire will draw unto it
another, to wit, the fire of Gods wrath and heavy displeasure, which will
precipitate and throw thee down headlong into the fire of hell. They then that
yield and are overcome with these fiery darts of Satan, show plainly that
they are destitute of this impenetrable shield of, Faith, wherewith we may
easily drive back and extinguish all his fiery darts on which side soever they
be. For if by faith we have feeling of Gods favor and love toward us, and
are fully assured that he will be a good and merciful father unto us, then his
love which is kindled in our hearts by faith, and his spirit, which he has
given us, does cause us to hate, abhor, and detest all evil, and strongly
resist temptations.

The fifth ^rt.
Next he comes to the Helmet: Take the Helmet of salvation, verse. 17. It is
called Galea (...) of salvation, ^er metonimiam, because it brings salvation,
or is saluta^is, wholesome, for it defends the head. But what this spiritual
Helmet is, the Apostle teaches, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Putting on the hope of
salvation 1. These. 5. 8.
for an helmet The Devil by all means labors to bring us to desperation,
for then he thinks himself sure of us. The Apostle therefore wills that
even as in earthly battles Soldiers cover their head with an Helmet: So we
should fortify our heart and mind against all the insults of the Devil, with
a sure hope of eternal salvation obtained freely for us by Christ, without our
merits And most certain it is that there is no kind of temptation which may
not be overcome if we hold fast the most certain hope of eternal salvation,
and therefore Romans Romans 8. 24.
8. We are saved by hope They that despair of the victory fight no more, but
yield themselves into the hands of the enemy: as they that conceive an assured
hope of the victory, fight courageously and strongly. And as the Helmet, or
head-peece is very necessary for him that is in the brunt of battle among so
many arrrowes, and shot which fly on every side: for without the same he
should quickly be wounded and slain: So is hope most necessary for us, (which
is the companion of patience) to withstand and beat back all the assaults of
Satan. For the assurance of salvation that we have promised unto us in
Christ, does make us invincible in this fight.

Take heed therefore (brethren) that in any case the devil shake not our hope
of salvation in Jesus Christ, but still let us go armed with this Helmet, that
we be not wounded Aug. super Psalm. 3.
by this enemy. Vita vitae mortalis, spes est vitae immortalis, (says Saint
Augustine,) The life of our mortal life is the hope of the life immortal.
Spes animum in aeternitatem erigit, and idcirco nulla mala exterius quae
tolerat sentit, Greg. in mora.
Greg. Hope erecteth our mind into eternity, and therefore it feels no evils
which it outwardly suffers.

The sixth part of this armor.

The word of God.


The sixth part of this spiritual armor, is the sword of the spirit, which is
the word of God. Now he comes to describe that part of armor wherewith we
must strike and expel the enemy from us, as are Sword;, Spears, Gunnes, etc.
which the Apostle comprehends under the name of sword. He calls it the
sword of the spirit, because it is spiritual, and from the mouth of God:
because our enemy is a spirit, our fight must also be spiritual. He wills
us to be furnished with the word of God, and testimonies of holy Scripture,
whereby we may expel and drive back our enemy from us. And how we should
use this sword, Christ by Mat. 4.
his own example teaches, Matthew. chap. 4. in his encountering with the Devil.

When he tempts us to pride, draw 1. Pet. 5.
we against him this sword: God resists the proud, 1. Pet. 5. When he tempts
to covetousness, strike him with this sword: The covetous man is an idolater
and has no inheritanc in the kingdom Ephesians. 5. 5.
of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5. 5. If he tempt to adultery, lay at him with
1 Cor, 6, 10
this sword: No fornicator nor adulterer shall inherit the kingdom of God, 1.
Cor. 6. 10.

Likewise, when he tempts to herisi^s: as, Christ is not the true God, 1.
Ioh. 5. 19
let us boldly dash him on the face with this sword, saying: This same is very
God and eternal life, 1. Ioh. 5. 19. and his blood cleanses us from all sin,
1. Ioh. 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
1. 7. If he says, we are not justified by faith only, let us draw this sword
against him, saying: Whosoever believes in him shall not perish, but have
everlasting Ioh. 3. 16. Rom, 3. 28
life, Ioh. 3. 16. Again a man is justified by faith without the works of the
law Romans 3 28. Again, if he tempt saying: that by reason of the personal
union, Christ in his body is vbique, every where, object against him the words
of the Angel: He is not here, he is risen, Math. 28. 6. Again, the very words
in the Article Math. 28. 6
of our faith: He ascended into heaven, and from thence he shall come again,
etc. If he say the body of Christ is in the bread really, reply, that Christ
said not, my body is in the bread, but this (that is the bread) is my body And
so let us use this sword of the spirit in all other temptations.

The seventh part of this armor.
Lastly, he concludes with prayer, which is the seventh part of this spiritual
armor, verse. 18. And pray always. This is a continual and fervent
supplication to Almighty God, that he will be present and assist us and all
the Saints, in this fight against Satan. With this kind of armor let us
defend our selves against this enemy, and strike him, and drive him from us. I
his is a most excellent and effectual kind of weapon, which the Apostle
therefore places last, because except God and our Emperor Jesus Christ, (by
our prayers) be present to protect us, all the rest of our armor little
prevails.

After therefore that the Christian Soldier be on every side armed, the
Apostle wills, that turning to his Emperor, and acknowledging his weakness,
he devoutly craves succor, and aid, and not once or twice, but continually,
for we stand in continual need of his defense. And this we should do, not
coldly, faintly, and with the lips only, as did the Jewish people, of whom
the Prophet in the person of God complains, Esaias. chap. 29. This people
honors Esaias. 29,
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me, but with a fervent
spirit, not carelessly, and negligently, as if we stood in no fear of the
enemy, but watching with an earnest affection in this duty of prayer.

And that not only for our selves, but for the whole Church, that is, for the
whole army of Gods Saints, and Soldiers of Christ's band in the Church militant.

To conclude, there are none therefore vanquished of the enemy, but such as
forsake this their impregnable armoure, and depart from their invincible
Captain, Jesus Christ. The victory shall be ours, through him who has
vanquished Satan, and shall break his head, tread him under foot, and make
us reign and triumph wlth him for ever.

Obseru. 6.
Lastly, I here observe, that the Church militant in this world, is not a
congregation absolutely pure, without spot or blemish, contagion of sin,
scandals, vices, and imperfections, as the tares sown among the wheat, and
growing together, plainly euinceth against the Donatists Anabaptists, and such
like. For alwaie in the visible Church in this life, the good and the bad, the
godly and the wicked, the elect and the reprobate are mingled together. The
Church Aug. de bapt. lib. 5.
(says Augustine) est velut lilium inter spinas, bonis and malis permista, as a
lilly among thorns, mixed with good and evil, as it may appear by the
example of the Church of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1. and 5, etc.
1. Cor. 1. and chap. 5. and other places, which may be proved by this
argument, taken from the scope of this parable, thus:

As it is with the tares and the wheat, so it is with the visible Church: but
thus it stands with the tares, and the wheat, they both grow together until
the time of harvest.

Therefore in the visible Church the good and the evil are mixed together until
the time of harvest, or of the end of the world. The antecedent is proved out
of this parable; the consecution is illustrated by this rule in logike,
similium similis est ratio, of like things is the like reason.

Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 38.
The use which the godly should make hereof S. Cyprian teaches, that because
tares seem to be in the Church, this should not hinder our faith and charity,
that because we see tares in the Church we our selves should depart out of
the Church: but we should rather endeavor, vt frumentum esse possimus, that we
may be the good come, that when the corn shall begin to be laid up in the
Lords barnes, we may receive the fruits of our works. For in a great house
are not only vessels of gold, and of silver, but also of wood and of brass*
some to honor, 2. Tim. 2.
and some to dishonor, 2. Tim. 2.

The third part
The third part*
Then came the servants of the householder and said unto him: Master* sowedst
not thou good seed? From whence then has it tares? verse. 27. Here is thirdly
contained the question of the servants concerning the rooting up of the tares,
joined with an admiration: Sowedst not thou good seed? The Protasis or
proposition is: even as the householder would not that the servants should pluck
up the tares, but that they should grow together till the time of harvest.
Apodosis: So wicked men and heretics shall ever be in thevisible Church until
the end of the world, when they shall be separated and utterly rooted Aug in
quest super Mat.
out. This Householder is God, the servants (according to Augustine) are such
Christians as are carried with a Prosopopoeia is a faining of a person to
speak.
more fervent zeal to have the church purged. Their speech, with the answer of
the Householder, is figured by an imperfect Prosopopoeia. verse. 28. Obseru. and
doctrine.
29. 30.

monsters of iniquities, so many periuries, blasphemies, adulteries, among men
professing Christianity? This the Prophet in the person of God admireth, Esaias.
5. when after he had described Gods goodness and diligence in dressing his
vineyard, he says: What Esaias. 5. 4.
could I have done any more to my vineyard that I have not done? Why have I
looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brings forth wild grapes?
And Jeremy. 2. 21. Yet I had* planted thee a Ier. 2. 21.
noble vine, whose plants are all natural* how then art thou turned into the
plants of a strange vine? From whence has it so many tares, seeing that sin
fights against Almighty God, of whom we receive all good things, and in whom
we move, live, and have our being, from whence then are so many tares?

If nothing be so hurtful unto man as sin, if of sin comes death and
eternal damnation: if of sin proceeds all miseries and plagues in this
life, why are men so easily induced to sin? from whence are these tares? If
Aug. in Romans 7.
(as Augustine says) vnusquisque peccando, animam suam Diabolo vendit: by
sinning a man sells his soul to the Devil, receiving as the price thereof,
a little transitory pleasure, how spring so many tares? If we demand of the
Philosophers what man is, they will answer: Animal rationale, a reasonable
creature. If man then be a reasonable creature, what should be more agreeable
to the law of nature, then to frame his life according to the rule of reason*
But if sin be not only against the law of God, but also contrary to the light
of reason, how should a reasonable creature commit daily and hourly so many
sins? Why (I pray you) did the Son of God take upon him our flesh? why did he
preach, teach, do, and suffer many great things? was it not that he might
destroy the works of the devil? and what are the works of the devil, but
sins? and why gave he himself for Tit. 2. 14.
us? was it not that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be
a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works? They therefore that
serve sin, what do they else but crucify again Heb. 6. 6.
to themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him. Heb. 6. 6. From
whence then are these tares? from whence is this abundance of iniquity in the
world? how are men so easily seduced by Satan to receive this pestilent tare
into the ground of their hearts? And surely so great at this day is the
corruption of Christian manners, that as in the time of pestilence we do not so
much wonder at them that dye, as at them which remain alive: so now adays we
may not so much marvel at hose that live wickedly, as at the gody, Simile*
honest, devout, etc. as if it were a miracle to see them unspotted of so great
corruption. So that this place ehemently reproves the negligence ^ngratitude,
and extreme impiety of men, and serves to exaggerate the filthiness and and
absurdity of sin.

Obseru. 2.
In that the Devil is called the envious man: Homo humanitatem significat, Note
the subtilty of Satan.
(says a Father) the word [man] signifies humanity. And as God so wing the
good seed is called a man, so the devil sowing his tares, is here termed aman,
not that he is a man, sequia humanitatem simulat, because he Mat. 4. Mark. 1.
12 Luke 4. 8.
faineth himself to be thy friend that he might deceive thee, when indeed he
is thy most fraudulent enemy. The same art he used in deceuing of Eve, as if
he tendered her good and wished her felicity. The like cra he used in tempting
of Christ, speakin friendly unto him: but better (says S^lomon) are the wounds
of a friend, then t^ kisses of an enemy. He knows that he can effect little
if he walk unmasked and therefore he reaches his poyso under the color of
goodness. But tal heed of him, he is the envious man. H resembles a thief in
subtilty, whic knocks at thy door in the night, thou ask who is there, he
changes his name, alters his voice, pretends to Simile.
be thy friend, that thou may open the door unto him at unawares, and so he
spoileth thy house, and kills thee. But what does this envious man? he
sows seed, ex diametro, contrary to the seed of God. Christ sowed poverty of
spirit, from whence then sprang The Devil contrary to Christ.
avarice? Christ sowed contempt of the world, from whence then sprang so great
love of the world? Christ sowed humility, from whence then has pride gotten
that growth? Christ sowed chastity, from whence then has whooredome,
fornication, adulteries, and all licentious living so ouergrowne the world?
Christ sowed sanctifying of the Sabbath, from whence then came such profaning
of the Sabbath in carousing, drunkenness, dancing, dicing stage playing, and
such like heathenish prophannes? Surely the envious man has done this, these
are the prints of his feet, he has been here, learn to know him ex vnguibus
Leonem, as the Lion by his paws.

Obseru. 3.
Learn here, that all envy is of the The gate of iniquity Envy a devilish sin.
devil, it is a diabolical sin. Envy is, first Ostium iniquitatis, the door of
iniquity: for by it death entered into the world. By this was Jacob vexed of
Esau, Joseph sold of his brethren, David persecuted of Saul, Christ delivered
to the Jews.

The bane of charity.
Secondly, it is toxicum charitatis, the bane of charity: for were it not for
envy, every one would rejoice at another good, as if it were his own, and
Augustine.
be soary for another harm. Toll inuidiam (says Augustine) and tuum est quod
habeo, and meum est quod habes. Take away envy, and that which I have is thine,
and that which thou have i mine.

The corruption of health.
Thirdly, Envy is putredo sanitatis, the corruption of health: for, do not the
envious man or woman hurt themselves most? do they not eat their own heart,
and by fretting and envying at others, consume themselves? Therefore God (says
a father) should do great injury to the envious man, to place him in heaven,
where there is nothing but joy: for another prosperity is the object of envy,
which ever tormenteth the envious man, and increases his sorrow. Therefore
hell is the place allotted to all envious caitifs, where they shall see nothing
that they may envy at, but weeping, howling, gnashing of teeth. Let Christians
therefore far abandon, and expel this pestilent vice, the express image of
the devil, and embrace brotherly love, the true badge of a Christian.

Obseru. 4.
Fourthly, we are here taught, that the wicked do not only hurt themselves,
but are also offensive unto others, and do corrupt them. For even as the tares
do draw and suck out the humor that should nourish the wheat: so the wicked by
little and little, consume the juice of virtue in them with Eccles. 13. 1 Cor,
5.
whom they converse. He that touches pitch, shall be defiled therewith, and a
little leaven leaueneth the whole lump. Vuaque conspect a liuorem ducit ab
vua: one rotten grape corrupts the Iurenal. Sa. 2.
whole cluster. Res maximi pretij est inter malos laud abiliter conuersari. It
is a thing of great price to live laudably among wicked men. And as it is a
great sin inter bonos, bonum non esse, not to be good, conuersing among good
men: So it deserves great praise, Greg. Mor. lib. 1.
bonum inter malos extitisse, to be good, living among wicked men, says
Gregory. Fly therefore the society of wicked men, and fear rather least they
shall pervert thee, then that thou shall convert them.

Greg. Hom. 12. in Eze.
Out of the 28. verse I note, that it was well said of Gregory: Zelum
animarumesse sacrificium deo omnipotenti, The zeal of souls is a sacrifice to
Almighty God: yet all zeal is not to be reputed such a sacrifice, as it is
plain by the example of these servants, which with an in tempestiue zeal
would have plucked up the tares. Such was the zeal of James Luke 9. 54
and John, Luke. 9. against the Samaritanes. Let the godly learn here always
to retain a holy zeal, but let it be (...), joined with the knowledge of God,
and not (...), according unto ignorance, an inconsult, Romans 10. 2
or bloody fury, Romans 10. 2.

The fourth and last part.
But he said nay, least while ye go about to gather the tares, ye pluck up
also with them the wheat, let both grow together until harvest, and in the
time of harvest, I will say to the reapers: Gather ye first the tares, and
bind them in sheaues to burn them: but gather the wheat into my Barn, verse.
29. 30.
The last part expresses the answer of the Householder, concerning the time
when God shall finally separate and divide the elect from the reprobate, and
the different state of them both. Protasis: Even as at the time of harvest the
tares are bound together in sheues to be burnt, but the wheat is gathered and
put into the barn. Apodosis* So at the end of the world, all infidels,
impenitent sinners, workers of iniquity, and all things that offend, shall be
utterly rooted up by the Angels, and cast into eternal fire for ever to be
tormented. But the elect and faithful shall be gathered into life eternal,
and shall enjoy everlasting felicity in the kingdom of their heavenly The
exposition.
father. The harvest is the end of the world, the reapers are the Angels, which
out of the kingdom of Christ shall take away all things that offend, that is,
(per metonymiam effecti) all such as by their filthy life have given offense to
others. ver. 42. 43.

Obseru. and doctrines.
First, here is laid before us the exceeding mercy and clemency of our heavenly
father in his long suffering of the wicked. For the divine nature, says
Hierome) is more prone to mercy Hiero^.
then revenge: For he will not the death of a sinner, but that he convert and
live, Ezech. 33.
Ezech. 33. Deus opus misericordiae cito facit, (says Chrysostom) God shows
Chrysostom. super Mat*
his mercy speedily, because this is most agreeable to the natural propension
of the deity: Sed opus iustitiae punientis, est deo alienum, ergo tarde facit:
but the work of his justice in punishing, is more remote from God, and
therefore he does this more slowly.

The idolatrous Gentiles in old time were wont to say in praise of their false
Lactantius.
Gods (as witnesses Lactantius) Quod dij habent pedes laneos, that their Gods
had feet of wool, because they did not presently power down vengeance upon
wicked men, but did proceed pedete^tim slowly to punishment, But more truly may
this be spoken of our most mild and loving God, for he has indeed pedes
laneos ad vlciscendum, woollen feet in coming to vengeance oftentimes against
sinners, who notwithstanding has pedes alatos, winged feet, in showing mercy,
and conferring benefits upon men. But consider here, and with a feeling heart
consider, that how much the greater is his lenity in expecting thy conversion,
so much the heavier shall be his severity when it falls: which the very
heathen by experience well perceived, as it appears by the saying of Valerius:
Valor lib. 1 cap. 2.
Diuina^ra lento quidem gradu ad vindictam procedit, sed tarditatem grauitate
supplicy compensabit, Valor. lib. 1. cap. 2. The wrath of God comes with a
slow pace to vengeance, but his slownesse he recompenceth in Psalm. 7. 12,
the grieuousnesse of the punishment. And therefore Gods wrath is compared by
the Prophet unto a bow: If a man will not turn, he has whet his sword, he
has bent his Greg. M^r. 19. cap. 21.
bow, and made it ready; and Gregory gives the reason: Because the bow (says
he) the more it is drawn, with the greater violence it sends forth the
arrow: So the day of revenge, the longer it be deferred, the more strict shall
the judgment be when it comes.

The Adamant, which of all stones is the hardest, if it be broken, it is
dissolved into so small a dust, that it cannot be discerned: So Gods patience
is like the Adamant, it may for a while suffer the wicked to follow their sins:
but in the day of vengeance the fire of his wrath will break forth, he will
let loose all the raines of his fury, and be revenged upon his enemies. O let
this consideration stir up all carnal, secure, and careless livers, which
without any fear drink iniquity like water, let this rowse them up out of
their deadly lethargy, and dangerous sleep of security, that yet at length
this long sufferance of God, may allure them to repentance, least through the
hardness of their hearts, they heap unto themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, Romans. 2. when the Romans 2.
tares shall be gathered together, and cast into the furnace of fire, where
shall be wayling and gnashing of teeth ver. 42.

Verse. 29. 30* A question
Here may a question arise, whether it be not lawful to excommunicate wicked
men out of the Church, yea for the Magistrate to inflict punishment upon
malefactors, and (according Answer.
to the quality of the offense) de medio tollere, to cut them clean off? I
answer, this parable is to be extended no further then the scope thereof
requires: for it is to be understood, first Romans 13. 4
(according to Gregory and Hierome) non de manifest malis, sed de occultis and
ambiguis: not of open and manifest offenders, but of things that are secret
and doubtful.

Secondly, not of the public execution of justice of the Magistrate against
malefactors; but of the private, intempestiue, and preposterous zeal of
certain men. For the Magistrate, for the punishment of offenders lawfully
convicted, bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.

It is the duty of the ministry to labor to pluck up the tares, and all
offenses, not by the sword, but by the preaching of the word: for this was the
Apostles charge, 2. Timothy. 4. 2* Preach the word, be instant in season, and
2 Timothy 4. 2.
out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort, manifest wicked and scandalous livers,
least by their evil examples they 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20
should corrupt others, to cut off such by the censure of excommunication.

And to the civil Magistrate it appertains, as justice requires, to use the
sword for the taking away of evil Exodus 21. Leuit. 24. Deuteronomy. 12. 19. 21.
doers, Exodus 21. Leuit. 24* Deuteronomy. 12. and 19. 21. Romans 13. 4. Otherwise wicked
men are to be tolerated with lenity in the congregation of the godly, and not
by and by without discretion to be plucked up, as this Householder here
teaches, who forbade his servants to pull up the tares. The same Apostle
counsels Timothy, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. 26.
Timothy. 2. 24. 25. 26. and that to this end: Proving if at any time God will
give them repentance, that they may know the truth, and come out of the snares
of the devil. For he that is wicked Nisi patienter cum mali sunt tolerentur ad
laudabilem mutationem non perueniunt, etc. Aug. quest. in Matthew.
to day, may (perhaps) to morrow be converted. And if wicked men be not
patiently suffered, they will never come to a laudable change (says S.
Augustine.) Itaque si euulsi fuerint, simul etiam triticum eradicabitur, quod
futuri essent si eis parceretur. If therefore they be plucked up, the wheat
together will be plucked with them, which wheat the wicked also might be, if
they had been spared.

Ex verse. 30. 41. 42. Obseru. 5.
There remains a last judgment, and eternal punishment for the reprobate*
when the tares shall be bound together, and cast into eternal Gregorius.
fire: that is, Pares paribus sociare, vt quos similis culpa coinquinat paretiam
poena constringat: To sociate like with their like, that they that have been
polluted with the same sin, may be tormented with the same punishment (says
Saint Gregory) They shall be cast into the lake that burns Apoc* 21.
with fire and brimstone for ever Apoc 21. Into eternal fire, Matthew. 25.
Where they Matthew. 25.
shall have nor est day nor night, Apocalips 2. These. 1.
14. They shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of
God, and from the glory of his power. They shall be cast into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 22. They shall say unto the
Math. 22.
Mountains, fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits upon
the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Apoc. 6 There shall be fire
inquenchable, Apoc. 6.
the worm immortal, howling lamentable, stink intolerable, aspect of devils
horrible, the wrath of God implacable* the malice of the tormentors insatiable,
desperation insuperable, and* death eternal. O then (beloved) that this golden
sentence were engraven in our hearts, that it never Aug. Ser* 26. ad frat. in
Erem.
might be forgotten: Momentaneum est quod hic delectat, aternum quod illi^
excruciat. The thing which here delights us, is but momentanie, short, and
fading: but the punishment for these short pleasures of sin, in the life to
come, are eternal, and never shall have an end.

1 These. 4. 17.
shall they be ever with the Lord, 1. Thessalonians 4. 17. Then shall they
shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their heavenly Father, verse. 43. as the
brightness Dan. 12. 3.
of the firmament, Daniel. 12. 3.

O sweet consolation! the godly then through the angust straites of this
mortal life, pass to the August and ample glory: by death they are not so
much consumed, as consummated: Death to them is to be reputed not so much a
grave, as a gain: when death does lance, their hearts do laugh: a blessed
and true life follows such a death, according to this of the Poet:

Frigida mors vitam, mortem rapit altera vita:
Mors vanae vitae finis, origo bonae.
Cold death takes life away,
True life yet death subdues,
Death ends this brittle life,
Whence happy life ensues.
Why then should not the godly, most cheerfully, and with a zealous heart, cry
out with a learned Father: O mortem beatam, quae vitam etsi adimit, non tamen
perimit, adimit quidem, sed ad tempus, restituendam in tempore, duraturam sine
tempore! O blessed death, which though it takes away our life, yet it does not
destroy it, it takes it away for a time, to be restored in time, to endure
without time.

It is sown here in corruption, 1* Cor. 15.
but it shall rise again in incorruption. They that sow here in tears, Psalm.
126.
shall reap there in joy. There shall be eternal health, and healthful
eternity, secure tranquillity, and joyful security, happy eternity, and
eternal felicity. The joy of that life shall never decrease, nor the love ever
wax cold: such a blessedness 1 Cor. 2. 9.
as the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has entered into
the heart of man. It surmounteth all speech, exceeds humane sense, and goes
beyond all our desires.

Let us strive therefore (good brethren) to be the good wheat in this life,
that in the life to come we may be gathered into to the Lords Barn of
everlasting blessedness: which God grant, for the merits of his Son Jesus
Christ, to whom with the holy Ghost be all honor and glory both now and for
ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

