A new Tragical Comedy of Apius and Virginia, Wherein is lively expressed a
rare example of the virtue of Chast^^^e, by Virginias constancy, in wishing
rather to be slain at her be slain at her own Fathers hands, then to be
deflowred of the wicked Judge Apius.

By R. B.

The Players names.
Virginius, Matter. Virgina. Haphazard. Mansipulus. Mansipula. Subteruus. Aptus.
Conscience. Justice. Claudius. Rumor. Comfort. Reward. Doctrina. Memory.
Imprinted at London, by William How, for Kichard Ihones. 1575.

The Prologue.
Qui cup^^ aethereas and summas s^andere sed^^
Vim simul ac fraudem discute chare tibi.
^rau^ hic nulla (...), (...) forti^ facta i^^^b^^,
Sola Dei tua te trahat, terse fides.
Qui placet in terris intactae palludis instar,
Viuere Virgini^m nitore virgo sequi,
Quo^ tulit and luctus, discas gaudia magna
Vitae, dum p^r^^^ci^de^ fila pareot.
Huc a^^^ o virgo, paritere moritura sepulcher,
Sic ai^ and faciem pallida morte mutat.
WHo does desire the trump of same, to sound unto the Skies,
Or else who seeks the holy place, where mighty Jove he lies,
He must not by deceitful mind, nor yet by puissant strength,
But by the faith and sacred life, he must it win a length,
And what she be that virgins life, on earth would gladly lead,
The Sluds that Virginia did fall, I wish her read,
Her doller and vir doleful loss, and yet her wyes at death,
Come Virgins pure to grave with me, quoth she with latest breath,
You Lordings all that present be, this Tragidie to hear,
Note well what zeal and love, herein does well appear,
And Ladies you that linked are, in wedlock bands for ever,
Do imitate the life you see, whose same will perish never,
But Virgins you, oh Ladies fair, for honor of your name.
Do lead the life apparent here, to win immortal same,
Let not the blinded God of Love, as Poets term him so,
Nor venus with her venery, nor Leehors cause of woe
Your Virgins name to spot or file: dear dames observe the like,
That fair Verginia did observe, who rather wish the knife,
Of fathers hand her life to end, then spot her chastety:
As she did wail, wail you her want you maids of courteste.
If any by example here, would shun that great anoy,
Our Author would rejoice in heart, and we would leap for joy,
Would Gods that our indeuer may, as well to please your ears,
As is our Auctors meaning here, then were we void of fears:
But patiently we wish you bear with this our first attempt.
Which surely will to do our best, then yield us no contempt,
And as you please in pacient wise, our first for to receive,
Ere long a better shall you win, if god do grant us leave.
A.Y. FINIS.
Enter Virginius. BEfore the time that fortunes lot, did show each fate his dome,
Or Bird, or Beast, or fish, or Foul, or Earth had taken rome
The Gods they did decree to frame, the thing is ended now,
The Heavens, and the Planets eke, and moist from air to bow.
Then framed they ye man of mould and clay, and gave him time to reign,
As seemed best their sacred minds, to run and turn again:
They framed aiso after this, out of his tender side,
A piece of much formositie, with him for to abide:
From infansie to lusty you, and so to reign a while,
And well to live, till Etas he unawares, do him begyle.
And since to see these gifts of them, no grounded cave to view,
Not daintyly to deck them up, which after they may rue:
Wherefore I thank the Gods above, that yield to me such fate,
To lincke to ee so just a spouse, and eke so loving mate.
Ey her I have a virgin pure, an ympe of heavenly race,
Bosh sober, meek, and modest too, and virtuous in like raze:
To Temple will I wend therefore, to yield the Gods their praise,
For that they have thus luckely, anexed with my days.
But stay, behold the peerless sparks whereof my tongue did talk,
Approach in presence of my sight, to church I deem they walk,
But stay I will, and shroud me secretly a while.
To see what wit or counsel grave, proceeds from their style.

Here enters Matter and Virginia. The perte and pricking prime of youth, ought
chastisment to have,
But thou dear daughter need not, thy self does show thee grave:
To se who Phoebus with his beams, has youth so much insected,
It does me we to see them crave the thing stould be detected.
I draw to grave, and naught can leave of thee to be desired,
As much as duty to thy dear, as reason has required:
Thy sufferent Lord and frindly fear, Virginius father thine,
To nourse as does become child, when boanes are burried mine.

Virginius, ^e^el your mind of mournig plaints, dear mother rest your mind
For though that duty dainty were, dame nature will me bind,
So much to do, and further force, of Gods that rule the Skies,
The Glope and eke the Clement, they would me else disp^es.

Matter. Then if the Gods have granted thee, such grace to love thy syer,
When time shall choose thee out a make be constant I requier:
Love, live, and like him well, before you grant him grace or faith,
So shall your love continue long, experience thus he says.

Virginia. I grant dear Dame I do agree,
When time shall so provide:
But tender youth and infansie,
Does rather wish me bide,
What should I lose Dianas gift,
And eke the spring to shun:
By which Acteon fateally,
His final race did run:
Should I as abject be esteemed,
Throughout Pernassus hill,
Or should my Virgins name be filde,
It were to great a skyll:
But yet it is unspotted lo,
Right well I do conceive,
When wedlock does require the same,
With parents love and leave:
Yet obstinate I will not be,
But willing will me yield:
When you command and not before
Then duty shall me sheeld.

Virginius. Ah Gods that rule and rain, in heavens, in seas, in flods and
lands,
Two couple such I surely dee me, you never made with hands,
A Gods why do ye not compel each Dame the like to show?
And every Impe of her again, her duty thus to know,
I cannot stay my tongue from talk, I needs must call my dear,
Oh spouse well met and Daughter to, what news how do you cheer?

Matter O dear Virginius Joy to me, oh pearelesse spouse and mate,
In health I praise the Gods I am and ioifull for thy state,

Virginius. Virginia my daughter dear
How stands all with thee?

Virginia. Like happy state as mother told,
Like joyful sight to me.

Virginius. By the Gods wife I joy me, that have such a treasure,
Such Gemme and such Iuell, surmounting all measure:
Such a happy spouse, such a fortunate dame,
That no blot or stain, can impair her fame,
Against such an Impe, and graffe of my tree,
As clear does surmount all others that be.

Matter. Nay rather dear spouse how much is my case,
To be now advanced by such happy grace:
Does daily distill, my husband so loving,
Granting and giving to all thing behouing,
Ioying in me, and in the fruicte of my womb.
Who would not requit it, the Gods yield their dome
And if it be I, the Gods do destroy me,
Rather then sin, so sore should annoy me.

Virginius. Oh wife refell thy wishing for woe,
My self thy fault rightwell do know:
And rather I wish my self to be slain,
Then thou or thy daughter ought woe should sustain.

Virginia. Oh Father my comfort, oh Mother my joy,
Oh Dear, and O sufferaigne, do cease to employ
Such dolorus talking, where dangers are none,
Where Joys are attendant, what needs this moan,
You matron, you spouse, you Nurse, and you wife,
You comfort, you only the some of his life:
You housband, you heart, you joy, and you pleasure,
You King, and you Keyser, to her only treasure,
You Father, you Mother, my life does sustain,
I babe and I bliss, your health am again,
Forbear then your dolor, let mirth be frequented
Let sorrow depart, and be not attempted.

Virginius. Oh wife, oh spouse, I am content.

Matter. Oh Husband.

Virginia. Oh Father we do consent.

Sing here.
All singe this. The trustiest treasure in earth earth as we see,
Is man, wife and children in one to agree,
Then friendly, and kindly, let measure be mixed
With reason, in season, where friendship is fixed.

Virginius. When nature nursed first of all, young Alexander learned,
Of who^ the Poets mention make, in judgment so deserned,
Oh what did want that love procured his vital end well near,
This is the hope where parents love, their children do not fear,

All sing this. The trustiest treasure in earth as we see,
Is man wife and children etc.

Matter. When time King Nisus would not let, his daughter to be taught,
Of any one correcting hand to nurtue to be brought:
She void of duty cut his locks, and golden tresses clear,
Whereby his realm was ouerrun, and she was paid her hisr,

All sing this. The trustiest treasure in earth as we see,
Is man wife and children. etc.

Virginia. When Dedalus from Creete did fly,
With Icaru, his joy:
He naught regarding fathers words,
Did seek his own anoy:
He mounted up into the skies,
Whereat the Gods did frown,
And Phoebus sore his wings did fry,
And hedlonge flins him down.

All singe this. The trustiest treasure in earth as we see.
Is man wife and children etc.

Virginius. Then since that persualitie, does partly discord moan,
And hatred often times does creep where overmuch we love:
And if we love no whit at all, the faming trump will sound,
Come wife, come spouse, come daughter dear, let measure bear ye ground.

All singe this. The trustiest treasure in earth as we see
Is man wife and children in one to agree,
Then friendly, and kindly, let measure be mixed, Exit.
With reason, in season, where frindship is fixed.

Here enters Haphazard the Vice. VEry well sir, very well sir, it shall be done,
As fast as ever I can prepare,
Who dippes with the Devil, he had need have a long spoone.
Or else full small will be his fare:
Yet a proper Gentileman I am of truth
Yea that may ye see by my long side gown.
Yea but what am I, a Scholar, or a scholemaister, or else some youth.
A Lawier, a studient or else a country cloune
A Brumman, a Baskit m^^er, or a Baker of Pies,
A flesh or a Fishmon zer, or a sower of lies:
A Louse or a louser, a Leeke or a Lark:
A Dreamer a Drommell, a fire or a spark;
A Caitife, a Cutthrote, a creper in corners,
A herbraine, a hangman, or a grafter of horners:
By the Gods, I know not how best to denise,
My name or my property, well to disguise:
A Marchaunte, a May poole, a man or a mackrell:
A Crab or a Creuise, a Crane or a cockerell:
Most of all these my nature does enjoy,
Sometime I advance them, sometime I destroy,
A maid or a Mussell Bote, a wife or a wild ducke,
As bold as blind bayerd, as wise as a wood cock.
As fine as phippence, as proud as a Pecocke,
As stout as a Stockefish, as meek as a mecocke,
As big as a beggar, as fat as a fool,
As true as a Tinker, as rich as an Owl,
With hey trick, how trowle, trey trip, and trey trace,
Trowle hazard in a vengeance I beshrew his knaves face
For tro, and trowle hazard, keep such a range
That poor haphazard, was never so strange,
But yet Haphazard, be of good cheer,
Go play and repast thee man, be merry to year:
Though vittaile be dainty and hard for to get.
Yet perhaps a number will die of the swet,
Though it be in hazard, yet happily I may,
Though money be lacking, yet one day go gay.

Enter Mansipulus. When Maud, with a pestelence, what make thou no have?
Of Baybery insence belike thou would taste,
By the Gods I have stayed a full great while,
My lord he is near hand by this at the Church style,
and al for Maud mumble turde, that mampodding madge
By the Gods if she hie not, i will give her my badge.

Mansipula. What drake nosed driuell, begin you to floute.
Zle fry you in a faggot stick, by cock goodman loute
You boaster you bragger, you brawling knave:
Zle pay thee thy fortypence, thou brawling slave:
My Ladies great business belike is at end,
When you goodman dawcocke, lust for to wend,
You, codshed you crackerope, you chattering pie,
Have with ye, have at ye, your manhood to try.

Haphazard. What hold your hands masters, what? fie for shame fie,
What culling? What lulling? What stur have we here?
What tugging? What lugging? What pugging by the ear,
What part and be friends, and end all this strife,

Mansipulus. Nay rather I Wish her, the end of my knife:

Mansipula. Draw it, give me it, I will it receive,
So that for the place it, I might have good leave,
By the Gods: but for losing my land, life, and living,
It should be so placed, he should have ill thriuinge:

Mansipilus. By the Gods how ungraciously the vicksen she chatteth,

Mansipula. And he even as knauishly, my answer he patteth,

Haphazard. Here is naught else, but railing of words out of reason,
Now tugging, now tatling, now musling in season,
For shame be contented and leave of this brawling,

Mansipulus. Content, for I shall repent it, for this my tongue wralling:

Mansipula. Thou knave, but for thee, ere this time of day,
My Ladies fair Pue, had been strawed full gay:
With Primroses, Couslips, and Violets sweet:
With Mints, and with Marigolds, and Margerum meet,
Which now lies uncleanly and all long of thee,
That a shame recompense thee, for hindering me,

Mansipulus. Ah pretty pranck parnel, the Coushen and Book,
Whereon he should read and kneel, are present here look:
My Lord when he sees me, he will cast such an eye,
As pinch will my heart near ready to die:
And thus wise, and thus wise, his hand will be walking
With thou precious knave, away get thee packing Here let him fight.

Haphazard. Nay then by the mass, its time to be knacking,
No words at all but to me he is poynting:
Nay have at you again, you shall have your annoynting,

Mansipula. Body of me, hold if ye can,
What will you kill such a proper man?

Haphazard. Nay sure I have done when women do speak,
Why would the knave my patience so break?

Mansipulus. Well I must begone, there is no remedy
For fear my tyle makes buttons, by mine honesty.

Haphazard. For reverence on your face, your nose and your chin:
By the Gods have ye hard such an unmannerly villin.

Mansipula. I never heard one so ra^cke of rudnesse,

Mansipulus. In faith it is but for sack of lewdness:
But here I burn day light, while thus I am talking
A way come Mansipula, let us be walking,

Mansipula Contented Mansipulus, have with thee with speed,

Haphazard. Nay stay yet my friends I am not agreede.

Mansipula. We dare not tarry, by God we swear.

Haphazard. Nay tarry take comfort with you for to bear,
It is but in hazard and if you be mist,
And so it may happen you feel not his first:
Perhaps he is stayde by talk with some friend
It is but in hazard, then sing or you wend
Let hope be your helper, your care to defend.

Mansipulus. By hap or by hazard, we singe or we cry,
Then singe let us say so, let sorrow go by.

Mansipula. We can be but beaten that is the worst,

enter Subseruus. What how Mansipulus, thou knave art thou curste
My lord stands talking and I gape for thee,
Come away with a wannion, run have and hie,

Mansipulus. Nay harken Supseruus, stay I pray thee,
Let us have a song and then have with thee:

Subseruus. Content if thou hie thee.

Sing here all. Hope so, and hap so, in hazard of threfninge,
The worst that can hap le, in end is but beating.

Mansipulus. What if my Lordinge, do chance for to miss me,
The worst that can happen, is Cudgel will kiss me,
In such kind of sweetness, I swear by Gods mother,
It will please me better, it were on some other,
With thwicke thwack, with thump thump,
With bobbing and bum,
Our side saddle shoulders shall sheside that does come?
Hope so, and hay so, in hazard etc.

Mansipula. If case that my Lady, do threaten my case,
No cause to contrary, but bear her a space,
Until she draw home lo, where so she will use me,
As Docters does doubt it, how I should excuse me,
With thwicke thwack, with thump thump,
With bobbing and bum,
Our side saddle shoulders shall sheilde that does come.
Hope so, and hap so, in hazard etc.

Subseruus. What if your company cause me have woo,
I mind not companyons so soon to forgo:
Let hope hold the Helmet, till brunt it be past,
For bloes are but buffits and words but a blast,
With thwick thwack, with thump thump,
with bobbing and bum,
Our side saddle shoulders shall shield that does come,
Hope so, and hap so, in hazard etc.

Haphazard. Then let us be merry, it is but by hap,
A hazardly thaunce may harbor a clap,
Bestur ye, be merry, be glad and be ioying,
For bloes are but buffits and small time annoying,
With thwick thwack, with thump thump,
with bobbing and bum,
Our side sadle shoulders shall shield that does come.
Hope so, and hap so, in hazard etc.

The end of the song.
All speaks this. Haphazard farewell, the Gods do thank thee. Exiunt

Haphazard. Farewell my friends, farewell gee pracke ye:
By the Gods Haphazard, These men have tried thee,
Who said thou wast no man, sure he belied thee,
By love master Merchant by sea or by land,
Would get but small argent, if I did not stand,
His very good master, I may say to you,
When he hazards in hope, what hap will ensue:
In court I am no man, by cock sir ye lie,
A Plowman perhaps or ere that he die,
May hap be a Gentleman, a Courtier or Captain,
And hap may so hazard, he may go a begging:
Perhap that a Gentleman, heir to great land,
Which sells his living, for money in hand,
In hazard it is the bying of more,
Perhaps he may ride when spent is the store:
Hap may so hazard the Moon may so change.
That men may be masters, and wives will not raunge:
But in hazard it is in many a grange,
Lest wives were the Godpeece, and maidens coy strange:
As Pecockes sit perking, by chance in the plomtree,
So maids would be masters, by the guise of this country
Haphazard each state full well that he marks,
If hap the sky fall, we hap may have Larkes:
Well, fare ye well now, for better or worse,
Put hands to your pockets, have mind to your purse.

Enter Judge Apius. THe sorowed face of Fortunes force, my pinching pain does
move
I settled ruler of my realm enforced am to love:
Judge Apius I the prmeelest Judge, that reigns under son,
And have been so estaeemed long, but now my force is done:
I rule no more, but ruled am, I do not Judge, but am Judged,
By beuty of Virginia, my wisdom all is trudged,
Oh perelesse Dame, Oh passing piece, oh face of such a fature,
That never e^st with bower such, matched was by nature:
Oh fond Apelles prattling fool, why boastest thou so much?
The famost pee^e thou madst in Greece, whose ^^ments were
Or why oldst thou dec^ued man, for beuty of thy work?
In such a sort with fond destre, where no kind life did lurk,
With raging fits thou fool ran mad, oh fond Pigmalion,
Yet sure if that thou saw my dear, the like ye could make none,
Then what may I, oh Gods above, bend down to hear my cry,
As once he did to Salmasis, in Pond hard Lyzia by:
Oh that Virginia were in case as sometime Salmasis,
And in Hermafroditus steed, my self might seek my bliss,
Ah Gods, would I unfold her arms, complecting of my neck?
Or would I hurt her nimble hand, or yield her such a check?
Would I gainsay her tender skin, to baath where I do wash?
Or else refuse her soft sweet lips, to touch my naked flesh?
Nay, oh the Gods do know my mind, I rather would requier,
To sue, to serve, to crouch, to kneel, to crave for my dester.
But out ye Gods, ye bend your brows, and frown to see me fare,
Ye do not force my fickle fate, ye do not way my care,
Unrighteous, and unequal Gods, unjust, and eke unsure,
Woe worth the time ye made me live, to see this hapless hour:
Did Iphis hang himself for love, of Lady not so fair?
Or else did Jove the cloudie mistes, bend down from lightsome air:
Or as the Poets mention make, of Inachs daughter meek,
For love did he to make a Cow, whom Inach long did seek:
Is love so great, to cause the quick, to enter into Hell,
As stout Orpheus did attempt, as histories do tell?
Then what is it that love cannot? Why love did pearce the skies:
Why Pheb. and famous Marcury, with love had blinded eyes?
But I a Judge of grounded years, shall reap to me such name,
As shall resounde dishonor great, with Trump of careless fame:
Oh that my years were youthful yet, or that I were vnweded.

Here enters Haphazard. WHy cease sir Knight, for why perhaps, of you she
shall be bedded:
For follow my counsel, so may you me please,
That of careful resurging, your heart shall have ease.

Apius. Oh thundering Gods that threaten ire,
and Plague for each offense:
Your selves I deem would counsel crave,
in this so fit pretense:
And eke your nimble stretched arms,
with great rewards would she,
To purchase farie Virginia,
so dear a wight to me:
And friend, I swear by Iubiter,
and eke by Iunos seat:
And eke by all the mysteries,
where on thou canust entreat:
Thou shall possess and have,
I will thee grant and give,
The greatest part of all my Realm,
for aye thee to relieve.

Haphazard. Well then, this is my counsel, thus standard the case,
Perhaps such a setch, as may please your grace:
There is no more ways, but hap or hap not,
Either hap, or else hapless, to knit up the knot:
And if you will hazard, to venture what falls,
Perhaps, that Haphazard, will end al your thralles.

Apius. I mean so. I will so, if thou do persuade me,
To hap or to hazard, what thing shall enuade me:
I King and I Keyser, I rule and ouerwhealme:
I do what it please me, with in this my realm:
Wherefore in thy indgement, see that thou do enter,
Hap life or hap death, I surely will venture.

Haphazard. Then this, and in this sort, stands the matter,
What need many words, unless I should flatter,
Full many there be, will hazard their life,
Happily to case your grace of all your strife,
Of this kind of conspirasie now let us common,
Some man, Virginius, before you must summon,
And say that Virginia is none of his Daughter.
But that Virginius by night away caught her:
Then charge you the father his Daughter to bring,
Then do you detayne her, till proved be the thing:
Which well you may win her, she present in house,
It is but Haphazarde, a man or a mouse

Apius. I find it, I mind it, I swear that I will,
Though shame, or defame, do happen no skill, Here let him make at though he
went out and let Consince and lustice come out of him, and let Consiece hold in
his hand a Lamp burning and let Justice have a sword and hold it before Apius

But out I am wounded, how am I divided?
Two states of my life, from me are now glided,
For Consience he pricketh me contempned,
And Justice says, Judgment would have me condem ned:
Consience says crueltye sure will detest me:
And Justice says, death in the end will molest me,
And both in one sodden me thinks they do cry,
That fire eternal, my soul shall destroy.

Haphazard. Why these are but thoughts man? why fie for shame fie
For Consience was careless, and sailing by seas,
Was browned in a basket and had a disease,
Sore moved for pitye, when he would grant none,
For being hard hearted, was turned to a stone:
And sayliing by Sandwitche he sunk for his sin,
Then care not for consience, the worth of a pin:
And Judgment judge Justice to have a reward,
For judging still justly, but all is now marde,
For gifts they are given, where Judgment is none,
Thus Judgment and Justice awronge way has gone:
Then care not for Consience the worth of a fable,
Justice is no man, nor naught to do able.

Apius. And say thou so my sured freende, then hap as hap shall hit,
Let Constence grope, and judgment crave, I will not shrink one whit
I well persevere in my thought, I will deflower her youth,
I will not sure reuerted be, my heart shall have no ruth,
Come on proceed and wayteou me, I will hap woe or wealth,
Hap blunt, hap sharp, hap life, hap death, though Haphazard be of health

Haphazard. At hand (quoth pick purse) here ready am I,
See well to the Cut Purse, be ruled by me.
Exit. Go out here.
Conscience O clear unspotted gifts of Love,
How haps thou art refused?
Oh Consience clear, what cruel mind
Thy truth has thus misused?
I spotted am by wilful will,
By lawles love and lust
By dreadful danger of the life.
By faith that is unjust.

Justice. Ah gift of Jove, ah Fortunes face,
Ah state of steady life:
I Justice am and Prime of peers,
The end of Laws and strife:
A guider of the common weal,
A gwerdon to the poor:
And yet has filthy lust suppressed,
My virtues in one hour,
Well well this is the most to trust,
In end we shall espire:
To see the end of these our foes
With sword and eke with fire.

Conscience. Oh help ye Gods, we members require.
Exit.
Enter Haphazard. When gain is no gransier,
And gaudes naught set by:
Nor Puddings, nor Pie meat,
Poor knaves will come nie:
Then hap and Haphazard,
Shall have a new cote:
And so it may happen.
To cut covetousness throat:
Yea then shall Judge Apius.
Virginia obtain:
And Geese shall crack Mussels,
Perhaps in the rain:
Lerkes shall be Leuerets,
And skip to and fro:
And chourles shall be codsheads,
Perhaps and also:
But peace for man's body,
Haphazard be mum,
Fie pratlyng noddy,
Judge Apius is come.

Here enters Judge Apius and Claudius. THe furies fell of Lymbo Lake.
my Princely days do short:
All drownde in deadly woes I live,
that once did joy in sport,
I live and languish in mylyse,
as does the wounded Dear:
I thirst, I crave, I call and cry,
and yet am naught the meare:
And yet I have that me so match,
But Tantalus amids my care,
I hunger sterue and pine:
As Sissifus I roll the stone,
in vain to top of Hill:
That evermore uncertainly,
reuoluing slideth still:
Oh, as if to her it were to me,
what labors would I fly?
What raging seas would I not plow,
to her commodity?
But out alas I doubt it sore,
lest drousy Morpheus:
His slumbry kingdoms granted has,
with Dewes and bewtious:
Oh Gods above that rule the Skies,
ye Babes that brag in bliss:
Ye Goddesses, ye Graces you,
what burning brunt is this?
Bend down your Ire, destroy me quick:
or else to grant me grace,
No more but that my burning breast,
Virginia may imbace:
If case your ears be dead and deaf,
the Feende and sprites beloe:
You careless ^arl^ of Limbo Lake,
your forced mightes do shoe.
Thou Caitife King of darksome den,
thou Pluto plaged knave:
Send forth thy sacred vengeance straight,
consume them to the grave:
That will not aid my case,

Claudius. Content and if it like your grace,
I will attempt the deed:
I sommon will Virginius,
before your seat with speed,

Haphazard. Do so, my Lord be you not afraid,
And so you may happen to Hazard the maid:
It is but in Hazard, and may come by hap,
Win her, or lose her, try you the trap.

Apius. By the Gods, I consent to thee Claudius now
Prepare the in haste Virginius unto,
Charge him, command him, upon his alegeance
With all kind of speed, to yield his obeisance,
Before my seat in my consistary
Subpene of land, life and treasury.

Here let Claudius go out with Haphazard. No let, no stay, nor ought
perturbraunce,
Shall cause me to omit the furtheraunce,
Of this my weighty charge: Exit.

Apius, Well now I range at large my will for to express,
For look how Torquin, Lucres fair, by force did once oppress,
Even so will I Virginia use:

Here let Consience speak within. Judge Apius prince, oh stay refuse,
Be ruled by thy friend:
What bloody death with open shame,
Did Torquin gain in end?

Apius. Whence does this pinching sound defend?

Conscience. From contrit Conscience pricked on,
By member of thy life,
Enforced for to cry and call,
And all to end our strife.

Apius. What art thou theu declare be brief?

Consience. Not flesh nor filthy lust I am:
But secret consience I,
Compeld to cry with trimbling soul,
At point nere hand to die.

Apius. Why no disease dath me aproche, no grief does make me grudge,
But want of fair Virginia, whose beauty is my Judge:
By her I live, by her I die, for her I wy or woe,
For her my soul does sink or swim, for her I swear I go.

Conscience. Ah Gods, what wits does rame, and yet to you unknown?
I die the death, and soul does sink, this filthy flesh has sown.

Apius. I force it not, I will attempt, I stay for Claudius hear,
Yet will I go to meet with him, to know what news and cheer.

Here enters Haphazard. Have for a hangman, in hazard of hemp
Run for a riddueke, there is no such impe:
Claudius is knocking, with hammer and stone,
At Virginius gate, as hard as he can lay one:
By the Gods my masters, Haphazard is hardy,
For he will run rashly, be they never so many,
Yea he will singe sowsnowt, and sknap with the best,
But peace, who comes yonder, what Iely good gest?

Here enter in with a song. WHen men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry,
And fearing with temerety, its ieopardy, of liberty,
We wish him take to chere his heart, Haphazard,
Boulde blind bayarde,
A Fygge for his vncourtesie,
That seeks to shun good company.

Mansipulus. What if case that cruelty, should bussell me, and iussell me,
And Holywand should tirkle me, for keeping of good company:
I Will follow by my honesty, hap Haphazard, bold blind bayard,
A fig for his nvrourtesie, that seeks to shun good company.

All singe this. When men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry. etc.

Mansipula. Never was that misteris, so furious nor curious,
Nor yet her bloes so boisterous, nor rosterous, nor dolorous,
But sure I would venterous, hap Haphazard, boulde blind bayard
A fig for his vncourtesie, that seeks to shun good company.

All singe this. When men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and crew. etc.

Haphazard. Then wend ye on and follow me, Mansipula, mansipula.
Let cropyng cares be cast away, come follow me, come follow me,
Subseruus is a ioyly loute, brace Haphazard bold blind bayarde,
A fig for his vncourtesie, that seeks to shun good company.

All sing this. When men will seem misdoubtfully,
Without an why, to call and cry. etc.

The end of the song.
Here Haphazard speaks. I by the Gods my masters, I told you plain,
Who companyes with me, will desire me again:
But how did ye spaede I pray ye show me,
Was all well agreed did no body blow ye.

Mansipulus. Mass sir, hap did so happen, that my Lord and master,
Stayed in behelding and viewing the Pasture.
Which when I perceived, what excuse did I make?
I came in the cross way, on the nerside the Forlake,
Hard by Hodges half aker, at gaffers Millers style.
The next way round about, by the space of a mile,
Andat Sy mkins side ridge, my Lord stood talking,
And angerly to me (quoth he) where have thou ben walking
Without any staggeryng, I had ready my lie,
Out at Bridgenredow, and at Benols lease (quoth I)
Your fatlings are feding well Sir, the Gods be praised,
A goodly loume of beef on them is all ready raised,
The outsteps on Frauncis Fabulator that was never my friend,
How past you Carters hay rock, at long meadow end
There might one (quoth he) within this few days,
With a cast net had given, mi knaves great assayes:
Under the Hedge with a pair of new Cards both rip and firdge,
Is it true quoth my Lord, will this gear never be left,
This causes swearing, and staring, proling and theft:
Well (quoth my Lord) take heed least I find it,
And so past his way, and did no more mind it.

Haphazard. By the Gods that was sport, ye and sport alone,

Mahsipula. Yea, but I was in worse case by Saint Jhon,
My Lady in Church was set full douout,
And hearing my coming she turned about:
But as soon as I heard her snappishly sound,
In this sort I crouched me down to the ground,
And mannerly maude, as though I were sad,
As soon as the Pue then strawed I had,
She gave me a wincke, and frowardly frown,
Whereby I do judge, she would cougell my gown:
Then I did devise, a pretty fine pranke,
A mean whereby to pick me a thank:
Of Margery Mildon the maid of the Milk house,
And stainer the stutter the guide of the store house,
Then was my Ladies anger well gone,
And will be so still, and the truth be not known.

Haphazard. ^er lady, barefoote this bakes trimly,

Subseruus. Nay but I escaped more finely,
For I under this bedge one while did stay,
Then in this bushe, then in that way:
Then slipped I behind them among all the rest,
And seemed to common to, of things with the best,
But so it did happen, that all things were well,
But hazard it is, least time will truth tell.

Haphazard. Tut, tut, that was but by hap, and if it be so,
Well since it was in hazard then let it goo.

Subseruus. Content by my honesty, then farewell all woe.

Mansipulus. Come out dog, ye speak happily of truth if it be so,

All speak. Now master Haphazard, fare you well for a season,

Haphazard, Let my council at no time with you be geason.

All speaks. No by the Gods, be sure not so.

Haphazard. Well since here is no company have with ye to Jerico. Exit.

Enter Virginius. What so the Gods they have decreed to work and do by me?
I marvel why Judge Apius he, such gretings lets me see:
I served have his seat, and state, I have maintaind his weal,
I have suppressed the rebels stout, I bear to him such zeal,
And now he sends to me such charge, upon my life and lands,
Without demur, or further pause, or ere ought things be scand,
That I in have, with posting speed, to Court I do repair,
To answer that aleaged is, before his Judgment Chair,
Some Histories they do express, when such mishaps do fall,
They should have tokens many a one, I have not one but all:
My Iuels sometime precious, do vade and bear no hew,
My seuces they do shun there course, my lights do burn as blewe:
My willing wights are wared slow, that once were swifte in speed
My heart it throbs in wondrous sort, my nose does often bleed:
My dreadful dreams do draw my woe and hateful hazard hale,
These tokens be of evil hap, this is the old wives tale:
But yet O thou Virginius, whose hoary hears are old,
Did treason never yet commit, of this thou may be bold:
In Mars his games, in marshall frates, thou wast his only aid,
The huge Carrebd his hazards thou, for him was often assaide:
Was Sillas force by thee often shunde, or yet Adrice land,
Laceface child that Minnotaur, did cause thee ever stand:
To pleasure him, to serve thy leach, to keep all things upright,
Thou God above, then what is it, that yields me this spite?
Since nothing need misdoubted be, where grounded cause is none,
I enter will Judge Apius gate, rejecting care and moan:
But stay Virginius, lo, thy Prince does enter into place,
Oh sufferant Lord, and rightful Judge, the Gods do save thy grace,

Here enters Judge Apius and Claudius. With tender heart Virginius, thou
welcome art to me,
I sorry am to utter out, the things I here of thee:
For Claudius a subject here, a man of mickle fame,
Appealeth thee before my Court, in deed of open shame:
And though in deed I love thee so, as thy deserts desirer,
Yet not so but I must Judgment give, as Justice does require.

Virginius. My Lord and reason good it is, your servant does request,
No parciall hand to aid his cause, no parciall mind or breast:
If ought I have offended you, your Court, or eke your Crown,
From lofty top of Turret hie, persupetat me down:
If treason none by me be done, or any fault committed,
Let my accusers bear the blame, and let me be remitted.

Apius. Good reason to Virginius, come Claudius show thy mind,
Let Justice here, if Judgment may, Virginus gilty find

Claudius. Thou sufferant Lord, and rightful Judge, this stands now ye case,
In tender youth not long agone, nere sixtene years of space,
Virginius a thrall of mine, a child and infant young,
From me did take by subtell mean, and keeps by arm full strong
And here before your grace I crave, that Justice be exstended,
That I may have my thrall again, and faults may be amended

Virginius. Ah Gods that guide the globe above what forged tales I here,
Oh Judge Apius, bend your ears, while this my crime I clear:
She is my child, and of my wife her tender corpse did spring,
Let all the country where I dwell, bear witness of the thing.

Apius and Claudius go forth, but Apius speaks this. Nay by the Gods not so
my friend, I do not so decree,
I charge thee here in paiine of death, thou bring the maid to me:
In chamber close, in prison sound, she secret shall abide,
And no kind of wight shall talk with her, until the truth be tried:
This do I charge, this I command, in pain of death let see,
Without any let, that she be brought, as prisoner unto me:
Exit.
Here let Virginius go about the scaffold Ah fickle faule, vnahppy dome, oh
most uncertain rate,
That ever chance so churlishly, that never staide in state:
What Judge is this: What cruel wretch? What faith does Claudius
The Gods do recompense with shame, his false and faithles mind:
Well home I must, no remedy, where shall my soking tears,
Augment my woes, decrease my joys, while death do rid my fears

Here enters Rumor. Come ventus come, blow forth thy blast,
Prince Eol listen well,
The filthiest fackte that ever was,
I Rumor now shall tell:
You gods bend down to here my cry,
reuengemente duly show,
Thy Rumor craves did Claudius lay,
and bring Judge Apius lo?
That wicked man, that fleshly Judge,
has hiered Claudius,
To claim a child, the only heir,
of old Virginius.
A virgin pure, a Queen in life,
whose state may be deplored,
For why the Queen of chaste life,
is like to be defloured:
By false Judge Apius cruel wretch,
who straightly has commanded,
That she to keeping his be brought,
Prince Pluto this demanded:
To skies I fly to blase abroad,
the trompe of deep defame,
Revenge yo^ Gods this Rumor craves,
this blood and bloddy shame:
Have through the air, give place you airs.
this is my duty done,
The Gods confound such lecherers,
lo Rumor this I run.

Virginius. O man, O mould, oh mucke, O clay, O Hell, O hellish hounde,
O ^aulle Judge Apius wrablinge wretch, is this thy treason found:
Woe worth the man that gave the seed, whereby ye first did spring
Woe worth the womb yt bare the babe, to mean this bluddy thing:
Woe worth the paps that gave ye suck, woe worth the Fosters eke
Woe worth all such as ever did, thy health or liking seek:
Oh that the graued years of mine, were covered in the clay

Here enters Virginia. Let patience dear father mine, your rigor something
stay,
Why do you wail in such a sort? why do you weep and moan?

Virginius Oh daughter dear and only heir, my life is near forgone,
And all for love of thee

Virginia. A Gods how may this be?
Dear father do withdraw your dread, and let me know the cause,
My self will aid with life or death, without demur or pause:
Then tender your child, that craves this bound.

Virginius Oh harken dear daughter attend thou my sound:
Judge Apius pricked forth with filthy desire:
Thy person as Lemmon, does greatly require:
And no kind of entreaty, no fear nor no shame,
Will he hear aledge, defending the same:
And straight without staying in pain of my death,
I must bring thee thither, wherefore stop my breath,
O Sisters, I search, I seek, and I crave,
No more at your hands, but death for to have,
Rather then see my Daughter deflourde,
Or else in ill sort, so vildely deuourde.

Virginia. Oh father oh friendship, oh fatherly favor,
Whose dulset words, so sweetly do savor,
On knees I beseech thee to grant my request,
In all things according, as lyketh thee best:
Thou know, O my father, if I be once spotted,
My name and my kindred, then forth will be blotted:
And if thou my father, should die for my cause,
The world would account me as gilty in cause:
Then rather dear father, if it be thy pleasure,
Grant me the death, then keep I my treasure?
My Lamp, my light, my life undefiled,
And so may Judge Apius, of flesh be begiled:
This upon my knees with humble beheste,
Grant me O father my instant request.

Virginus Then rise up my daughter, my answer do note,
From mouth of thy father, whose eyes do now flote:
O daughter, oh dear, O darling, oh dame,
Dispatch me I pray thee, reg^rde not my name:
But yet, as thou satest fith remedy none,
But Lemmon thou must be, if I were gone,
And better it is to dye with good fame,
Then longer to live to reap us but shame:
But if thou do dye, no doubt is at all,
But presently after my self follow shall,
Then end without shauie so let us persevere,
With trompe of good same so dye shall we never.

Virginia here kneeleth. Then tender arms complect the neck, do dry thy
fathers tears,
You nimble hands for woe whereof, my loving heart it wears:
Oh father mine, refrain no whit, your sharped knife to take,
From giltles sheath, my shame to end, and body dead to make:
Let not the shameless blouddy judge, defile my virgins life,
Do take my head and send it him, upon your bloody knife:
Bid him imbrue his bloody hands, in giltles blood of me:
I virgin dye, he leacher lives, he was my end you see:
No more delays, so kiss me first, then stretch your strongest arm,
Do ryd my woe, increase my joy, do ease your child of harm.

Virginius. O weary wits of woe, or wealth, oh feeble aged man,
How can thy arm give such a blow, thy death I wish thee than:
But since that shame with endless trempe, will sound if case thou joy,
By means of false judge Apius he, myself will thee destroy:
Forgive me babe this bloody deed, a no meekely take thy end,
Here let him profer a blow, The Good forgive thee father dear, farewell, thy
blow do bend:
Yet stay a while, o father dear, for fleash to death is frail,
Let first my wimple bind my eyes, and then thy blow assail.
Now father work thy will on me, that life I may enjoy.
Here tie a handca^cher about her eyes, and then strike of her head. Now
stretch thy hand Virginius, that loath would flesh distroy.
O cruel hands, or blouddy knife, o man what have thou done,
Thy daughter dear, and only heir, her vital end has wone:
Come fatal blade make like dispatche, come Atropos, come end,
Strike home thou careless arm with sp^ede, of death be not afraid.

Here enters Comfort. Oh noble knight Virginius, do stay, he not dismayde.
I curing Comfort present am, your doller to aid:

Virginius. Since joy is gone, since life is dead:
What comfort can there be?
(...) there is but dee^e dis^^ire^

Here enters Haphazard. I came from Caleed even the same hour,
And Hap was hired to hackney in hempstrid,
In hazard he was of riding on beamestrid,
Then crow crop on thee top hoist up the sail,
Then groned their necks, by the weight of their tail,
Then did C^^m^^x, put these three together,
Pays them their pasporte for ^lu^tring thither.

Apius. Why how now Haphazard, of what do thou speak?
Me thinks in mad sort thy talk thou deest break,
(...) all in one.


