Somewhat: WRITTEN BY OCCASION OF THREE SVNNES seen at Tregnie in Cornwall,
the 22. of December last. WITH Other memorable Occurrents in other places.



Imprinted M.DC.XXII.

Believing Reader:
YOu are saluted, by (I think) you know not whom: I would be sorry you
should; for a beggarly generation of mercenarie liers have drawn an inevitable
suspicion upon the reporters of all truths in this kind: But as it is your
virtue that has exempted you from the number of ordinary censurers, so let
your charity excuse me from being of the number of ordinary writers.

The Seller of these presents entreated I would speak a word or two to you in
his name: but I thought it most necessary to be mine own advocate; lest, if
it should happen this concealment to be found out, (as Multa fidem promissa
leuant. The largest promises come from the longest tongues) I might be exposed
to the tyrannous rage of them, who by my expense of two hours, are anticipated
in their project, importing at least two pieces, and twenty or thirty
coppies. Believe this therefore, as y would believe any thing that ^s not de
fide, that what I have written, is the truth as I believe; and I think I have
just reason to believe it, for it has been confirmed by the voluntary oaths
of many, the truth of which none can doubt of, but such as use themselves to
swear untruths, (...). I confess, I heard not of it (how could I?) till it
was too late to see it; but if I had, there motenesse of the place would
peradventure have persuaded me (according to the proverb) rather to content my
self with believing it, than to go to see it. But that I may not be too light
in so grave and weighty a matter, I will conclude with that common excuse, You
have it as good cheap as I, and cheaper; for it cost me thrice as much time in
writing, as it will do you in reading; yet the loss of that is the greatest
hazard you can make, in so poor an adventure.

Somewhat:
Written by occasion of the report of three Suns seen at Tregnie in
Cornwall, the 22. of December last.
WHen I consider the present state of things, with how strong and powerful
delusions the great enemy of mankind goes about to ouerspread the whole
Church, laboring by all means, that the floods of untruths, belched from his
wide throat, might carry away that Glorius woman clothed with the Sun,
crowned with Stars, and treading upon the Moon; I have just reason, with all
humility and becoming reverence, to take into consideration that gracious
instruction, which his Majesty, in his Meditations upon the 20. chapter of the
Revelation, raises and enforces by occasion of the Devils loosing, by the
rising of Antechrist, namely, that Whereas the justice of God, in respect of
man's falling wilfully from the truth (as Paul says) justly did send to the
world the great Abuser with efficacy of lies; as well to tyrrannize
spiritually over the conscience by heresy, as corporally over their bodies, by
the civil sword. Therefore we must fear to fall from the truth revealed, and
professed by us, that we may be free from the like punishment. For assuredly,
though I dare not say, that every falling away from the truth, with what
circumstances soever it may be qualified, is a sin against the Holy Ghost;
yet I think I shall not stray from the judgment of the most and best Divines,
if I affirm that the sin against the Holy Ghost is never committed, but
there must necessarily concur a wilful and obstinate denial of a known and
inwardly confessed truth, or A withholding and keeping of it back in
unrighteousness.

Which sin of sins, because lamentable experience teaches every man whose
eyes are open, that it is stealing upon us: The Lord in mercy has not only
frequently protested against it in his word, denouncing judgment without
mercy, to all them who shall dip hands or hearts in the guilt thereof: But
also by signs and wonders, by strange and uncouth prodigies, he gives warning
that he folds not his hands together like a sluggard, loath to pull them out of
his bosom, or like such a God as the wicked feign (because they would feign
have it so;) sees not, neither understands any thing. But that his eyes
behold all the wickednsse that is done upon all the earth; as if he had no
more than one particular person to attend unto: and that he is whetting his
sword, and making ready his quiver full of arrows against impenitent sinners,
and such as will not fear his name.

His abundant mercies indeed will not suffer his justice to take vengeance of
sinners, before he have (according to his own Law, in case of Isreal's making
war against other cities and nations) offered peace and reconciliation unto
us: But for all that, when he sees his love despised, his long-suffering
contemned, and all his covenants trodden under foot; He is at length
accustomed to show himself the Lord of his promise; and that all his former
patience proceeded not (as it falls out many times with men) from fear of
opposition, or the greatness of the delinquents; but only and merely from his
immeasurable love, which hates nothing that he has made, and is so loath to
punish, that if all had continued in their primitive order and created purity,
the very Word had never been named, nor had the thing it self ever been
created.

I should not have spoken so much, nor with so much confidence upon this
occasion, had I not known that the same God who always has written the texts
of these predictions with his own hand, has likewise ordinarily given this
Interpretation of them; and withal that admonitions, whether in season, or out
of season, cannot hurt; It being a happy occasion, whatsoever by any means
draws us to amendment of life. Let not Philosophy wrangle with me for
neglecting her, when I am employed in the service of our common Mistress,
Divinity; I willingly give unto her the knowledge of immediate and second
causes; but she her self has taught me, to give unto God the ordering and
disposing of Nature, and a constant influence into the least effects, which she
produces.

It were an hard matter for me to say, that Parelij (so the Gracians call an
appearance of many Suns together;) and Paraselenai (which are when it seems
that many Moons appear at the same time) are caused by the reflection of the
beams of those Planets, from an equally condensed cloud interposed between
them and us; as Rainebowes are (by the refraction of their beams) from an
hollow, waterish, or dewie cloud, unequally condensed or thickened (which is the
cause of the variety of colors) as is plain by a three square glass, which
represents more colors, or at least more lively than are in the Rainebow. Of
which who so are desirous to see more, may read Seneca largely discoursing
thereof, in the first book of his Natural questions, the 11, 12, 13 chapters,
and diverse others.

And was there none among the many thousands of Israel, that could satisfy the
amazed multitude, concerning the causes of thunder and rain; but that they
must fall to such a deiection upon the sight and hearing of them, as is
expressed, 2 Samuel 12. 18, 19. Certainly, the unsafe curiosity of mankind,
when it has gained credit in some things, scorns to acknowledge his ignorance
in any thing, as we see by them, who being believed, or thought to speak
probably in the disclosing of the causes of Snowes, Dewes, and Raines, have
from thence assumed unto themselves to be able to give natural reasons of the
Deluge, of raining of Blood, Milk, Wheat, Stones, Woll, Iron, and such like,
whereof many histories written by credible Authors do make mention. How much
better and safer is it for us, though these things be granted possible by
Nature; yet since it cannot be denied that they are not ordinary in Nature, to
take the advantage of them for the preventing of that wrath, which, whether it
be prognosticated by these ostents, or no, will surely be revealed from Heaven
upon us, when the measure of our iniquity shall be filled.

Were we at that point with God, where we should be; we needed not to be
afraid at the signs of Heaven; simply and positiuely we need not fear them;
as though they could hurt us, without the impulsion of his hand which made
Heaven and earth; or as if, though he had commanded his Army Royal of all
creatures to march against us, and the Heavens themselves to fight against us,
as against Sisera, yet it were not in his power, upon our repentance to sound
the retreat, and make them all retire, and again to renew the league between
the stones in the street and us. But when we see the signs the same, and know
our sins the same, God will, without doubt, rather accept of an humble fear,
that trembles at the hand, that shakes the rod, than of a presumptuous and
unreasonable confidence, that he who punished the perjury of Troy, should love
the lies of Rome, (to use S. Augustines words) or to use the phrase of
Scripture, that he who punished Judah for three transgressions should wink at
Israel for the multitude of her rebellions.

When there were three Suns seen at Rome, which by little and little did all
grow into one body, It was answered by the College of Southsayers, that it
portended the uniting of the three parts of the world, (which then were only
known) Asia, Afric, and Europe into one Empire; Grande spectaculum (says
mine Author) and quod grandia significauit; This was in the year after the
worlds Creation 3923. and after the building of Rome, 711. about 41. years
before the incarnation of our blessed Savior, M. Aemilius Lepidus, and L.
Munat. Plancus being Consuls. The success proved it true; for shortly after,
so much of the world, as was either known, or worth conquering, acknowledged
the Sovereignty of the Roman Empire: Had these lately seen three Suns,
(whereof I am to speak) appeared but twenty years sooner, we might
peradventure have hoped they had but foretold, what we have since found true,
The happy union of these three mighty Kingdoms, in our blessed Peacemaker:
But seeing they come too late to foretell it; let us hope they come not too
late to confirm it unto him and his posterity, as long as the Sun and Moon
endure.

Notwithstanding, even at that time, there were some that on the other side did
stiffely maintain, that these three Suns could not presage any good unto the
Roman Empire; but rather a division and distraction of that Imperial power,
as indeed it proved true; for the year following began the Triumvirate of
Lepidus, Caesar, and Antonie, which made way unto Caesar's Monarchy, the period
of the Romans liberty, and the beginning of the decay of their greatness.
And certainly, it has not been often seen or observed, that such Prodigies
have been forerunners of any good unto the place where they were seen:
howsoever, upon a turning of the hearts of the people unto God, without
question, God can turn the threatened plagues upon the heads of the Heathen,
and such as have not known his name.

The like apparition of three Suns and so many Moons which happened in Italy
in the year of Grace 1164. was thought to presage the great dissension of the
Princes Electors in choosing the Emperor, and the schism which lately followed
in the Sea of Rome. And what the three Suns which three years after were
seen in Poland might seem to fore-shew, the Chronicles of that Country do
sufficiently demonstrate.

And to pass by many other; those three Suns which were seen at Magdeburge
upon the 21. of March 1551. about seven of the clock in the morning,
accompanied with seven Rainebowes: and the three Moons appearing the night of
the same day: the three Suns appearing again in the same place, the 21. of
April following, accompanied only with three Rainebowes, might probably be
thought to fore-shew the straight siege, which (by the command of Charles the
fifth) Maurice the Duke of Saxony* and Albert Marquisse of Brandenburge laid
against that City by the space of fifteen months; whereby the Citizens were
driven to great extremities, though afterward they made their peace upon good
conditions.

What should I speak of the three Suns appearing over Vinarium a little
City in Doringia the tenth of February 1555. Or of the like in France before
the battle of S. Quintins? Because according to the Spanish proverb, Da lueng
as vias, lueng as mentiras; From far countries, foul lies: I will come
close to our own times, and our own home; nay, as our Savior said, Regnum
Dei est intra vos, The Kingdom of God is within you: So will I say, It is not
beyond the seas, that thou should say, who shall go over the sea for us,
and bring it to us, and cause us to hear it, that we may do it? But the thing
is very near unto thee, yea even before thine eyes to see it: And therefore
the more inexcusable are they, that either will not believe it, or reflect no
more upon it, than if they believed it not: Howsoever, thus it was.

Upon Saturday the 22. of December last, at Tregnie, a market-towne in
Cornwall, well known to Cornish men, in respect of his neerenesse to
Falmouth, about eleven of the clock before noone, the Sun being under a
cloud, it was observed that from the body of the Sun there proceeded a more
scattered and dispersed light than was wont, as if the body of the Planet had
been greater than it had formerly been: But this being attributed only to the
brightness of some cloud between him and us, little notice was taken thereof,
till about a quarter of an hour after, this diffused light seemed to
concenter, as it were, and gather to three heads, which in short space appeared
to the view of the beholders to be three Suns, of equal luster and
brightness, and placed as near as could be ghessed in a Triangle; all
shining clear, and scattering their beams with so great light, as that the
eye of man could not fasten upon any one of them more than another. And yet
which is remarkable, the light of the day was not increased, otherwise than in
a clear Suune-shine day, at such time of the year it is accustomed to be; so
that they who were in their houses could not, by reason of any such symptom,
take notice thereof.

This strange and extraordinary sight made the people (who were assembled
there in great number that day, as being market day) to forsake the streets and
other places, where any thing might interpose it self between it and them,
and to betake themselves into open places, whence they might the better
discern it; where they, with fear and amazement, did a great while gaze upon
it, not being able to discern which was the natural Sun, and which his
aduentitious and Mimicke reflections. They that were of better judgment,
ghessed them to be distant one from the other about two degrees, or two and one
third.

Nor were they only that were at Tregnie partakers of this fearful and
preternaturall oftent; but as many as dwelt within four or five miles round
about were, or might have been eyewitnesses unto it; peradventure, not in so
plain and conspicuous a manner, because the cloud was not either of height or
largeness: but it is avouched by some Gentlemen of good worth and quality,
that being that day four miles from Tregnie into the landwards, about twelve
of the clock, they did plainly see and discern it.

At the same time, and so long as these three Suns appeared, there were seen
in the air, just opposite unto them, and almost due North three Rainebowes,
two of which were the one within the other, but the third, against the course
of nature, had his center in the Zenith of that place, and was almost
contiguous unto the other two, having his back almost joined to theirs. That
Rainebowes should appear, we know it to be no wonder, and that so many
Rainebowes as Suns, we believe it possible; but that any Rainebow should be
greater than a semicircle, or have his center above our Horizon, is a thing
which elder times have not been so well acquainted withal.

These Suns and these Rainebowes continued in the manner abouesayd, from a
quarter of an hour after eleven, until half an hour after twelve; at what
time the light of the Suns, beginning by little and little to grow weak, the
thick cloud got the victory over them, and took them away from the eyes of
the beholders; and at the same time also the Rainebowes their attendants
vanished, and left the day a little troubled, (but much more the minds of the
people;) yet about one of the clock, or soon after, the Sun brake out
again in his wonted and accustomed manner, and the rest of the day was clear
and free from clouds.

Since this strange apparition, namely upon the tenth of January last, there
happened in Devonshire, yet not far from the other place, being on the edge
of Cornwall, another wonder, which did as much affright the ears of men, as
this did their eyes: For in the afternoon of that day, being the Thursday
after Twelfth day, there were heard in the air, unusual cracks or claps of
thunder, resembling in all points, the sound of many Drums together, sometimes
beating Charges, sometimes Retreats, sometimes Marches, and all other points of
war: which after it had continued a good time, it seemed that the same
thunder did most lively express many volleyes of Small-shot, and afterward the
like volleyes of Ordnance, with so great, and yet so distinct noise, that many
of them who dwelt near the sea, went toward the shore to see what it might
mean, as verily supposing there had been some great sea fight near upon that
Coast. These several fearful noyses were again and again renewed in the
same order, till at length, with an horrible and extraordinary crack of
thunder, there fell in a ground of one Robert Pierce, where there were diverse
worke-men planting apple trees, (which ground lay near the house of one Master
George Chidley) a thunderbolt, if I may so call it, being a stone of three
foot and an half in length, of two foot and an half in breadth, and one foot
and an half in thickness, the substance whereof was in hardness and color
not much unlike a flint, as appears by many pieces thereof, which are showed
up and down by many credible and honest Gentlemen, who with their own hands
brake them off from the maine stone. After the fall of this stone, which with
the weight thereof was clean buried in the ground above a yard deep, the
thunder ceased, and people began as much to wonder at that which they now saw,
as they had lately done at that, which with so much fear and amazement they
had heard.

You have now heard a simple, plain, and short narration, of some great and
fearful wonders, what the causes of them were, we all may peradventure
conjecture, though none of us can demonstratiuely show: What the effects of
them shall be, I scarce think any man can conjecture; sure I am, no man can
certainly tell; It is neither safe nor good for us to be Polimanticks, but in
all patience and prepared resolution, to submit our selves to the will of God,
we may well determine it the duty of every Christian.

I had here put an end of this short and vnpollisht discourse; but that being
in hand with it, there was brought unto me a brief (but excellent) and simple
narration of the massacres committed by Papists, upon the persons of more than
400. men, women, and children, of the Reformed Religion, in the Valletelline (a
place in the Grisons Country among the Rhaetian Alps, of good importance for
many respects) both in Tirano, Teglio, Sundrio, and Malenco, and diverse other
places of the Country near adjoining: the ninth, tenth, and eleventh of July
1620. wherein, though I confess there be such examples of cruelty and
inhumanitie, as a Turk, Infidel, Jew, or any other saving a Papist, would
blush and tremble at; yet not conciding so aptly with this purpose, I will for
the present omit them, and (which agrees better with this argument) only touch
upon such Prodigies, as the Author of that Treatise, who as an eyewitness
reports what he saw and felt, Et quorum pars magna fuit. affirms, to have
been seen and heard in those places, both before the Massacre and after; and
thus they are word for word with the Italian coppie.

Signs and Prodigies which happened before the massacre in Valletelline, the
ninth of July 1620. after the old account.
THere being through out all the Valletelline, Guards or Sentinels set in every
Steeple or Bell-fray; together with certain others appointed to several
places, to give warning by fire, to the intent that all the Valley, as well by
the fires, as by the correspondence of the sounds of the bells, might be in an
instant aduertized to take arms for their own defense, against such enemies
as pretended to assault the said Valley: About the Calends of May, 1620. In
Sondrio, the Sentinels that were (as aforesaid) appointed to watch in the
steeple made relation, that in the night they heard in the Church of S.
Geruais, a great murmuring and noise, as if it had been of many people,
earnestly reasoning and disputing about some great and serious matter: and that
from the body of the Church, there shone up into the steeple a great light;
whereupon the Sentinels, lighting their candles, went to go down into the
Church, to see what the matter was: But as they were going down, their light
was blown out, and they going back to light it again, it was again blown
out, with greater noise and violence than before. And suddenly, the light which
was in the Church ceased, and the waits ^f the clock fell down, and the bell
was tolled ten times, as it is accustomed to be done, in case of giving an
Alarm, which thing was heard of many.

In Tirano likewise there were some such blows given to the greater bell; In
so much, that the Magistrate sent suddenly to see what it meant: but he found
that it was not done by any man: And as the messengers returned home from the
steeple, the bell of the Palace it self was heard to ring; and they of the
place wondering and looking diligently what it might be, they saw descending by
the rope of the said bell, somewhat in the likeness and proportion of a Cat.

Signs and prodigies heard and seen in Valletelline, after the horrible
massacre: As it is affirmed by diverse credible persons, that have since come
from thence, and were there, at, and aft^r the massacre.
IN the Churches which were formerly used by them of the Reformed Religion, and
principally in Teglio and Tirano, there has many times been heard a voice to
cry, Woe, woe unto you, vengeance from God for the blood of Innocents.

There has also been often heard the bell of the Church of them of the
Reformed Religion in Tirano, to toll without any man's hands, at the time that
the Sermon was wont to be; and in the same Church there has been often heard
a voice, as if it had been of the reverend Antonio Basso, late Minister of
that place, and there massacred, when he was wont to preach. Of this Antonio
Basso it is likewise reported, that being slain be the rebellious and
seditious Papists; they not satisfied with this, cut off his head, and carried
it into the Church, and set it upon the Pulpit, where he had been accustomed
formerly to preach, and then mocking, cried unto him, Cala a basso, Basso, cala
a basso, c'hai predicato assai, etc. that is, Come down, Basso, come down,
thou have preached long enough.

In Sondrio there was seen coming down from the Mountains, as it had been,
an host of armed men; whereupon many going out of Sondrio, were about to run
away to save themselves by flight; but in the end this apparition vanished like
a cloud; yet it has been so great a cause of fear among the people, that
many have forsaken their dwellings in the Valley, for fear of the divine
punishment.

To make an end now where I began, at home and amongst our selves; though this
brief narration was not by me intended, as a pious fraud, to make men afraid
where there is no cause of fear; yet howsoever the truth of it be, (for I
will not engage my faith unto you for the certainty of it, though in my self
I be well enough satisfied thereof, in respect of the credit of such as
reported it, as having been eyewitnesses:) Let others please themselves in
the persuasion, that, Nihil est in istis terribile nisi ipse timor, (as Seneca
speaks) There is nothing fearful in these things, but the fear it self:
yet the wise will be admonished by every occasion, Et quod aequum est sperare,
and ad id quod iniquissimum est se compararet; both (as we say in honest
English) to hope the best, and to provide for the worst; which how to do, as
becomes Christians, no man has better taught us, nor in fewer words, than
our Sovereign himself in the end of his Meditation upon 1 Chronicles. 15. verse.
25, 26, 27, 28, 29. First, by constant remaining in the purity of the truth,
which is our most certain covenant of salvation, in the only merit of our
Sauiou^: And next, by reforming our defiled lives, a^ becomes regenerate
Christians, to the great glory of our God, the utter defacing of our
adversaries, the wicked, and our unspeakable comfort, both here and also
her^after.

Amen.
FINIS.

