A brief Chronicle, where in are described shortly the Original, and the
successiue estate of the Roman weal public, the alteratyon and change of
sondrye Offices in the same: the order and succession of the Kings, Consuls
and Emperoures thereof, together with sundry gestes and acts of many famous
Princes and valiant Captains, from the first foundatyon of the City of Rome,
unto the. M. C. and.xix. year there of consequently: right pleasant and
profitable to be red, marked and followed of all men.

Collected and gathered first by Eutropius, and Englished by Nicolas Havvard,
studiente of Thauies In.

Anno. 1564.

Fais ton deuoyr,
Selon ton pouuoyr.
TO THE RIGHT worshipful and excellent young Gentle man, master Henry Compton
Esquier, his faithful and dailye Orator Nicholas Hawarde, wishes long health,
with encrese and affluence of all worship.
ALthough of long time sith, (right worshipful,) I had in my heart professed
a great zeal and reuerens toward you, which from time to time, day by day.
I sought menes to signifye to your good mastership, yet there never wanted some
occasion which might wthold me from yt mi said intent and purpose. For why,
waying mine own case and condition of fortune, and considering your worthy
estate and degree of worship, I did always with my self yet hitherto, disalow
my former attempted enterprise. But on the other side, setting before mine
eyes, and beholding the exceeding great gentleness, which from your very youth
ye have aboundauntly toward all men in all places declared, (which you as
inheritance claim from your auncetors,) and also the no small favor and
zeal which you continually have professed toward learning, where in I my
self am able not a little to testify how you have profyted. For omitting here,
your diligent study employed at Oxford, which is to diverse not unknown, I my
self do well remember that long time before that, ye had attained the Laten
tongue, (and that well nyghe in your very childhoode:) which things being
so, I was emboldned,) presuming upon your passing great favor) now at last
with certain confidence to declare to your goodness my pore heart to you long
time since wholly addicted: upon which snre affiaunce so reposed in your
worship, I have here presented unto you this small treatise. Upon the
fynishinge whereof, I have employed for the most part such vacant time as I
had, (not defraudinge my other studies,) bering in memory therample and saying
of Pliny, who thought all that his time to be lost, which he bestowed not
at book. Nothing doubting but your lenity, being such as it is, ye will
gratefullye with favor accept the same, and so enboulden my bashfulnesse in
this behalf, as did Octauius Augustus to one, who when he had finished a book,
(like as I this,) which he would have delivered to Augustus, and was come in
presence before him, with trembling hand, he did both profer and withdraw yt
his book again, which thing Augustus apperceiuing, accepted the gift, and
reprehending ye bashful and timorousness of the geuer, said: what thinckest
thou, yt thou do now erhibite a mite to an Elephante? Such clemency and
familiaritye was there in y^ mighty Emperor. The like of which, also promises
this your worships countenance: which has now exiled, and clean put to flight,
the cloudy mistes of my former bashfulnesse: So that now without fear or
drawinge back, I have hear preferred to your worship these my simple
travails, which I chose among others to employ upon this author, as chief for
sundry causes. The One is, for the substance and matter, which he writes of,
which as it is of time and co^tinuans antique, so is it of all men far before
other histories to be embraced and desired to be known. An other cause is, for
ye where diverse Historiographers as well Greeks as Latins have vttred to their
posteritye in writing therploits and feats atcheued by the Romans, as well in
peace, as in war, yet among the^ al, are there few which in so good order
have placed the same: and as for breuitye and compendiousnesse, I am assured
noone there are, but of force must grant him the price. And all be it that
as Tullye says, and as experyence teaches us, diverse there are endued with
very excellent wits by nature, which wits are aided by precepts and
perfyted by experience, which experie^s is alone the maistres of al things, who
instructs and teaches us how to demene and govern both our selves and our
doings by judging things present, and calling to memory things which are
past: yet among all those which are endued with such pregnante wits by
nature, each one has not attained such perfectyon in learning, that they of
them selves are able enough to attain fully to the knowledge and understanding
of the gestes and factes of diverse most victorious nations and peoples: the
examples of whom may aminate and encourage others to endeavor and labor to
purchase and attain such like fame and praise, as those others have done, so
much as nothing can more. The knowledge of which examples, had to diverse
even to this day lien hid, been unknown, and vnattained unto, had not that
their default in learning, been aided by some others, able to further the^ in
this behalf. Which imperfection of many, diverse here to fore understanding,
(to whom the talent of learning has been more abou^dantly granted,)
endeuoringe them selves, to remedy and supply yt want and defalt in others,
have to their great commendation and praise immortal, by their industry and
pains taking in translating diverse Histories and Chronicles, (as in their
minds best seemed to them) out of sundry languages into this out mother
tongue, made perfect and healed that maime, which otherwise the want of
knowledge of the same Historyes for want of learning, had bred to diverse of
this our country. By which example of theirs, I was the more hardye to
attempt this enterprise, as one right glad if by ought that lies in me,
(which easelye I confess, and grant how slender it is,) any one might take
either furtheraunce or pleasure. Which my simple trauayles I have presumed to
exhibyte to your worship, not for any the causes before said, (knowinge that
you are in such studies, as ye are also in all other good scyences very
exactlye seen and parfecte,) but only to signifye, and as argument to
testifye the good will which to my power my poor heart unto your worship, as
of duetye doothe owe: which then at length shall be fullye satisfied, and
adjudged it self very happy, when it shall seem to have done any thing
which may appear acceptable to your good mastershyppe.

And all though it may be granted that experyence of things may be
attained without learning, yet is experyence purchased by learning, to be
preferred before that other so much as quietness is more to be regarded then
trouble.

For as Phillip de Comines a French writer affyrmeth: a man shall see more
experyence in three months, by reading of books, then twentye men shall
in Process of time, the one of them living after the other: Where by a man
shall also understand the usage and and fashions of sondrye realms and
countries, as well in peace as in time of war, the ordinances and laws of
sundry nations, the ways and means by which they have enlarged their
kyngedoms, and the causes of the decay of the same, and how those ruinous
Empires have been again restored, and have recovered their former estates. All
which things like as they are plentifullye, so are they chefly contained in ye
description of good histories, which historyes of Cicero are most worthelye
called the witness bearers of time, the lyghtes of veritye, the lives of
memory, the regentes of life, and the ambassadors of antiquity: by which we
may learn how to bear all manner fortune, as well adverse as prosperous,
which shall administer unto us the very true and certain experyence of
things, so that we may certainly know how to attain and purchase praise
and fame immortal: which with great increase and long contynuaunce of the
same, God of his infinite goodness, grant to your worship for ever. From
Thauies Inn the xxii. day of June.

Your faithful and daily Orator Nicholas Haward.

To the Reader.
COnsidering with my self (gentl^ reader) with how infinite pain and labo^
diverse here tofore me^ of most excellent wits and of passing knowledge have
compyle^ their books, and with what heed and cyrcumspectnesse they have
examined and perfited their said trauayles and with what fear and wariness
they have publyshed the same, (nor that without good cause why.) For there by
they exponed themselves, their name and fame to no small dangers and hasardes.
Namelye to the vewe judgment, and report of all men. For which causes (me
semes) I have taken upon me a^ this present a hard enterprise: A burden over
heavy for these slender shoulders to sustain, who have at length showed my
self so hardy as to publishe abroad this small book to the skanning and
trying of so many touch stones. Among whom like as those other most famous
men have doubted to credit their wrytrnges (dreading how they might eskape the
close carpinge of diverse slanderous and p^ruers detractors:) so I who now have
wayed the safe ankers) of closeness, and hoysted up the sails of
fearfulness, to receive the blastes of rumors and reports, have launched
forth this simple ship to take his way amyd the sapde gulfes, where as nothing
elsse is to be looked for, but captain perdition, without the singular
lenitye of the beneuolente Readers do supplye the Pylottes stead to safe
conducte him alonge those dangers, and defend him from those violente and
surgynge waves which shall s^ke to ouerwhelm him: who should well have
contented my self to have gratified only that excellent young (gentleman my
singular good master, master Co^pton (whom I here name for his worthiness sake)
without hazardynge my self by farther dangers, to seek such aduentutes as
might betide.

Nevertheless, since it has pleased him to will me to attempt this enterprise
(whose request to again say, or commandment to wythstand in no case I
might,) I have the boldlyer, under the banner of his Protectyon aduenturxed to
endaunger these first fruits of my trauayles. Where in I do as yet adiudge
my self to stand in far more safetye and less danger, then those others
do, of whom I made mertyon before: for that if in their doings any error
might have happily been espised, it could hardelye have been wyncked at,
either for their singular knowledge and learning where in they did excel, or
for their tipenesse of judgment, which well nigh passed all men's credit.

But as for me, if ought there be doprehended in this small treatise, worthy
reprehension (as one submittynge my self to the judgment of others,) yet I
desire of thee gentle Reader, grant of favorable skannynge: which I trust
easelye without repinynge, I shall at thy hands obtain: For that what so ever
has chanced to escape me, may be adscribed to my imperfectnesse, (whom I
yield to thy judgment) or imputed to youth, and so the easlyer be remytted,
or at least dissymuled. Neither thyncke I that I could be so incircumspecte
in sit placynge of words, ne so exact a translatoure, that I could (though
most I couetie it) please and satisfye of each one his fantalye: Suffiseth
it me therefore, if among such a company, some: among so many, shall seem
all together not to reject these my simple trauayles.

And to the end I may indue the frendlye Reader to conceive the better opinion
of this small book, I shall show to thee what profitte and commoditye is
annexed to the same, and how much doothe avail the reading of good
hystoryes. And then have I to speak to the obloquy of certain persons, which
seem greatly to disalowe the translatynge of Historiographers, and other good
authoures, forth of diverse languages into his own mother tongue: where by
they detracte and deprive the trauaylers in those affairs of their praise
which most worthily ought to ensue their said labors.

And as touching the first point, which is to express the profitte and
commodytye which do ensue the reuoluynge and often perusyng of hystoryes, and
to declare of what force and effect they are to quycken and encourage others
to atcheue the like, the saying of worthy Themistocles seems to prove
suffycyently: who in his first youthful years gave him self wholye to follow
lust and sensualitye, regarding nothing but ryotousnesse and satisfying his
fantasy, but so soon as Melciades obtained opportunity, and wan through his
prowess and manhood great victoryes of Themistocles, who always before had
been drowned in folly (and wantonness) conferring the life of Milciades with
that of his, did in short space so aultare himself, as if he had never been
any such kind of person. Where at diverse much meruaylyng, demanded of him
the cause of that his so sudden change. To whom Themistocles aunsweared that
the victoryes and conquestes of Melciades would not permit him any longer to
sleep or slumber.

Of such force and efficacy, and the examples of others, that of one who to
fore was a member skante worthy to live in a commonwealth, the example of that
other made a valiant and most victoryous conqueroure. Which things being
so. who does dou^e how requisite and necessary historyes are: in which are
contained such noumber of notable examples, of men more famous far then was
Melciades. Which histories like as they are to be had in estimation, and
greatly to be regarded for the worthiness of them, whose acts they recount,
so are they highlye to be had in price, for that by mean of them only those
gestes of such men are so ryfe in memory, that in manner they do yet live,
and seem presentlye to put them in practyse. For why, has not Virgill that
deuyne Poet by his worthy verses given Troy such perpetuitye, that it doothe
as yet seem to burn, with an inextinguible fire: which elsse doubtless had
peryshed together with the fading of that consnmynge flame.

Who should now have been able to recite the worthy prowess of famous
Achilles, if Homere had not crowned the same with eternitye? And that which
is more, (that I may say with mighty Alexander,) what had it auayled that
worthy Achilles? what had it auauntaged diverse other valyaunte men to have
adventured them selves to such dangers, to have attempted so heard
enierpryses, Finallye to have declared them selves always invincible, if
such their victoryes, that their manhood, those their excellen^e virtues
should have been with them over whelmed in the earth, and pearished in that
small coffen? Which doubtless had happened, if the worthynesse of writers
had not challenged and delivered them from that lamentable destiny. Where
had the renown, the fame and glory of the Romans. the Grecians, the
Macedonians, the Persians and diverse other victoryous Natyons been now
become? They had certesse ben quite worn out by antiquity, decayed by
descent of ages, and given place to time, if the fame of them so deceassed, had
not ben shrouded in the pardurable seereclothes of famous writers, (as Lyuius,
Plutarche, Curtius with others whom I here pass over,) and their said factes
farsed with the pure poulders of the wrytinges, and monumentes of such men as
those were most soueraign preservatives against such putrefactyons.

And thus much as touching the commodious and well nyghe requisite knowledge
of Historyes. Now rests it to speak a word or two to satisfye the
mislikynge of certain persons, with such as have trauayled in translatinge
diverse authoures forth of other languages into this our mother tonnge. For
the aucthorisinge and defense whereof, (me seems) the words of the famous
Oratoure Apollonius doothe avail not a little. Who coming by chance into the
schole where Tullye was, being but a child as yer, and apperceiuing his for
wardnesse in learning, and his natural inclinatyon to the same, said: Truly
Cicero I commend thee, and bewail grestly the chance and case of the
Grecians. For why, full well that worthy Orator apperceiued that Tully should in
process of time bereft ye Gretians of their exacinesse in all sciences (where
in they might worthily at those days claim singularitye to the^ selves) and
communicate the same with y^ Romans and others. Which thing though Culli did
not as an interpretor of any, yet did he it so, that he seemed as an erpositor
to mani. For look what absoluteness or perfection any of the Grecians, the
Hebricians or any other strange nations had through their labor and
travail attained unto in leatnynge, and left written in their languages, for
the prolytte and behoufe of their country men, which was neither commodious
or profitable to be known. All that has he by his industry left most
eloquentlye published in the Laten tongue, a language more rife and familiare
then those from whence he desumed them. And like as many had failed of that
knowledge which they now have aspyred unto, had not Tully txoden forth unto
them such easy paths, tyghte had there been no few among us in this our
region, which had not as yet attained unto any understanding of so many
histories, and with them so^drye other things worthy to be knoweu, had not
the diligence of Translators, and their pains employed in that behalf, removed
and cleared the thycke mistes of their ignorans, where by it may appear that
such as busye them selves for the furtheraunce and commodity of others, are
not only worthy to be void of reprehensyon vndepryued of their well deserved
praise, but are also to be encouraged to persevere in those their well doings.
And where as some their be which obtecte that through these translatyons, the
affectynge and desire of the attaynynge of the Greek, Latyne, Italian and
other tounges does decay, and is the less sought after, who sees not how
frivolous and vain that their saying is. For as it is very absonant that any
one who has the perfect use of corn and grain, and tasted the plesauntnesse
there of, would refuse the same to be fed with Acornes, so is it no less
dissonant to say, that any man having ones tasted the pleasant puritye of
the Greek and Latin tounges, would (for saking the same,) fall to the
barbarousnesse (in respect) of this our English tongue. But like as Ce^es
has not so indifferently dealt with all men, to instruct and show them the
use of corn, for which some must of force content them selves to be fed with
Acornes. So for that each man has not attained the knowledge of those
languages, in which notwythstandinge many things are worthy to be known, some
must neades content themselves to wade only in the troubled streams of
Translators: for that they are not able to attain to the well spryng it self:
with translations if they had any manner way sounded to the decay or
hinderaunce of learning or knowledge. Doubtless in those so many so famous
men, which have sustained so great pains in that behalf great folly and
oversight might have been imputed that they would have busied them selves so
many years about so harmfull studies. But so much are the minds of men now
depraved with malice, and puffed up with pride, that they can not only broke
the well meaning minds of any, but narowly examine and try the errors of
others. Being sure in the mean time that they them selves will attempt no such
enterprise: (warely preuentyng what men might fortune to report by them,)
worthy to be resembled to Esopes dog. Who lying in the Oxes rack, would not
only not eat the hay him self, neyet would permyt the Ox, who ^ould gladlye
have fed. Whose over hedeful ^eades I pass over without regard, desyringe
thee gentle Reader, (for whose cause I have sustained these labors, and
endaungered my name) to conceive of this my rude enterprise accordingly.
Exhorting thee also earn estly, daily to reunlue and peruse the number of good
histories which either are all redye, or shall here after happen to be
publyshed for thy behoufe. Wyshinge thou may like as Themistocles,) pexceyue
there by such fru^e and profit, that thou may be animated by readinge those
worthy acts and exployees of others, to purchase and gain like praise and
fame to them, whom those their factes commend to thee.

Farewell from my chamber in Cha^es Inn.
The first book of the Breuiary of EVTROPLVS.
THe Romain Empire, which was at the first beginni^g Romulushis birth and
parentage. Rhea Siluia mother to Romulus.
thereof, of all other the smalest, and in process of time did become the most
Virgins vestals wet they which minystred to Vesta daughter to Saturn, who se
order was to keep themselves virgis until. 30. year of age, and the^ they were
lice^sed to marye. The foundation of Rome laid, the. 729. year beforethe birth
of christ and the. 3101. year after the creation of the world, and continued in
that state about a 1300. years.
ample, and surmounted in circuit all other Empires, that any man could ever
remember, was founded by Romulus. Who (as it was supposed) was the son of a
birgin Vestale, be gotten by Mars, and borne at one birthe with his brother
Remus. This Romulus when he had oflong time accustomed among the shepherdes to
pray and spoil abroad. At last being of the age of.xviii. years, he laid the
syte of a small city, in the hyl Pallatinus, the eleventh day of May, in the
xxxiii. year after that the plays called Dlimpici were first begone. And after
the destruction of the city of Troy: according to the sust computation of al
writers, the. CCC. lxxxx. and fourth year. When he had builte this City,
which after to his own name he called Rome, he wroughte Rome named
these feats wellnigh as they follow. First he gathered together into his city
a great number of such as were Rome inhabited.
borderers there about to furnishe this citi. Among who^ he chose anC. of such
as were most anctent of years, after whose advise he minded to order his
affairs: whom he for that they were so aged, called Senators. Then for yt
both he and his people were as yet Senatoures in Rome. The cause why plays
were first invented in Rome.
destitute of wives, upon a time he did invent certain plais and shows
within the City, requestinge such as were inhabitauntes near about Rome, to
come and see those plays. At which time the Romans by force berefte them
their daughters and maidens. Where upon, war was proclaimed against the
Romans for that rape: in which battle, Romulus War against the Romans
subdued the Ceninenses, the Antennates, the Crustumyes, the Fidenates, the
Veientines and the Sabines: which people environed the city of Rome. Within a
while after, there arose suddenly a great tempest, in which Romulus vanished in
a tempest forth of Caprea meadow, where he took the view of his souldy ours.
Romulus being abroad, vanished away so that he was not after seen: Where
upon when he could not be found, his people supposing that he was raught up
to the skies, canonised him in the.xxxvii. year of his reign. Romulus
canonysed.
After ye, the senators bare rule by ye space of.v. dais, during which time of
their reign, was accomplished Interregn^, the time between ye death of one
king, and the treat on of another. Numa Pompilius the.ii. king a Sabine
borne.
one whole year. The^ was Numa Po^pilius created king: who during the hole
time of his reign, waged no batel, and yet was he no less profitable to the
city of Rome the^ Romulus was. For why he establishedde Laws, and framed to
good order the conditions No wars in Rome, which chanced vnt two times more
in Rome, one after the first Carthaginia^ battle, ones in Augustus Cesares
time. The year divided into xii months. Numa, his reign.
of the people of Rome, which for that they had been so long accustomed to
battles, were now judged as robbers and rude people. This Numa divided the
year into.xii. months, being before but a confused noumber of days, and a
thing not able to be accounted. And innumerable rites and ceremonies, and
temples founded he besides at Rome. And deceased by sickness in the. 43. year
of his reign. After him, Tullus Hostilius being Tullus Hostilius the third
king. Martial policy renewed.
made king, did again put in ure the feats of arms, and renewed battails:
which during the reign of Numa had been laid aside. He conquered the Albanes,
which were distant.xii. miles from the city of Rome. He also subdued the
Veientines and Fidenates, of Alba longa destroyed in this kings raygne. Rome
enlarged.
which the one were.vi. miles, the other were.xviii. miles distant from Rome. He
enlarged the city annexing thereto the hill Celius, and being strycken with
lightning, both he and his house was Tullus his reign.
burned, when he had reigned.xxxii. years. After him Ancus Martius governed
the city of Rome. Who was Ancus Martius, the.iiii. king, he was before the
Incarnatyon of Christ. 642. years, he made the bridge over the river of Tyber,
which ran by Rome, and built a gail or prison in Rome for the runishyng of
offenders.
son to Numa Po^pilius his daughter. He waged battle against the Latins. He
enlarged tbe city, by taking into it the hills Auentinus and Ianiculus. He built
a city fast upon the sea shore at Dstia, which was.vi. miles distaunt from the
city of Rome. And being visited with sickness, he deceased in the.xxiiii.
year of his reign. Then Priscus Tarquinius, obtained the Empire, he doubled
the noumber Priscus Tarquinius the v. king.
of the Senatoures. He built the place of playee in Rome called Circus: and The
number of the Senators doubled.
instituted also diverse games there, which as yet to this day do remain. He
subdued the Sabines. And berefting Circus built.
them of a great portion of their land, annexed it to the territorye of the
Romans. He was the first that entered the City of Rome with any Priscus
Tarniquinius triuinphed first at Rome.
triumph. He builded the walls of ye city, and sinkes also to avoid ye filthe
and ordure of the City. He began the Capitol, and when he had raygned xxxviii.
years, he was slain by the The capytoll (...) slain.
sons of king Ancus whom he succeaded in the kingdom. After him, Seruius
Tullius was king, whose mother was a noble woman borne: Seruius Tullius
the.vi. king.
but yet was she a captive and a ha^dmaide. He subdued the Sabines, and annexed
to the city, these three hills, Quirinalis, Viminalis and Esquilinus. He
entrenched round the Romewalles entrenched.
walls of the City. He was ye first that invented mustring of men, which before
his time was not known through the whole world. In his reign Mustryng (...).
the names of all the inbabitantes in Rome were taken, and there were found (...).
in the City of Rome.lxxx. and.iiii. M. citizens able men with those which
inhabited about ye city. He was slain in the.xlv. year of his reign, through
Seruius Tullius slain.
the wickedness of his son in law Tarquinius who was son to ye last king before
him (who^ this Seruius Tullius succeeded) and the naughtines of his own
daughter, who^ he had espoused to the said Tarquinius. Lucius Lucius
Tarquinius, Superbus ye vii. king.
Tarquinius, Superbus was the.vii. and the last king that reigned at Rome He
ouercam the Volscians in battle, which are situate not far distant from Rome
(as me^ go from thence toward Campania, He subdued the City of Gabios, and
Suessa Pometia. He made peace with the Thuscians, and built Jupiter, his temple
built.
Jupiter his temple in the capitol. Afterward, as he was laying siege to ye
city of Arde, which was.x. miles distant from the city of Rome, he was
deposed. Lucius Tarquinius deposed.
For when his son Sextus Tarquinius had forced and poluted the noble woman, and
therwithal the most chastest Adultery the cause of the first alteratyon of the
state of the weal public in Rome.
Lucretia wife to Collatinus, and she had of this injury complained to her
husband, and other her friends, in ye presens of them all, she slew her self.
Where upon they kindled the hearts of the people against Tarquinius, and
deposed him from his kingdom: and The severity of the Romans in punyshing
adulterye.
sone after, the whole army which at that time laid siege to the city of Arde
together with ye king, forsook him. Where upon when the king returned, and
would have entered the city, Lucius Tarquinius his raygne.
ye gates were shut against him. Thus when he had reigned.xxv. years, he fled
with his wife and children. In this wise reigned.vii. kings over the city of
Rome, by the space of. CCxliii The time that kings governed Rome.
years: at which time Rome extended not to above.xv. miles, where it was
largest. From this time began there to be created in the place of one king ii.
consuls for this consideration, that Two consuls created in Rome. Consuls
ordained in rome ye 3450. year after the creation of the world. The reign of
the consuls.
although the one of them were disposed to naughtiness, yet the other having
the like authority, might bridle the affection of his companyon. And it was
decreed that they should not rule above one year, least the continuance of
their bearinge rule should make the^ wax hauty, whereas otherwise The order of
the co^suls co^einued after it was first instituted until Julius Cesares
reign, which wxas by the space of 464. years
they would demene them selves more courteously, knowinge that after their ycare
expired and determined, they should become private persons again. In the
first year after the expulsing of the kings forth of the city, Lucius Iunius
Brutus, who had most of others procured the banishing Lucius Iunius Brutus
and Tarquinius Collatinus first consuls.
of Tarquinius, and with him Tarquinius Collatinus, who was husband to
Lucretia, were chosen co^suls. How be it Collatinus was forth with deprived of
his Consulship. For why it was agreed that none should remain in the City,
that bare the name of Tarquinius. whereupon Collatinus Tarquinius Collatinus
depryned of his consulship.
taking with him all his substance, departed forth of the City, and in his
room Valerius Publicola was created consul. Nevertheless king Valerius
Publicola co^sull. The first battle that any Romain ever waged against Rome.
Tarquinius who a little before was banisheda ssembling togethera great army to
aid him to recover his kingdom, waged batail with the Citizens of Rome. In the
very first front of ye batail, Brutus the consul and Aruus Tarquinius his son
slew one another. Brutus and Aruus slain.
How be it the Romans obtained the victory in that battle: and the Romain
matrones bewailed ye death of Brutus by the space of one whole Brutus death
bewailed.
year, as the defender of their chastities. After the death of Brutus, Valerius
Publicola chose Spurius Lucretius Tricipitinus, who was father Spurius,
Lucretius, Tricipitinus consul. Lucretius dyed. Horatius, Puluillus consul.
Five consuls in the i. year.
to Lucretia to be consul, who died by sickness: and Horatius Puluillus was
created consul in his room. Thus were.v. consuls created in ye first year. Of
whom, Tarquinius Collatinus lost the city for his name. Brutus was slain in
battle, Spurius Lucretius sickned and died. Then in the second year after,
Tarquinsus again War again attempted by Tarquinius against the Romans.
made war upon the Romans, to the end he might recover his kingdom,
whom Porsenna king ^f Thuscia then aided, and well nigh he had taken Rome.
How be it at this time, was he also overcome. In the iii. year after the kings
were banished forth of the City, when Tarquinius apperceiued that he should
neither be received again of the Romans, nor yet that Porsenna would succor
him any longer, he departed to Thusculus a city not far dista^t from Rome, and
there by the space of.xiiii. years Tarquinius lived as a private man at
Thusculus.
he lived with his wife, as a private man. In the. 4. year after yt the kings
were banished ye city, the Sabines The Sabins warred on the romans
again warred upon the Romans: at which time, they were also ouerco^e and the
Romans triumphed over the^. In the.v. year Lucius Valerius, who was fellow in
office with Brutus, and the other. 4. consuls, deceased in such extreme poverty,
yt money was fain to A collectyon of monye for the burial of Valerius the
consul.
be gathered among the people, to bear the expenses of his funeras.

Whose death the Romain matrones did by the space of a year, bewail, as they
did the death of Brutus before. In the.ix. year after the banishyng of the
kings, when Tarquinius his son in law had assembled together Preparatyon for
war against the Romans by tarquinius his son in law. The office of
dictatura first instituted. Titus Largius dictator
a great army, to the end he might revenge the reproach which his father in
law sustained at the Romans hands, There was a new office created in Rome,
called Dictatura in authority, excelling far the office of the consuls. That
same year was there also ordained in Rome an other Offycer called Magister
Equitum: who was deputed to be attendant upon the dictator. To this office of
Dictator was Spurius Cassius. first magister Equitum.
first deputed at Rome Titus Largius. And Spurius Cassius supplied first the
office of magister Equitum. In the.xvi. year did the commons of Rome make a
commotion, prete^ding A commotio^ at Rome by the commo^s.
the cause to be, for that the senators and Consuls would have oppressed
them: At which time, they created ii. whom they called Tribuni Plebis, Tribuni
Plebis created: which were after, abrogated by Sylla, and restored again by
Po^peius.
and assigned them to be peculier decisers and determiners of their causes
only: by whose means they might be in safety, and defended against the
co^suls. In the year following the Volstians renewed battle against the
Romans, The Volstianes renewed war against the Romans
they were subdued: and lost moreover their first city called Corioli. In
the.xiii. year after that the kings were banished, Quintus Martius Rome
invaded by Quintius Martius a Romayne.
a famous capitain of the Romans, who wan Coriolis a city of the Volscians,
upon displeasure conceived, went to the Volscians, and took part with them,
who also aided him against the Romans. By mean whereof, he put the Romans
often times to the worste. He camped within.v. miles of the city of Rome. And
regardinge nothing the Legates, which the Romans sent to him to entreat for
peace, he determined to have invaded his own country, had not his own mother
Veturia, and his wife Volumnia come forth of the city to entreat him:
through whose request myxte with tears, he was overcome, and so withdrewe his
army. In that year that Cesus Fabius, and Titus Virginius were consuls, three
hundredth noble men of the house and stock of the Fabianes, took upon them
alone Battle taken in hand a gaynst ye Veientines, by ye house of the
Fabianes alone.
to wage battle against the Veientines, offering the senatoures and the
people of Rome, that they the^ selfs would fight the field. Whereupon, al these
noble me^ according they had before decreed, went forth to ye battle ward, of
which each of the^ was well worthy to have been a capte^ for their singular
prowess: and were all slain there: so that of that so great a family The stock
of the Fabians near clean extynguyshed.
and line, there was left none a live but one, who for that he was but a child,
was not then able to go to warfare. After these things, there was another muster
taken within the city, and the citizens amounted to ye nombre of a C. The
second muster at Rome.
and.xix. M. able men. The year following, when tharmy of the Romans was
beseged in ye hill Algidus, which The romain army beseged
was well nigh.xii. miles distant from ye city of Rome. Lucius Quintus Cin
Lucius Qui^tus Cincinatus being Dictator, called straight from the plough
handle.
cinnatus was made dictator, who being seized of a close or field which
contained so much ground as one yoke of oxen was able to ear in.iiii. dais:
called in latin. Quatuor vgera: (which contained.ix. C.lx. foot in length and
in In how sinal citimatyon ample possessions were in Rome.
breadth. CCCC. and.viii. score foot,) tilled that ground with his own hands.
And being sent for to succor the Romans, they found him busily occupied in
plowing: he then wiping only the swet from his brows, and (as the manner was)
castinge upon him the garment (which was assigned for the Dictator to wear)
called Toga pretexta: took his journey forthewith against his enemies: Toga
pretexta.
and putting them to flight, delivered the army of the Romans besieged. In
the year after the foundatyon of the city of Rome three hundredth and one, the
office of the consulles ceased The office of Consuls ceased.
for a time. And in the place of the.ii. Consulles, there were chosen ten
which should bear chief authority in the city, and they were called
Decemuiri. But when in the first year Decemuiri first instituted.
after their creation they had well demeaned them sclues, in the second year
of their bearing rule, one of the^ During the raygne of the Decemuirs certain
of that order, were sent into Greece, to see the vsages of the most famous
cities there, who vsyng there in the advice of the most learned in those parts
wrate certain laws which were called the.xii. tables, and The Decemuirs
deprived of their authority, they reigned. 3. years.
named Appius Claudius would have forced and defloured a maid, which was daughter
to one Virginius: which Virginius at that time soulded for honest wages in the
hill Algidus against the Latins. But when Virginius understood the pretens of
the Decemuirs, he chose rather to slaye daughter as he did, then he should be
polluted by the Decemuir: and returning back to his souldioures, he began a
commotion: for which fact the Decemuirs were deprived of their authority, and
they them selves condemned. In the. CCC. and.xv. year after Rome was builte,
the Fidenatss rebelled against the Romans: wheme the Veientines assisted.
Tolumnius The Fidenates rebelled.
was at that time king of the Veientines, both which Cities were situate nigh
to Rome: For Fidene was but.vii. miles and Veientes.xviii. miles distante from
Rome. The Volscianes in like manner took Parre with those other people. How be
it they sustained the overthrow by Marcus Emilius Dictator. Lucius Q.
Cincinatus magister Equitum. Tolumnius slain. The City of the Fidenats taken
and overthrown. Furius Camillus Dictator.
Marcus Aemilius then Dictator, and Lucius Quintus Cincinatus, Magister
Equitum. In that battle they lost their king. The city of the Fidenaies was
won and quite destroyed. Twenty years after that, the Veientines rebelled
again: and there was sent against them, Furius Camillus the Dictator: who at
the first, discomfited them in battle: and eftsoon when he had besieged
the City a good space, he wanne it: which was The city of the Veie^tins taken.
the most ancient and the rychest through all Italy. After that, he wan also
Falisci, a City no less notable the^ that other was. But the peoples Falisci
won.
hearts were kindled against him, through the procurement of certain persons
which surmised that he had Camillus banyshed.
not well and indifferentlye divided the spoil: Upon which cause, he was
condemned and banished the City. Immediately herevppon, the Rome invaded by the
frenchmen, in the. 360. year after the city was built, about. 350. years
before the birth of christ
Frenchmen invaded Rome and pursued the Romans unto the floude Allia, which
was xi. miles dystante from the city of Rome, when they had thus discomfited
and va^quyshed the Romans, they wan the city it self: of which no part was
able to be Rome taken.
defended against them but the Capitol only: which when they had also of
long time besieged, so that the Romans which were included, began now to
fail of vyttayles, Camillus who lived as a banished man, in a city near
adioynyng, set upon the Frenchmen, and with much a do put them to flight.
Whervppon Rome reskued by Camillus, and the frenchmen put to flight.
the Frenchmen which laid syege to the capytoll, brake up their siege,
receyuyng gold of the Romans for the same intent. But Camillus still pursued,
and made such slaughter of them, that he recovered not only the gold which
they had received, but such anncientes also and ensigns of war, as they
had gotten. And thus returnyng to Rome again, he entered into the city with
his third Camillus called the second Romulus.
triumph, and was called the second Romulus: as though he also had been a
founder of that his country.

The second book of the breuiary of Eutropius.
IN the three hundredth three skore and v. year after the building of the city
of Rome, and in the first year after Offices changed again in Rome.
that it was so taken by the Frenchemen, the offices were again altered, and
in stead of the two consuls, two were created, which were called Tribuni
Militum: of no less authority Tribuni militum created.
then the Consuls were. From this time, began the wealth of Rome to increase.
For that same year, Camillus wan the city of the Volscia^s. The city of ye
Volscianes won by Camillus.
which by the space of.lxx. years had waged battle with the Romans: he wan
also the cities of the Equies and Sutrines, and discomfited all their armies:
and got three triumphs together. Tytus Quintius Cincinatus pursuinge at that
time also the Prenestines which came to the very gates of Rome to wage
battle, and overcame them at the flood Allia, and annexed to the Empire of
the Romans those cities which were under the dominion of the Prenestines.
Than gave he the assault to the city Preneste it self: which was Great
prowess of Cincinatus.
yielded up to him: All which feats he did within.xx. days space: and a
triumph was granted unto him. How be it the dignity of the Tribunes The
office of Tribunes cesed.
did not long endure: for after a while, it seemed good to the Romans to
create no mo of that order. And so by the space of three years, they stood in
dout whether they should make any great offices again or no. Nevertheless the
Tribunes at last, The Tribunes recovered again their dygnytye.
by common consent obtained again their former dignity, and that they should
also have the authority of the Consuls besides, and continued so by the space
of three years. Then were there consulles created again. In the year that
Lucius Genutius, and Quintus Seruilius were Consuls created again.
consuls, Camillus died, unto whom most honor was attributed next after
Camilius deceased.
Romulus, of any that ever was in Rome. About this time Quintius the Dictator
was sent forth against the Frenchmen which were aryued in Italy, and had camped
on the farther The french men again a riued and camped in Italy.
side of the flood Auienes, where Titus Manlius the worthiest of all the
Senators, slew one of the French men, which provoked him to fight hand to
hand. And when he had slain him, he pluckte of a chayn of gould which his
enemy ware about his neck, and put it about his own: whereof both he and his
posteritye were called Torquati, for a perpetual memory of that fact. The
residue The original or the name of Corquati.
of the Frenchmen were put to flight: and eftsoons overcome by Caius Sulpitius
the Dictator. Within a while after, the Thuscianes were The Thuscians
discomfited by Marius.
subdued by Caius Marius: and.vii. thousand of them were led prisoners in one
triumph. There was again a muster had in Rome, and when the Latins whom the
Romans had The third muster at Rome.
before subdued, refused to assiste the^ with any power of me^ against their
enemies, they were enforced to chose among them selves young soldiers only,
and such as before that time had never been at war, to the number often
legions. So much prevailed the Romans in Warlike feats and cheualry,
although their wealth and substance was as yet but very sclender. This army
went forth against the Frenchmen, and Lucius Furius was appointed general
thereof: At that time, one of the french camp challenged into the field him
whom the Romans accounted the most valiant among them al. Upon which
bragges Marcus Valerius being at that time Tribunus Militume proffered himself
to fight the combat: and as he marched forward Mar. Valor. did battle with a
french man.
into the field ready armed, a Crow lyghted upon his right arm, and sat
there still. Afterward when his aduersarye and he came to handy grypes, the
same Crow smote the Frenchman upon the eyes with his wings and tallaunts in
such sort, that he could not see forthrighte, by mean whereof he was slain hy
Valerius. And the Crow gave him not only the victory, but his name also, that
he was after called Coruinus. The original of the name of Coruinus. M. Va.
Cor. Consul.
And for this fact he was created consul, duringe the space of.xxiii. years.
Then the Latins who before had refused to aid the Romans with any
souldioures, made request that one of the Consuls might be chosen among them,
and the other among the Romans, which demand of theyrs was denied, and
battle by the Romans prepared against the^, wherein they were overcome, and
upon their overthrow the Romans Battle against the Latins.
triumphed. The pictures of the consulles were set up at the bars: (which
was the place where the Orators pleaded men's causes) for The Images of the
Co^suls erected.
this victory achieved. Now the Romans waxed mighty: they warred with the
Samnites well nyghe an C. and.xxx. miles distant from Rome which are situate
in the mid way between Picennm, Campania, and Apulia. Lucius Papirius Cursor
went to that battle being first created Dictator, and retournyng through cause
of business from thence to Rome, gave charge (at his departure to Quintus
Fabius Maximus, who at that time was Magister Equitu^, that during his absence,
he should not fight with his ennemies. How be it he upon occasyon given, with
merueylous dexterity of fortune fought with the Samnites, and vanquished them.
For which fact the Dictator Lucius Papirius after his return gave sentence
of death upon him, for that he had fought contrary to Quintus Fabi. Max.
adjudged to death.
his commandment. But yet he was delivered through the paslynge great
favor of the soldiers, which they pretended toward him. About which matter
there was such dissension bred by Papirius, that he was nighe slain himself
there in. After this, the Samnits ouercam the Romans The Romans vanquyshed
by the Samnites. The yoke y^ they called Iugst was made with ii. spears, stuck
in the earth. and the third on their points like a galowes: under which for
reproach vanquished men were led.
to their great reproach, and caused them to crepe under the yoke at which
time Titus Veturius and Spurius, Postumius were consuls. How be it the
Senators and people of Rome forth with infringed that league, which a litel
before they were constrained to make with the Samnites. Then Lucius Papirius
had the upper hand over the Samnites, and sent.vii. thousand of them under
the yoke: and Papirius tryumphed over them. At that time Appius Claudius being
Censor conveyed into the The Sa^nites discomiyted.
city, the stream which is now called Claudia water, and made ye high way
which is yet called Appia way. The Samnites renewed battle.
Not long after the Samnites renewed battle, and overcame Quintus Fabius
Maximus, and slew.iii. M. of his men. Afterward when his father Fabius Maximus
was sent to Quin. Fab. Max. vanquished.
aid him, he did not only subdue the Samnites again, but wan also diverse of
their towns. Then were Publius Cornelius Rufinus, and Marcus Curious Dentatus
created Consuls: and were both sent forth Publi. Cor. Ruf. and M. Cur. Dent.
Consuls.
against the Samnites, and in an exceeding great battle they vanquished
them: and thus ended they the battle, which the Samnites had continued
against the Romans, by the space of.xlix. years: which nation far above all
the residue through out all Italy, did most diminish the force of the Romans.
Within a few years after, the armies of the french men joined with the
Thuscianes, and Samnites against the Romans: but as they marched toward
Rome, Cnaine Cornelius Dolabella encountringe with them, slew them: At that
time war was proclaimed War proclaimed against the Tarentines.
against the Tarentines which inhabited the farthest parts of Italye, for
that they had iniuryed the Legates of the Romans. The Tarentines desired
Pyrrhus king of Epirus to assyste them against the Romans, who forth with
came to Italye.

This Pyrrhus was descended of the line of Achilles. This was the first
battle that the Romans The first battle that the romans waged with
forrayn enemy.
waged with any foraine enemy. To this battle was Publius Valerius Leuinus
sent: who when he had apprehended the espyes of Pirrhus, he willed that they
should be led through the camp, and that all the army should be showed to
them, and so be dismiste, to the end they might recount to Pirrhus how the
The stoutnes of the romans.
Romans did demean them selves in all points. Soon after the armies joined
battle, and Pyrrhus was at the point to have fled, had not his Elephantes
been, through Pyrrhus overcame the romans, by means of his Elephantes.
whose means he got the victory: of whom the Romans (for that they had
not earste seen, such bestes) were dismayed and stood in fear.

How be it the night fynished their skyrmishe for that time. Leuinus the
Consul fled that night: Leunius the Consul fled.
and Pirrhus took prisonners about ^ thousand and eyghte hundredth Romans,
whom he entreated ve^ye honorably, and such as were ^aine in the battle,
he buried, whom when he saw they were all wounded in the fore parts, and
after they were dead, keeping still their Pyrrhus his princely behauyour.
grim lokes, which while they lived they yet had, as one agaste at the
sight, lifting up his hands to the skies, he said: were it my chance
Worthy commendation of the Romans.
(quod he) to have such souldioures as these were, I could easily within
short while conquer all the whole world. After this, Pyrrhus associated unto
him the Samnites, the Lucanes and the Brutians, and marched so forward toward
Rome despoiling all as he went with fire and sword. He prayed through all
Campania, and came to Preneste which was dista^t but.xviii. miles from Rome,
then retired he back again to Campania for dreede of the Consuls, who came
with a great army against him. The Romans then sent their legates to
Pirrhus to entreat about the ransomynge of their prisoners, whom he received
honorably, and sent to Rome such prisoners as he had, without receiuinge any
ransom for them. And among the residewe of the Roman Legates, Pyrrhus was
so much affectyoned toward one Fabricius, that where as he understood the
said Fabricius to be but a very poor man, he proffered to give him the fourths
part of his kingdom, if that he would forsake How dear the Romans esteemed
their country.
Rome, and come to him. But Fabricius refused that his offer, Where upon
Pyrrhus not a little meruailinge at the Romans, sent the chiefest of all his
band, one called Cyneas on embassade to Rome, Pyrrhus prayed peace.
to entreat for peace, upon indifferent conditions, so that Pyrrhus might still
detayne that part of Italye which he had subdued by battle, which profer of
peace misliked the Romans: and word was sent back to Pyrrhus from the
Senate, that unless he would depart forth of Italy, he could in no wise have
peace with the Romans. Then the Romans The stout answer of the romans.
commanded that all those which Pyrrhus had taken prisoners, should be reputed
as infamed persons, for that they would be taken prisoners The severity of the
Romans.
when they might have defended the^ selves by force of arms: And more over,
that they should not again be restored to their former estate, until such
time as they brought with them the like spoils of their ennemies. With this
answer returned Worthy praise of enemies mouths.
the Legate of Pirrhus: of whom when Pyrrhus demanded what manner of place
Rome was, he answered that he had there seen a country of kings: affirming
that in manner every one there, was such a one, as Pirrhus alone was counted
to be at Epirus, and through all Greece. The^ there were sent forth against
Pyrrhus, Publius Sulpitius and Decius: who were then Consuls. In a skirmish Pub.
Sul. and Decius Consuls sent against Pyrrhus.
which he made against them, Pyrrhus was wounded, his Elephantes slain, and
of his army he lost twentye thousand. There were slain of the Romans
only v. M. Thus was Pyrrhus discomfitedde. Pyrrhus put to fiyght.
The year after, Fabricius was sent forth against Pyrrhus: This was he, whom
before among the other Fabricius sent against Pyrrhus.
Legates of the Romans, Pyrrhus could by no means allure to forsake Rome and
come to him, upon promise to depart with the fourth part of his kingdom unto
him. When he and king Pyrrhus had pitched their tents near the one to the
other, Pyrrhus his Physician came by night to Fabricius, offering that he would
destroy Pirrhus with poison, if Fabricius would give him any thing for his
labor: whom Fabritius The Romans hated treson.
apprehended, and caused to be bound and carried to Pyrrhus, and to be
dedeclared unto him what things his Physician had conspired against him.
Where at the king all agaste said. Undoubtedly this is that Fabricius (quod
he), who with more difficulty can be made to forsake honesty, then the Sun
can be stopte to run his course. And so the king departed into Sicilie.
Fabritius after Pyrthus went into Sicilie. Fabritius triumphed.
that he had subdued the Samnites and the Lucanes trpumphed. Afterward, Marcus
Curious Dentatus and Cornelius Lentulus being then Consuls, were sent forth
against Pirrhus, Curious fought the battle with him. He slew his army, he
drove him to Tarentum, and Pyrrhus discomfyted.
sacked his tents. He slew that day of his enemies three and twentye
thousand. Curious Dentatus tryumphed in his Consulship: he brought Elephantes
first brought to Rome.
four Elephants to Rome: which were the first that ever were there. Not
long after, Pirrhus departed from Tarentum, and at Argos Pyrthus slain
a city of Greece he was slain. When Caius Fabritius Luscinus, and Caius
Claudius Cinna were consulles, which was in the year after the foundatyon of
the city of Rome, four hundredth three skore and one, ambassadonres were sent
forth Legates forth of Alexandria sent to Rome.
of Alexandria by Ptolomeus too Rome, to join frendshyp and amyty with the
Romans: which thing they obtained. Whilst that Quintus Gulo, and Caius
Fabius Pictor were consuls, the Picentines stirred up war against the
Romans, Pub. Sem. and Ap. Clau. Consuls.
but they were overcome by Publius Sempronius and Appius Claudius, (which were
next co^suls) and triumphed over them. About this time, the Romans The cities
Ariminum and Benenentu^ built by the Romans. Mar. Attili. Regu. and Lu-Iuni.
Libo Consuls.
built the cities Ariminum in France, and Beneuentum in Samnio: when Marcus
Atti. Regu. and Lu. Iu. Libe were consuls, war was procilamed against the Sale^.
in Apulia: The Brundusians were vanquished, The Brundusians and the city taken.
and their City won: and triumph was had over them again.

In the. CCCC.lxxviii. year after the buildinge of Rome, the name and renoume
of the Romans became now famous, and yet had they never waged any battle
forth of Italy. To the end therefore that they might understand what power
they were able to make, there was a muster A m^^^er again in Rome
had, and the names of the Romans were taken: who being nombred by the pols,
amounted to.cc. xc.ii. M. 334. citizens, all he it sith the first foundation
of the city, wars had at no time ceased: The^ was the The first battle
which the romans waged against the Carthaginiens was in the 480. year after
the buyl dynge of the city, and lasted xx^^. years without intermissyon.
first battle attempted against the people of Affricke: Appius Claudius and
Quintus Fuluius being then Consuls: battle was fought against them in
Sicille: where as Appius Claudius triumphed over them, and over Hieron king of
Sicilie.

In the year following Martus Valerius, Appi. Clau. and Quin. Full. Consulles.
Mar. Vale. and Octacil. Consuls.
and Octacillus being then Consuls, the Romans wrought very great
enterpryses. For why, the Taurominatanes, and the Catanenses, and besides
them, fiftye other cities, were received under obediens.

In the third year after, preparation for war was made against Hieron in
Sicilie. But he, together with Wax pretended against Hieron.
the reside we of his Nobilitye, made peace with the Romans, and gave unto
them in consideration thereof, CC. talentes of silver. The Affricanes were
ouercom in Sicilie, which The second triumph over the Affricans
was the secon^de time that the Romans triumphed over them.

In the fifthe year after that the Romans first waged battle against the
Afers, (Caius Duillius, and Cneus Cornelius Asina being Ca. Duil. and Cne. Cor.
Asi. Consuls The first battle which the romans waged on the sea.
Consuls,) they fought upon the sea: Against which battle, they had
prepared light ships, which they called Foystes. The Consul Cornelius was
deceived by a train. But Duillius fought the battle out, and overcame the
captain of the Carthaginiens. He took.xxxi. ships. He sonk The Carthaginiens
dyscomfyted.
xviii. He took.vii. M. men prisoners, and slew.iii. M. There was never
victory more acceptable to the Romans, then this was. For where before they
had showed them selves to be invincible upon the land, they had now also
experime^ted that they were of great force upon the sea, when Caius Aquilius
Florus, and Lucius Scipio were, Consulls, Scipio wan Caius Aqui. Flo. and Lu.
Sci. Co^suls. Corsica and Sardinia won.
Corsica, and Sardinia, and led with him from thence many thousand prisoners,
and triu^phed. Lucius Ma^lius Volso, and Marcus Attilius Regulus, being
Consuls, war was again tra^sposed Luci. Man. Vol. and Mar. Atti. Regu. Consuls.
into Afric against Hamilcar a captain of the Carthaginie^s: This battle was
also fought upon the sea The second battle on the sea.
and Hamilcar was discomfyted. For when he had lost.lxiiii. ships, he retired
back. The Romans lost in that battle.xxii. ships: but when they were A great
over throw of the Carthagini. Clipea yielded to the Romans.
arrived in Afric, Clipea the chefest City in Affricke was yealded up to
them. The Consulles then marched forward toward Carthage: and when they had
despoiled many Towns, Ma^lius returned to Rome, and brought Manlius returned
with victory to Rome.
with him.xxvii. M. prisoners. Attilius Regulus remaininge still in Affricke,
prepared his army to withstand the force of the Affricanes: and Regulus
remained in Affricke. Regulus worthy acts.
joining battle with iii. captains of the Carthaginiens at ones, he obtained
the victory. He slew.xviii. M. of his enemies. He took prisoners five
thousand men, and eyghte Elephantes. He received under obeysaunce lxxiii.
Cities. The Carthaginiens when they were thus dyscom^ited, desired peace of the
Romans, which Peace desired by the Carthagini.
when Regulus would not grant, but upon straight conditions, they desired aid
succoure of the Lacedaemonians: to The Carthaginiens desired aid of the
Lacedaemonians.
whom ye Lacedaemonians sent Xantippus with a band of men, through whose
means, Regulus was overcome, so that of all the army of the Romans, there
eskaped but ii. M. only, xv. M. were taken prisonners, A great over throw of
the Romans.
and their captain Regulus al so: xxx. M. were slain. Regulus himself was
cast into prison. The^ were Regulus taken and cast into prison. Mar. Emili.
Pau. and Ser. Full. Co^suls.
Marcus Emilius Paulus, and Seruius Fuluius the nobler created Co^suls: both
which passed over into Affricke with a navy of.iii. C. sail. First they
overcame the Afers in Battle renewed by the Romans against the Cartha. The
third battle on the sea. A great disco^ fyture of the Carthagini.
battle upon the sea: Emilius sonke a hundredth and four ships of his
enemies. He took xxx. together with the men that fought in them. He slew and
took prisonners besides.xv. M. of his ennemies, and enriched his souldioures
with a^ exceadinge great spoil. And at that time, had all Affricke been
subdued, had not there is chanced so great a dearth, that the souldioures could
not any longer remain there: As the Consulles returned A great derth in
Affricke.
home with their victorious navy, they suffered shypwracke about the coaste of
Sicilie. Whereas there a rose so great a tempest, that of.iiii. The Romans
(...) greatly by shipwreck
C. lxxriiii. ships, uneath lxxx. could be saved. Which tempest was so
terryble, that the like thereof had not at any time before been heard of,
upon the sea. Nevertheless the Romans forthwyth renewed two hundredth The
invincible and stout courage of the Romans.
new ships, (whose minds were not a whit dismayed with those former
mishappes.) Then were created Consuls, Cneus Seruilius Cepio, and Caius
Sempronius Blesus Cne. Serui. Ce. and. Ca. Sem. Bie. Consuls.
who with two hundredth and.lx. ships, took their byage toward Affricke where
they wan certain cities. And as they returned thence homeward The fourth
battle on the sea.
(bringing a great spoil with them) they suffered shipwreck, Whereupon they
suffered shipwreck, whereupon The romans. sustained shipwreck again.
the Romans finding them selves agreued with these continual and often
damages which they sustained upon the sea, the Senators thought good, to give
over that kind of battle, The romans purposed to give over battle on the
sea. Luci. Ceci. Me. and Caius Furi. Pla. Consuls.
and to keep no mo but lx. ships only, to defend Italy wythall. When Lucius
Cecilius Metellus, and Caius Furius Placidus were Consuls, Metellus overcame in
Sicilie, the captayn of the Carthaginiens which came against them with a
hundredth and.xxx. Elephantes, and a great power of men besides. He slew The
Cartha. dyscomfyted.
xx. M. men, and got.xxvi. Elephants. The residue of his ennemies which were
skatred and dispersed among the Numidians, (whom he had to aid him,) he got
together and brought the^ prisoners with great triu^ph to Rome and as they
went, the herd of Elephants, which were a. C. and.xxx. in number ouerlayde
all the way. The The Carthaginiens after these so great mischances, required
Regulus a captain of the Romans (whom The Carthasente regulus a romayne to
^ntreate for peace.
before they had taken prysonner,) that he would goo to Rome, and get peace
for them of the Romans, and also exchau^ge of prisoners. But Regulus when he
was coe to Rome, and was brought into the Senate, did in no point behave
himself as a Roman, affirming that from the day that he first fell into the
hands of the Carthaginiens, he gave over clean ye desire to be any longer a
Romayne: in so much that he refused the co^pani of his own wife at Rome: and
persuaded the Romans that peace should by no means be granted to the
Carthaginiens: alledgynge that their minds were so quaylte with those so many
mischaunces, that they were quyte void of hope, that they should ever be able
to recover again their former estate.

And as for him, he was not worthy to be so much esteamed (being now very
aged) that for his cause, and the redeminge of a few others which A notable
example of love toward his country.
were detained prisonners, at Carthage, so many thousand of their ennemies
should be restored. Which request of his, at last the Romans assented unto.
In so much that they would not give ear to the petytyon of any which came
from Carthage, to entreat them for peace. Regulus sone after, returned to
Carthage: whom the Romans offered to detain still at Rome. But he denied
that he would remain in that city, in which he could not now have the name
of an honest Citezen, since that he had so long been among the Carthaginiens.
Whom (after his return to Carthage,) the Carthaginiens with most cruel
torments Regulus put to death.
put to death. When Publius Claudius Pulcher, and Caius Iunius were consuls,
Claudius in an evil Pub. Clau. Pulcher, and Ca. Iunius Consuls. Theromains
dyscomfyted.
time, with no less evil success, loughte a vattayle: and was overcome by
the Carthaginiens. For setting forth with two hundredth and twenty sail, he
fled with.xxx. shyps only, lxxxx. were taken together with the men which fought
in them: and the residue were sonke. There were besides, xx. thousand of the
romans taken prisoners. In like manner also The romaye navy perished by
shipwreck
the other Consul lost his nauye by shipwreck: how be it he saved his
army, for that the shore was near. At what time Caius Luctacius Catulus, and
Aulius Posthumous Ca. Luctatius Catu. and. aul. Posthu. albi. Consuls.
Albinus were consulles, (which was in the.xxiii. year after that battle was
first waged with the carthaginiens,) battle was committed to the guiding and
orderinge of Catalus against the Africanes: who took his viage into Sicilie,
with three hundredth sail: against whom the Afers had prepared.cccc. sail
ready furnished. This Catulus was some what sickly when he took shypping. For
why, he was wounded in a battle a little before. The battle was fought over
against Lylibeu^ a city of Sicilie, with passing great valiantness of the
Romans. They took lxxiii. of the Carthaginiens ships: They sanke a.c. and.
xxv, they took The great overthrow of the Carthaginians.
xxxii. M. men prisoners: and slew.xiii. M an infinite deal of gold and
silver brought they to Rome: and of the Romayne nauye, only.xii. ships
miscarried, which were sonke. This battle was done the.vi. of the Ides of
March. The Carthaginiens forth with desired peace, and it was granted Peace
granted to the Carthaginiens.
to them. Such prisonners as the Carthaginiens had taken of the romans were
restored. And they desired that they might ransom such prisoners as the
romans had taken of theirs. The Senate therefore commanded that such of the
carthaginiens, as were prisonners in the common holds, should be delivered and
sent home without any ransom: and such of them as private persons had taken
prisoners, should be dismyste also: and that their ransom should be
answered (to those which took them) forth of the common tresorye, The great
largess of the romans.
rather then the carthaginiens should be charged therewith. After this, were Q.
Luctatius, and Aulus Manlius created consuls. They waged battle against
Falisci: which had been some Q. luctatius and Aulus Man. Consuls.
time a welthye city of Italye. This city they wan, within.vi. days after
Falisci besieged and won.
they laid the assault thereto. They flew there.xv. M. men: to the residue
they granted peace, but they deprived them of the one moitye of their lands.

The third book of the breuiary of Eutropius.
WHen the battle against the Carthaginiens was thus determined, which had
continued by the space of.xxii. years, the Romans (who were now become
famous,) sent Legates to Ptolomeus king of Egypt, proferynge to aid him,
Aid proffered by the Romans to Ptolomeus.
for that Antiochus king of Syria, warred against him: he thanked the
Romans for their gentleness: how be it he received no aid of them, for
that the battle was all ready finyshed. About the same time Hiero the mighty
and puissant king of Sicilie, came to Rome, to behold Corn given among the
romans by Hiero.
the Enterludes there, and distributed among the people of Rome, two hundredth
thousand bushels of wheat Lucius Cornelius Lentulus, and Fuluius Lu. Corn.
Len. and Full. Flac. Con.
Flaccus being Consuls (during whose reign Hiero came to Rome) battle was
waged against the Ligurians within Italy: and triumph Battle against the
Ligurians.
was had over them. At that time all so, the Carthaginiens attempted to renew
battle: and persuaded in like War renewed by the Carthaginiens.
manner the Sardinians to rebel, who should have been subject to the Romans,
for as much as peace was concluded between them and the Romans upon the same
condition. Nevertheless they sent their Ambassadoures to Rome, and confyrmed
Peace granted to the Carthaginiens. Ci. Mau. Tor. and Ca. Atti. Balbus
Consuls. A triumph over the Sar.
the peace again. When Titus Manlius Torquatus, and Caius Attilius Balbus were
Consulles, the Romans triumphed over the Sardinians. Then the Romans
concluded peace with all natyons, so ye now they had no manner batel in hand:
which thing never happened unto them sith the first buildinge of the city of
come, but at one time only: (which was) duringe the raygne of Numa Pompilius.
When Lucius Posthumous Albinus, and Fuluius Cneus Centumalus were consulles Lu.
Posthu. Albi. and Full. Cueus. Cen. Consuls.
they waged battayl against the Illyrians: and when they had taken many
cities there, the kings yielded them selves. And that was the first tryumphe
that the romans ever The first triumph over y^ Illyrians.
had over the Illyrians. During the time that Emilius was Consul, great
armies of the Frenchmen were Emilius consul. Italy invaded by the Frenchmen.
come over the Alps. How be it, all Italy stood together in the defense of
the romans. For as Fabius the Historician does report, (who was himself
present at that battai,) there were eight hundredth thousand men in a readiness
for to have fought that battle. Nevertheless the Consul him self ended
that battle with great dexteritye of fortune. He slew in that battle forty
thousand ennemies: and there was a tryumphe decreed unto Emilius. A few years
after, a battayl was fought against Emilius tryumphed.
the Frenchmen within Italye, and it was done by Marcus Claudius Marcellus,
and Cneus Cornelius Scipio, being then consulles. At Battle against the
Frenchmen. Mar. Clau. Mar. and Cne. Corn. Sci. Consuls.
that same time, Marcellus having with him but a very small troop of horsemen,
slew the king of the Frenchmen (called Viridomarus,) with his own hands.
After he, and Viridomarus king of the Frenchmen slain by Marcellus. Millayn
conquered.
his fellow consul, slew great armies of the Frenchmen. He conque^rd
Millaine. He brought an excea^yng great spoil with him home to Rome, and in
his triumph he fastened ^he spoils which he had gotten of Marcellus tryumphed.
the French king, to a long staves ^nde, and so bare it upon his own
^houlders. In the time that Mar^us Minutius, and Publius Corne^ius Mar. Min.
and Pub. Corn. Consuls. War with y^ Istrians.
were Consulles, war was ^aged sore against the Istryans, for that they had
robbed and despoyled the ships of the Romans, which served them with grayn.
And they were quyte subdued. The self same year, the Carthaginiens waged The
second battayl of the Carthagi. against the Romans, in the 560. year after
the city was buylt, which duted by the space of.xvi. years. Saguntum assaulted
by Annibal.
their second battayl against the Romans, by Anniball their capytaine, who
attempted to assault Saguntum a city of Spayn, which was in league and
friendship which the Romans. This Annibal was then of the age of.xx. years,
and had in his army a hundredth and fifty thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand
fotemen. The Romans sent ambassadoures to him, to will him to cease from
battle. But he would not speak with the Legates: whereupon the Romans
sent likewise to Carthage, How loathe the Romans were to use force.
desiring that commandment might be given to Anniball, that he should no
more war upon such people as were friends and in league with the Romans.
But they has shreud answers given them by the Carthaginiens. In the mean
season the Saguntines were famishedde, whom Anniball (after he had got The
Saguntines famishe by Annibal.
the conquest over them) afflyeted with extreme punishments. Upon this,
Publius Cornelius Scipio, went into Spain with an army, and Tiberius Two
armies sent forth by the romans.
Se^pronius into Sicilie with an other, war was proclaimed against the
Carthaginiens. Anniball (leauinge his brother Asoruball in Spain,) himself
passed over Pyreneus, making his way over the Alps: at which place as yet,
no way lay. It was reported that he had in Annibal passed the alps.
his army which he brought with him into Italy, lxxx. M. footemenne, xx. M.
horsemenne, and, xxxvii. Elephantes. In this space, diverse Ligurianes and
Frenchmen had assocyated them selves with Annibal. Sempronius Gracchus as soon
as he understood that Annibal was come into Italy, he conveyed his army over
Ariminus forth of Sicilie. Pub. Cor. Scipio first encountered with Annibal: his
Scipio disco^fyted by Anniball.
men were put to flight, and himself returned wounded to his tents. Se^pronius
Gracchus in like manner fought with him at the riner Trebia Sempronius Gracchus
dyscomfyted by Anniball.
and was discomfited. Whereupon diverse in Italy for fear yielded the^ selves to
Annibal. And as he departed thence to Thuscia, he met with Flaminius the
Consul whom he slew. Flaminius the Consul slain by Annibal.
There were at that time.xxv. M. Romans slain. The residue fled. After these
things, Q. Fab. Max. was sent by the Romans against Annibal. He by tracting
the time and dalying brake the violence and force of Annibal: and efcsones
finding opportunity, set upon him and gave him the over throw. In the.ccccc.
and. xleyere after that the city of Rome was built, Lucius Anniball sustained
the overthrow by Q. Fa. max.
Emilius, and Publius Terentius Varro, were sent against Anniball, and
succeaded Fabius, which Fabius advertised both the Consulles that they could
not otherwise Lu. Emilius and Publi. Tere^. Varro Consuls.
overcome Anniball (who was a hot and a hastye warryoure,) but only by
deferring and prolongynge the battle. How be it, Varro very rashlye:
contrary to the mind of the other Consul joined the battle, and fought at
the Town called Can in Apulia: Whereas both the Consulles were overcome by
Anniball. There were slain in that battle Both the Consuls over come by
Anniball.
three hundredth Africanes: and a great part of Anniball his army was wounded.
But no battle that The greatest discomfyture that ever the Romans endured by
the Carthagini.
the Romans ever hadbe with the Carthaginiens, endamaged them so much as
this.

For why, there were slain in that battle, Emilius Paulus then consul, and
twentye other of the order of Consulles and Pretoures: of the Senators there were
taken and slain.xxx. noble men, to the number of three hundredth: soldioures to
the noumber of.xl. M. and.iii. M. and five hundredth gentlemen besides. For all
which great mischaunce, there was not yet any one among the Romans which
made any mentyon of The great stoutnesse of the romans.
peace making with the Carthaginiens. The bondmen in Rome were made free, and
appointed for souldioures: The bondme^ in Rome manumist.
which thing never happened erste there. After that battle, many cities in
Italye which before were under the obeysaunce of the Romans, fell from them
to Anniball.

Then Annibal proffered the Romans that they should redeame such Annibal
proffered the Romans to redeem their prisoners. The great stoutnesse of the
romans.
souldioures of theyrs, as he had taken prysonners. To whom the Romans and
the Senators answered that those were not to be accounted as necessary
citizens, which when they were armed, would be taken prysonners: upon which
answer, Anniball slew them all with sundry punishments, and sent home to
Carthage three bushels full of rings, which he pluckte of from the hands A
passing great murder of the romans.
of the Gentlemen and Senatoures, and souldioures of the Romans. Asdrubal
also his brother whom he left behind him in Spain with a great army (to
the end he might bring all that country in subjection to the Africanes,)
sustained an overthrow by the two Scipios which were captains of the
Romans, he Asdrubal ouercom by the ii. Scipioes.
lost in that battle.xxxv. M. men, of which the Romans took prisonners, x.
M. and slew.xx. M. But the Carthaginiens to strengthen him again, sent him
out of hand.xii. M. footmen, and. iiii M. horsemen, and xx. Elephants. In
the.iiii. year after that Anniball invaded Italye, Marcus Claudius Marcellus
then Consul Mar. Clau. Marcel. Consul.
fought against him with passing good fortune at Nola a city of Ca^pania.
Annibal had by this time gotten many cities there from the Romans in Apulia,
Calabria, and among the Brutians. At that time, Phillip king of Macedonie by
his Legates (whom he sent to Anniball) proffered that he Phillyp proffered to
aid Anniball against the Romans.
would aid him against the Romans: Upon condition that after he had overcome
the Romans, he might in like manner have assistence of Anniball against the
Grecians. But the Romans by chance apprehended the Legates of king Phillip,
and understood by them the whole matter. Where upon, they willed Marcus
Valerius Leuinus to go into Macedonie: and Titus Manlius Torquatus then being
Proconsul, into Sardinia: for that Province also through the alluring of
Anniball, was fallen from the Romans. And thus at one Battle waged in four
several places by the Romans.
time, fought the Romans in four several places rogether. In Italy against
Annibal. In Spain against his brother Asdrubal. In Macebonie against Phillip.
In Sardinia against the Sardinians, and an other Asdruball a Carthaginien. This
Asdrubal was taken by Titus Manlius the Proconsull, who was sent into Sardinia
against him: he also slew there xii. M. of his enemies, and took a M. and D
prysonners. Thus was Sardinia subdued by the Romans, and Manlius as a
conqueror brought Sardinia sub dued by the romans.
Asdruball and those other prisoners with him to Rome. In this while, Philip
was also overcome by Leuinus in Macedonie. And Asdrubal the Phyllip over come.
second brother to Annibal, and Mago his third brother were by the ii Scipiocs
Asdrubal and mago overcome.
overcome in Spain. In the tenth year after yt Anniball invaded Italy, at what
time. Pub. Sul. and Cne. Full. were consuls, Annibal aproched with in. 4. miles
of the city of Rome: and his Pub. Sul. and Cne. Fulu^us Consuls.
horsemen were come to the very gates. But forthwith for dread of the Consuls
which came against him with a great host, he retired back to Ca^pania. Soon
after, his brother Asdruball flewe hothe the Scipioes in Spain: which by the
space of many The.ii. Scipio^ slain by Asdruball in Spain.
years had been conqueroures there. Nevertheless, their army remained
whole. For why, they were rather beguiled by train, then vanquished by
manhood. At this time, a great part of Sicilie was recovered by Marcellus the
Consul: which country the Afers began as than to possess: and from Siracusa
the most famous City thereof, he brought an exceadinge great spoil to Rome.
Leuinus made league and joined friendship with Philippus Macedonie: Frendshyp
joined with Phillip by Leuinus.
and with diverse other cities in Greece besides: and with Attalus king of Asia.
And by the way as he went marching toward Sicilie, he discomfyted and took
prisoner Annones a captain of the Carthaginiens, at the Annones taken prisoner.
city Agrigentum, together with the city it self: and sent him to Rome among
those other prisoners. There were yielded up unto him.xl. cities. He
conquered.xxvi. other cytyes. Thus when all Sicilie was recovered, and
Macedonie in such sort shaken and quailde, he returned to Rome with great
renown. Afterward Anniball assaultinge Cneus Cneus Fuluius slain by Annibal.
Fuluius at unawares being then in Italye, slew him and viii. M. men besides.
In the mean space, Publius Pub. Corn. Scipio sent into Spain.
Cornelius Scipio son of Publius Scipio, was sent into Spayn: where (after
that the two Scipioes were slain,) no captain of the Romans was left. He
waged battle there, being but of the age of.xxiiii. years. One who of all
the Romans that were either in his days or any Great commendation of Scipio.
time since, might worthily be adjudged the chiefest.

He wan Carthage in Spayn, where the Affricanes had all their gold and
Silver, and furniture for war Carthage in Spayn won.
remayninge. Furthermore he sent to Rome, the most noble hostages which he
had received of the Spaniardes. He took also prisonner, Mago Annibal his
brother, and sent him to mago sent prisoner to rome
Rome with the residew. There was great mirth demeaned at Rome after these
news. Scipio restored to their parents, their sons whom he had received for
pledges before. Where upon, in manner all the Spanyardes with one assente
took part with Scipio against Anniball. After these things, he subdued and
put to flight Asdruball Anniball his brother, and got there a great spoil.
Asdrubal discomfited.
In this mean space, Quintus Fabius Maximus the Consul, (being as then in
Italye) recovered Tarentum, in which were then remaining Tarentum recovered.
great armies of Annibal: and there he slew also Carthalon captain to
Anniball. He sold.xxv. thousand prisoners, and divided the spoil among
Carthalo^ slain.
his souldioures, and the money which he received for the men which he sold,
he brought to the common tresor of the Romans. Then many cities of the
Romans which earste had yielded them selves to Anniball, did again submit
them selves to Fabius Maximus. The year following, Scipio wroughte notable
feats Scipio, his good success in his affairs
in Spain: there he (what through the aid of his brother Lucius Scipio, and
what through his own valiantness,) recovered.lxx. cities. Howbeit they had
evil success in that battle which they fought in Italy. For why Claudius
Marcellus being then consul) Clau. mar. consul slain.
was slain there by Anniball. In the third year after yt, Scipio went again
into Spain, and atcheued worthy things there. He vanquished the king of Spain
in a great battle, The king of Spain dyscomfyted.
and afterward concluded frendshyp with him, without requyryng any pledges of
him after he was subdued, whereas all others used after they had vanquysht
any, to take pledges of them whom they had so overcome. Then Anniball
fearing that he should not be able any longer to detayne Spain against
Scipio, or to wythstande his force, sent for his Asdrubal sent for forth of
Spain.
brother Asdruball withal his army from thence. And as Asdruball would have
passed that same way as Anniball did forth of Spain into Italy ward, he fell
into the embushme^tes which of set purpose were laid for him by Appius
Claudius Nero, and Asdruball slain.
Marcus Liuius Salinator: at which place manfully fightinge and defendyng him
self, he was slain: and his great army which he had with him, was al
together taken either or slain: and a great quantitye of treasure was brought
to Rome. after those things, Anniball began clean to despair of the success
of the battle: and courage accrewed and grew to the Romans. Whervppon they
sent for Publius Coruelius Scipio Scipio sent for forth of Spain.
forth of Spain: who came to Rome with great glory. When Quintus Cecilius
and Lucius Valerius were consuls, all those cities among Q. Cecilius and L.
Valerius Consuls.
the Brutians, which before fell from the Romans to Annibal, yielded them
selves again to the Romans. In the.xiiii. year after that Annibal had
invaded Italye, Scipio who had luckely atcheued things in Scipio created Consul.
Spain: was created consul, and sent into Affricke. This Scipio was adjudged
to be inspired with some divine spirit. In so much that men thought he had
conference with the celestial powers. He fought in Afric against Annon a
captain of the Carthaginiens and slew his army. In the second battayl he took
his tents, and.iiii. M. and.v. C. soldiers, and slew.xi. M. He took Siphar.
the king of Numidie prisoner, who had joined himself in aid with the Afers:
and invaded his tents and sackte Syphar king of Numidie take prisoner.
them: and sent Siphar together with the most noble men of Numidie to Rome
and an infinite spoil: which thing so sone as it was understood, all Italy
well nygh forsook Annibal, whom the Carthaginiens wylled to return and
succoure Affrycke, Annibal willed to retourn home into Afrycke.
which as then Scipio despoyled. Thus in the.xvii. year all Italy was
delivered from the terror of Anniball. The Legates of the Carthaginiens
desired peace of Scipio: and by him they were sent to Rome to the Peace
desired by the Carthaginiens.
Senate. Truce was made with the^ duringe the space of.xl. days: until such
time as they might repair to Rome, and return from thence again. In
consideratyon where of, they gave the Romans.xxx. thousand pounds. And when
they had exponed their cause to the Senate* answer was made to them, that
according to the advice of Scipio, peace should be granted them, referryng
the matter wholly to Scipio: by who^ it was granted upon these condityons.
That they should give the Romans five C. thousand pounds of silver: and that
they should moreover, The conditions of peace with the Carthaginiens.
rastore to the Romans such prisoners as they had taken of theyrs, and such
as were fled from the Romans to them.

While these things were in talk, Annibal as he returned into Africa, infringed
the league, for he and his army wroughte diverse things by The lege broken by
Anniball.
the way as they went, contrary to the peace concluded upon, and as
enemies. The Legates of the Carthaginyens were apprehended by the Romans: as
they returned from Rome.

But they were by the commandment of Scipio straightway dismiste again. Not
long after, Annibal himself being sore wearyed with those contynuall
battles, desired peace: Annibal desired peace.
which when it came to be treated of, it was granted upon the same
conditions as it was before: and to the precedent conditions of payment of.v.
M. pounds of silver, was annexed the penaltye of paymente of a C. M. pounds
besides, for that new breche of league by him committed. The conditions
displeased the Carthaginiens. Where upon they willed Annibal to fight it out.
War was waged against the Carthaginiens, The condityons of the peacemisliked
the Carthaginiens.
by Scipio, and Masinissa king of the Numidians, who had joined friendship
with the Romans. Annibal sent three espies to the tents of Scipio: which
when they were apprchended by the Romans, Scipio commanded they should be
led about through the tents, and that all his army should be showed them.
Then that they should be feasted, and so dismissed, to the end they might recount
to Anniball, what they had seen among the romans. In the mean time,
preparaunce of battle was made by the captains on cche party, such as
uneath any man could ever remember the like. At which time both those
expert men of war and valiaunte captains led forth their armies into the
field. Scipio returned conqueror: and at that time had he well nyghe taken
Anniball greatly disco^lyted.
Anniball him self also: who at the first eskaped and fled with a great
company of horsemen: but being pursued, they were all slain, saving.xv. Annibal
sustaind a great over throw.
only. And at the last, he fled but with iiii. alone. There was found in the
tents of Anniball, xx. M. pounds of silver, and of gold eyghte hundredth
Peace graueted to the Carthaginiens.
thousand: of other stuff great store. After that skirmishe, peace was
concluded with the Carthaginiens: Scipio returned to Rome, and with Scipio
tri^^phed and was called Affricanus. The second battayl with the Carthaginie^s
finished.
great glory triumphed: and from that time was he called Africanus. Thus was
the second battle with the Carthagidiens finished in the.xix. year after the
first commencement thereof. () reversed

The fourth book of the Breuiary of Eutropius.
WHen the battle against the Carthaginiens was finyshed, there ensued
battle in Macedonie against Phillip who was kig there. In the.ccccc. and.li.
year after ye buildinge of the City Titus Quintius Flaminius was sent against
king Titus Quintius Flaminius sent against Phillip.
Phillip, and had good success. He granted peace to Phillip upon these
conditions: That he should not make war upon any of those cities which were by
ye Romans received under Peace granted to Phillip
protection: y^ he should moreover restore al such Romans as he had taken
prisoners, and such as had fled also from the^ to him: and that he should keep
but l. ships only: the residue of his fleet he should deliver up to the
Romans. Furthermore, that he should yearly by the space of.x. years, pay to
the romans.iiii. M. pounds of silver, and deliver him his son Demetrius for
a pledge, for performance of these couenauntes. Titus Quintius waged battle
also against the Lacedaemonians, and vanquished their captain Battle against
the Lacedaemonians.
Nabides: who submitted himself to Quintius upon what condityons he would. And
as he returned Nabides yielded himself.
thence homeward with great glory, there were led before his charyotte, the
worthy hostages which he had gotten, (that is to wete) Demetrius son to king
Phillip, and Armenes Nabides his son: After that the Macedonian battle was
finyshed, there ensued war in Siria against War in Syria.
king Antiochus: During the time that Publius Cornelius Scipio and Marcus
Attilius Glabrio were Consuls. Pub. Corn. Scipio, and M. Attilius Glabrio
Consuls.
Annibal took part with Antiochus, forsakynge his own country for fear
least that his renuynge of battle might seem to have been a breche of the
league before made between his country men and the Romans. Marcus Attilius
Glabria had good success in Achaia: He invaded and took the tents of king
Antiochus by night* and put him to flight: and for that Phillip aided the
romans against Antiochus, he delivered unto him his son Demetrius.
Demetrius restored to his farther king Phillyp.
when Lucius Cornelius Scipio and Caius Lelius were consuls, Scipio who was
also surnamed Africanus was sent unto his brother Lucius Cornelius Scipio,
then consul, to aid him against Antiochus: Anniball who was with Antiochus on
his side, was dyscomfited in battle upon the sea. Afterward, Antiochus Annibal
discomfyted in battayl on the sea.
himself was put to flyghte in a very great battle, by Cornelius Scipio the
Consul at Sipilus Magnesia a City of Asia. Eumenes king Antiochus put to flight.
Attalus his brother, who builded Eumenia in Phrigia, aided ye Romans in ye
battle. There were slain in that battle on king Antiochus his side, l. M.
footmen, and.iiii. M horsemen. Then king Antiochus desired peace, which the
Senate granted him upon Antiochus desired peace.
the same conditions as they did tofore, (though he was now overcome:) which
was that he should avoid forth of Europe and Asia, and meddle no farther but
within ye precinet of Taurus: Moreover ye he should give to the Romans.x. M.
talentes, and.xxx. pledges for thassurans of his promise. And finally that he
should deliver Anniball to them, who had been the only procurer of ye battle.
Then the Senate gave to Eumenesal The liberality of the Romans.
those cities of Asia which Antiochus had lost in battle: and diverse other
cities were also granted to ye Rhodians for yt they had assisted the Romans
against Antiochus. Scipio the^ returned to Rome, and with great glory
triu^phed: and obtained also a surname like as his brother had before: which
Scipio triumphed, and was called Asiaticus.
was, to be called Asi^a^^us for the subdui^g of Asia, like as his brother was
called Africanus for that he conquered Afric. When S. Posthumous Albinus and
Q. Martius Philippus were Co^suls, Marcus Fuluius triumphed over the S.
Posthumous Albinus, and Q Martius Philippus Consuls
^^etolians. As Soon as Antiochus was overcome, (Annibal fearing least he should
be delivered to the Romans) fled to Prusias king of Bythinia: at Anniball
fled to Prusias king of Bithinia.
whose hands he was required again by T Quintus Flaminius. Whereupon, when he
saw there was no remedy, but that he should come into the hands of the
Romans: he drank Annibal poysonned himself.
poysone, and so died: and lies buried at Lybissa, which is in the bor^ers of
the Nicomedienses. Sone after Phillip died also: who had both ^varred against
the Romans, and Phillip dyed.
assysted them also against Antiochus: The^ his son Perseus rebels in
Macedonie: where he had assembled a great army ready appointed and furnished
for war: whom Cotis War renewed in Macedony by Perseus king there.
king of Illiria, aided against the Romans. But the Romans had to assyst
them, Eumenes king of Asia: Atlarates king of Cappadocia: Antiochus king of
Syria, Ptolomeus king of Egipte: and Masinisla king of Numidia. But Prusias
king of Bithinia, although he had espoused the sister of Perseus, yet he
demeaned himself indifferently between both parts, helping neither of the^
both. Publius Licinius who was then Consul, was deputed captayn on the P
Licinius the Consul vanquyshed.
Romans side, and was vanquished by the king, in a great battle. Yet would
not the Romans grant the king peace when he desired it, (all though they
them selves had sustained the overthrow at his hands,) but upon condition
that he would submit him self, and all his, to the Senate and the people of
Rome. Sone after, Lucius Emilius Paulus the Consul was sent against him, L.
Emilius Paulus Consul.
and Caius Anitius the Praetor was sent into Illyria against Gentius. But
Gentius was easily overcome in one battle: and shortly after, yielded himself.
His mother, his wife, his two sons and his brother, were taken prisonners by
the Romans. And thus within the space of.xxx. days, was that battle ended.
For the Romans knew that they should have the upper hand over Gentius or ever
that they had joined battle with him. Paulus Emilius the Co^sul, fought with
Perseus the fourth Perseus overcome.
day of September and overcame him. There were then slain on Perseus his
side.xx. M. fotemen. But ye whole troop of horse men remained safe with the
king. The Romans lost in that battle a hundredth soldiers. All the cities
of Macedonie which the king possessed, submytted themselves to the Romans.
The king when he understood, ye his friends had forsaken him, yielded himself to
Paulus Perseus yielded himself to the Romans.
Emilius, by who^ he was entreted honorably, and not as a vanquished man. For
when the king would have prostrate himself at Paulus his feet, he did not only
refuse that he should so Notable clemency of Emilius.
submit himself, but placed him in a chair fast besides him. He granted ye
Macedonians and the Illyrians, yt they should from thence forward befre. And
that they should be charged with the payment but of the one moity of those
tributes and impositions which they were before assessed to pay to their
kings: To the end it might appear, that the Romans The Romans contented
minds with small lucre.
warred more for equity (and justice, the^ for avarice and desire of luere:
which words, Paulus pronounced a great assemble of people: and at that time he
desired thambassadors of sundry nations which were with him to an exceeding
sumptuous feast: affirming yt it appertained to a man to show himself not only
victorious in battle, but that it was also sitting for him to be neat and
expert in feastynge and entertaining of strangers. Sone after, he received
again under obeysaunce.lxx. cities of Epirus, which before had rebelled. He
distributed ye spoil among the soldiers. Then returned he again to Rome, in
a ship of king Perseus, which was reported to be of a marvelous greatness, so
y^ as the report went, it had.xvi. rows of ores. He triu^phed royally, carried
in a golden chariote with his.ii. sons standing on each side of him. There
werled before his chariot, the kings.ii. sons and Perseus himself being Emilius
triumphed.
of thage of.xlv. years. There followed lying in y^ triu^ph Caius Anitius, who
then also triu^phed over y^ Illirians.

Gentius and his brother, and his sons, were led before his charyot. There
came to Rome kings for the of sondrye countries to behold this sight. Among
whom were Attalus In what admiratyon the Romans were had of strangers.
and Eumenes kings of Asia, and Prusias king of Bithinia, who were received
and entreted by ye Romans very honorably: and through the permissyon and
sufferaunce of the Senate, the gifts and presents which they brought with
them, were set up in the Capitol. And Prusias committed his son Nicomedes to
the government and ordering of the Senators. In the year following, Lucius
Manlius fought a battle in Spain, with good success. And after him,
Marcellus the Consul had good chance there also. Then was the third
battle taken in hand against the Carthaginiens, in the year after The third
battle against the Carthaginiens.
the building of Rome, six hundredth and one: at which time, Lucius Manlius
Censorinus, and Marcus Manlius were Consuls: which in the.li. year after that
the second battle against them was finished. The Consuls took then their
viage to invade Carthage. Asdruball a captain of the Carthaginiens was sent
forth against them, and Famea an other of their captains had the conductynge
of the horsemen: At that time, Scipio who was neue we to Scipio Africanus, was
by the Romans deputed general of the army. Him did all the army both
reverence and fear. For why, he was a captain passing ready Notable
commendation of Scipio.
in battle, and therwithal very cyrcumspect. Through whose pollicyes the
Consuls atcheued many things very fortunately. And there was nothing that
either Asdrubal or Famea so much sought to avoid, as they did to fight against
that wing of the Roman Misinissa deceased.
army where Scipio was. About this time, died Misinissa, who was in league
with the Romans, after that he had lived.lxxxxvii. years and left behind
him.xliiii. sons. Among whom, he appointed Scipio, to distribute his
kingdom. No we when as the name and renown of Scipio waxed famous, he was
created Consul, being as yet but a young man: and was sent forth to assault
Carthage. He wan it and pluckte it Carthage assaulted by Scipio.
down to the ground. Such spoils as he found there, (which the
Carthaginiens before time had gotten at the subversion of diverse Cities,)
together with the monuments of sundry towns of Sicilie, he restored again to
those cities, from whence ye said spoils were taken: Among which, every city
knew such things as sometime had been their own. Thus was Carthage ouerthrown in
the.vii. C. year after that it was first built. Scipio Scipio merited to be
called Africanus the younger.
merited to have the name which his graundfather before him wan, (which was,
for his valiantnes and prowess to be called Affricanus the younger.) In this
mean space, one usurping falsely upon him the name of Phillip, attempted war
against ye. Romans in Macedonic: and gave Publius Iuuencius praetor of Rome,
the overthrow, who was sent against him: and Iuuencius discomfyted.
made such slaughter of his men, that ska^t he let one eskape a live of al his
army. After him, Q. Cecilius Metellus was deputed captain, and sent forth
against this false named Phillip. Who when he had slain.xxv. M. of his me^,
recovered Macedonie, and took prysonner the said Phillippe. At this time war
was also proclaimed against Corinthus, the worthiest city of all Greece, for
thal they had iniuried Corinthus over thrown.
the Legates of the Romans. Mummius the Consul wan it, and pluckte it down
to the ground. And so were there three notable triumphs Three tryumphes at ones
at Rome.
had together at one time at Rome. The one by Scipio, forth of Afric: before
whose chariot Asoruball was led. An other, by Metellus forth of Macedonie,
before whose charyotte Andriscus was led, which was that false named and
counterfaited Phillip. The third triumph was by Mu^mius over the Corinthiaus:
before whom were carried the brazen ensigns, and painted tables, and other the
ornaments of that most famous city. There was yet again another, who falfly
named himself Perseus in Macedonie: affirminge that he was son to that
other Perseus of whom we spoke before: when he had assembled an army of
bondmen, to the number of.xvii. M. men of arms he was conquered by Tremillus
the Perseus conquered by Tremillus.
Questor. At the same time, Metellus atcheued notable enterprises in Biskay
awong the Spanyardes. Quintus Pompeius succeaded him there. And not long after,
Quintus Cepio was also sent forth against one Viriatus, which waged battle in
Portugale against the Romans. But Battle in Portugale by one Viriatus
Viriatus his men, dreadinge ye force of the Romans, slew Viriatus: which
was he that had stirred up the Spaniards to war against the Romans, by the
space of xiiii. years. This Viriatus was first a shepherd, sone after, he
became a Captain among robbers and thieves: And at ye last, he stirred up
such nations to war against the Romans, that he became to be called
Protector of Spain against the Romans.

Then they who slew this Viriatus, The Romans detested treason.
demanded of Cepio the Co^sull, what reward they should have for their fact.
Who answered that it never pleased the Romans, to have any captain slain by
his own souldioures. Q. Pompeius the Consul overcome
Then was Quintus Pompeius, who was also Consul, discomfited by the citezens of
Numantia: which was the worthiest City of Spain: and made with the^ a
reprochful peace. After him Caius Hostilius I reproachful league.
Mancinus the Consul, made again with the Numantines, an infamous Caius
Hostilius Mancinus the Consul dyscomfyted.
league. But the Senate and people of Rome, commanded forthwith that y^ peace
should be infringed, and that Mancinus should be delivered to his enemies, to
thend they might wreke the injury of the breche of peace on him who was ye
author of making ye same. After this so great infamye, that the people of Rome
were twice disco^fited by the Numantines, Publius Scipio P. Scipio Consul.
(who was also named Affricanus,) was created Consul the second time: and was
sent to Numa^tia: He by exercising and well trading up the Roman Souldioures
rather then by punishinge them, reformed them very well, who through the
guidinge of evil captains were now become slothful and cowardly. Sone after
be got many cities in Spain: of which, some he wan in battayl: some were
yielded up to him. At length, after that he had of long time besyeged Numantia,
he famished it, and so wan it. The residue of that province, he received under
protection. At that time, Attalus king of Asia brother to king Eumenes died,
and made the people of Rome his heir: And so by Testament was Asia annexed to
the Empire of the Romans. Not long after, Decimus Iunius Brutus, triumphed
with great glory over the Calesianes and the Portugals: and Publius Scipio
Africanus had his second triumph which was over the Numantines in the.xiiii.
year after that he had first triumphed over Affricke. In this mean space,
Aristonicus son to Eumenes whom War in Asia by Aristonicus.
he begat upon his concubine stirred up war in Asia. That Eumenes was brother
to king Attalus.

There was seen against this Aristonicus, Publius Lucinius Crassus, who was
aided of sondrye kings. For why, Nicomedes king of Bythinia, Mithridates
king of Pontus, (between whom and the Romans was waged afterward most sharp
and cruel war), Ariarathes king of Cappadocia, and Pilemenes king of
Paphlagonia assisted the Romans. How be it, Crassus was overcome and slain
in that bataile, his head was stricken of and brought to Crassus slain.
Aristonicus: and his body was buried at Smirne. Afterward Perpemia Consul of
Rome, (who succeaded Crassus) hearing of the success of the battle, hasted
toward Asia: he vanquished Aristonicus in battle Aristonicus vanquyshed.
and enforced him to flee to the city Stratonice: where famishinge him he
caused him to yield. This Aristonicus was thratled in prisone by the
commandment of the Senate, for that Perpenna could not tryumphe Perpenna the
Consul dyed.
over him, because he died at Troy, by the way as he returned homewardes.
Lucius Cecilius Metellus, and Titus Quintius Flaminius being L. Cecilius
Metellus and T. Quintius Flaminius Consuls. Carthage reedefyed.
Consuls, Carthage was by the commandment of the Senate reedified in Afric:
(which does yet to this day remain) in the.xxii. year after that it was
overthrown by Scipio. Thither went diverse Citizens of Rome to dwell, In
the.vi. C. and.xxvii. year after the buyldinge of the city of Rome, Caius
Cassius Lo^ginus, and Sextus Domitius Caluinus, were created Consuls. They
waged battle against the Frenchmen, Battle against the Frenchmen.
which inhabited on the farther side of the Alps: and against the most
noble city of the Auernians: and against Bituitus king there. They slew an
infinite multitude of A great slaughter by the Roman of french men.
frenchmen, fast by ye river of Roane. There was brought to Rome a great
tresor of the very chains only, which were gotten at the despoiling of ye
frenchmen. Bituitus yielded himself to Domitius, and was by him brought unto
Rome: and with great glory both the Consuls triu^phed. When Marcus M. Portius
Cato, and Q. Mar^ius Consul.
Portius Cato, and Quintus Martius Rexwer Consuls, which was in the.vi. c.
and.xxxiii. year after the building of the city of Rome, Narbona in France,
Narbona inhabited.
was inhabited and stored with people. Afterward when Lucius Metellus and
Quintus Mutius Sceuola L. Metellus and Q. Mutius Sceuola Consuls.
were Consuls, they triumphed over a great part of Slauonia, which is now
called Dalinatia. In the vi.c. and.xxxv. year after the buildynge of the city
of Rome, Caius Cato then Caius Cato Consul.
Consul, warred against the Scordiscians, with great reproach to him. When
Caius Cecilius Metellus, and The two Metelli tryumphed. Ca. Cecilius Metellus.
and Cne. Carbe Censuls.
Cneus Carbo were Consuls, the two brothers Metelli triumphed both in one day.
The one over Thracia, and the other over Sardinia. About that time, news came
to Rome, that the Danes and people of Norway were The Danes aryued in Italy.
arrived in Italye. When Publius Scipio Nasica and Lucius Calphurnius Bestia
were Consuls, war was P. Scipio Nasica, and L. Calphurnius Bestia Consuls.
waged against Iugurthe king of the Numidians, for that he had slain Adherbal
and Hiempsal, Micipsa his sons, and brothers to Iugurthe, which were each
of them kings and friends to the Romans. There W^^ against Iugurth.
was sent against him, Calphurnius Bestia the Consul: who being corrupted
with money which the king gave him, concluded a dysworshipfull peace with him:
which was by the Senate forth with infrynged again. In the year following,
Spurius Albinus Posthumous was also sent against Iuxsgurth: who fought
likewise against the Numidians with great dishonor, committing the battle
to his brothers guiding. Then thirdlye there was deputed to goo against him,
Quintus Cecilius Metellus the Consul, who reformed Q. Cecilius Metellus Consuil.
the army with great sobrietye and wisdom: using no manner of rigor or
cruelty to any man: but by lenitye reduced them to the valiant courage of the
Romans. He discomfited Iugurth in sondrye battles: He slew and took all
his Elephantes: and when he was now at the very point Iugurth discomfyted.
to have finished his battayls, Caius Marius succeeded him, and overcame both
Iugurthe, and also Bocchus king of Mauritania, who assisted Iugurth. Iugurth
and Bocchus vanquyshed.
He wan sundry towns in Numidia, and so finished he those battayles: Then
Iugurth was taken by Lucius Sylla lieuetenaunt general of the army: a man of
great prowess and stout courage, to whom Bocchus delivered Iugurth: whose
Iugurth taken.
part before he had taken against the Romans. At this time these tryumphes
were had at Rome. One, by Marcus Iunius who vanquished the Danes in France. An
other, by Minutius Rufus, who overcame the Scordiscians and Triballia^s in
Macedonie. And an other by Seruilius Five tryumphs at Rome together.
Cepio, who subdued the Portugales in Spayn: and two other triumphs which
were gotten over Iugurth. The one by Metellus, and the other by Marius. But
Iugurthe with his two sons was led prisoner before the charyot of Marius
fettred in Iugurth thratled in prison.
chains: and within a while after, he was by the commandment of ye Consuls
thratled in prison. () reversed

The fyfthe book of the Breuiary of Eutropius.
IN ye mean while that battle was waged in Numidia against Iugurth the
Romain Consuls Marcus M. Manlius and Q. Cepio Consuls.
Manlius and Quintus Cepio were overcome by the Danes, the Almaines, the
Swysers, and Ambroues: which (were people of Germanye, and France.) They had
this overthrow fast besides the river of Roan: where was made so great
slaughter of them, that there eskaped skant one away a live. And well nigh they
had lost at that time, their tents A great over throw of the Romans.
and the most part of their army. Here upon, so great fear invaded the
Romans, as vnneathe they sustained the like whilst Anniball lived, and the
Carthaginian battle yet endured: (doubting not a little, least the French
men should again have gotten the City of Rome).

Where upon, Marius after that Marius assined to fight battle with the Danes.
he had got the victory over Iugurthe, was created Consul the second
time, and appointed to goo forth to battayl against the Danes and Almaynes:
And for that this battle with the days continued still, he was made Consul
the third and fourth time also. But in the fourth year of his Consulshyppe,
Quintus Luctatius Catulus was deputed to be his colleague. Where upon, he
joined battle with the Danes: and in two battayles he slew two hundredth
thousand of The Danes greatiye discom^yeed.
his enemies. He took four skore thousand prysonners: and their captain
Theutobodus with them prisonners.

For which fact, he was in his absence, made Consul the fifth time. In this
while, the Danes and Almains of whom there remained as yet great store in
those parties, were passed over into Italy: with whom Caius Marius, and Quintus
Catulus encountered again: but the matter fell forth more luckely on Catulus
his side. For in that battle which Marius and Catulus fought jointly
together, there were slain of their adversaries, (what in fight, and what as
they fled,) to the noumber of a C. and.xl. M. men. And there were taken
prisonners lx. M. besides. And of the Romayne souldioures, were slain of either
army, no mo but.ccc. men only. There were won in that battle from the
Danes.xxxiii. ancients: of The battle with the Dance and Almaynes finyshed.
Both the Consuls tryumphed.
which Marius his host wan two, and Catulus his army.xxxi. Thus was that
battle finished, and a triumph granted too either of the Consuls. When
Sextus Julius Caesar and Lutius Martius Philippus were Consuls, in the.vi. C.l.
and lr. S. Inlius Caesar, and L. Martius Philippus Consuls.
year after that the city was built, and that now all other battayles were
almost fully ended, the Picentines, the Scithians, and the Pelignians began a
grievous battle in Italy: who A grievous battayl in Italy.
when of long time they had been subject, and under the obeysaunce of the
Romans, they began now to claim equal and like liberty with the Romans
them selves. This was a very dangerous battle. In it Publius Rutilius the
Consul slain. Cepio a worthy young man and P. Rutilius, and Portius Cato
Co^suls and Cepioslayne.
Portius Cato the other consul were slain also: Captains against the
Romans on the Picentines and Seythians side, were Titus Vietius, Hierus
Asinius, Titus Herennius, and Aulus Cluentius. And Caius Marius on the behalf
of the Romans, Marius vi. times Consul a row.
sought against them with exceeding prosperous fortune. Marius had now been.vi.
times Consul. There was sent with him also Cneus Po^peius But especially among
other, L. Cornelius Sylla wrought at ye time notable feats: Among which his
famous gests, this is one worthy to be had in mory: yt he discomfited in such
sort ye army of Cluentius which was very populous, yt of his own men, he lost
not one. This war continued by ye space of. 4. years, not without great damage
and loss to either party. At last, it was finished in the. 5. year after it
was first co^menced, by L. Coruelius L. Coruelius Sylla Consul.
Sylla then Consul: who in the same battle, worthelye behaved himself sondrye
ways, when as yet he was but praetor. In the.vi. C. and.xlii. year after the
buildinge of the city, began The first civil battayl at Rome.
the first civil battle in Rome: And that same year also, began ye battle
against Mithridates. Thoccasion of Battle against Mithridates.
the civil battle proceeded of Caius Marius who had been.vi. times Co^sul.
Marius causer of ye first civil war at Rome upon indignation taken, that
Silla was preferred to fight yt batail against Mithridates
For when Silla (who was now Co^sul,) was sent forth to war against
Mithridates, (who had already gotten Asia and Achaia,) and stayed his army for a
while in Ca^pania, Marius (to thend the memory of ye battle which before Silla
and he waged jointly in Italy, might be extinguished and decay,) made iaboure
to the Senate that he might himself alone have ye ordering and disposinge of
that battle so attempted against Mithridates. Where upon Sylla conceyuing
displesure, returned again back to the City withal his army, and fought
there against Marius and Sulpitius. Him self first entered the city of Rome,
Sulpitius slain, and Marcus put to flyghte.
and slew there Sulpitius: and forced Marius to fle thence. And so when he had
appointed Cneus Octauius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna to be Consuls Cne.
Octauius. and L. Cornelius Cinna Consuls.
for the year following, he took his journey toward Asia.

For Mithridates king of Pontus, had gotten now both Armenia the less, and
all the sea called Ponticum in compass, and Bosphorus also. This Mithridates
would first have driven Nicomedes forth of Bithinia, The prefence of
Mithridates battle.
who was friend to the Romans: And upon that, gave the Romans to understand
that he would make war upon the said Nicomedes, for that he had sondrye
ways endomaged The assured frendshyp of the Romans
him. To who^e the Senate made answer, that if it were so that he warred against
Nicomedes, he should also feel the force of the Romans. Whereupon Mithridates
being moved with anger, forthwith invaded all Cappadocia, and expulsed from
thense, king Ariobarsanes, who was friend to the Romans. Sone after, be set
upon Bythinia and Paphlagonia, and exiled thence Pilemenes and Nicomedes who
were kings there, and likewise friends to the Romans. From thence he went to
Ephesus, and sent letters through all Asia, that where so ever any citezens of
Rome might be found, they should be all slain forth of hand. In the mean
space Athenes a city of Achaia Athens yielded ^o mithridates.
was yielded up to Mithridates by one Ariston an Athenien. For Mithridates had
all ready sent Archelaus his captain with a. C. and.xx. M horsemen and foremen
to over run and bring all Greee in subiectyon. Sylla be sieged Archelaus at
Pireneus, not far from Athens, and wanne the city. Afterward, he joined
battle with Archelaus: in which he disco^fited him in such sort, that of
his C. and.xx. M. men, skant.x. were left Great discomfyture of mythridates.
a live with Archelaus: and of Sylla his army, were slain but.xiiii. persons
only. When Mithridates had understanding of this chance of battle, forth of
hand, he sent to Archelaus.lxx. M. well appointed men, whom he chose as
chefest through out all Asia. Against who^, Silla fought again. And in the
first battayl he slew.xx. M. of his enemies, and Diogenes also. Archelaus his
son. In Diogenes Archelaus his son slain.
the second battle, all the whole force and power of Mithridates was quyte
discomfited. Archelaus himself was constrained to fly, and to hyde himself
naked in the fennes and Archelaus narrowly eskaped.
maryshes by the space of three days, when Mithridates heard these tidings,
he began to treat with Sylla for peace. In this while also Sylla had partlye
subdued in battle, and Mithridates desired peace.
partlye received again under obeysaunce, the Dardanians, the Scordiscians,
the Sclauonians, and the Moesians. But when the Legates were come from
Mithridates to him which desired peace, Sylla answered that he would not
grant peace in any wise, unless the king would depart thence to his own
country, and yield up such Provinces as he now deteyned there.
Nevertheless, Peace concluded between Mithridates and the Romans.
at length both the parties them selves came to talk, and peace was concluded
between them. For Silla feared least that if he should return to repress
the civil wars at Rome, he should also stand in ieoperdye of invasion, at
his back by Mithridates.

For during this while that Silla warred upon Mithridates in Asia and Achaia,
Marius (whom Silla had before constrained to flee the city,) and Cinna one
of the Consuls, renewed battle in Italye, and entering into the city of Rome,
they slew the most noble men Marrius his great crueity.
of the Senate and Consuls: and many they banished. They despoyled Silla his
house, and drove his wife and his sons, to fly forth of the City.

All the residue of the Senate, leaving the city of their own acord, fled to
Sylla into Greece: and besoughte him, that he would without farther delay
succoure his country. Sylla Sylla returned to pa^ifye things in Italy,
du^ynge which time marius dyed.
therefore forthwith transposed his army from thence into Italy: minding to wage
a civil battle against Norbane and Scipio the Consulles. He fought the first
battle with Norbane Narbane and Scipio Consuls.
not far from Capua, where he slew vii. thousand of Norban his army: and took
vi. M. prisonners: and lost of his own men, to the number of a. C. and.xxiiii.
souldyours. From thence, he turned his army against Scipio: and or ever they
came to handye gripes, all Scipio his army yielded them selves to Sylla without
any bloodshed. Then were the Consuls changed at Rome: and Marius Marius, and
Papirius Carbo Consuis.
son to that other Marius, (who was causer of this civil war) and Papirius
Carbo were made Cousuls. Sylla fought against Marius the younger, and
slew.xv. M. of his men, and lost.cccc. of his own. Sone after, he entered the
city: and p^rsuing yo^g Marius unto Preneste, besieged him there, and slew
him. He had again Marius the younger slain.
an other battle with Lamponius and Carinates, which were captains on Marius
his side, at Collina gate. There were by report assembled in that battle
against Silla.lxxx. M. of which.xii. M. yielded them selves to Silla. The
residue what in fight, what in their tents, and as they fled, were all slain,
through the insacyable hastiness of the conquerors. In like manner Cnous Carbo
the other Consul fled from Ariminus into Sicilie: Cne. Carbo Consul.
where he was slain by Pompeius: which Pompeius being as then but of the age
of.xx. years, Sylla (for that he apperceiued his prowess Cneus Carbo the
Consul flayn.
and fires courage,) deputed to be lieuetenaunte over his garryson, to the end
he should be had in estimatyon next after himself. Thus when Carbo was slain,
Pompeius appeased Siliice pacifyed.
Sicilie, and departing from thense toward Affricke, he slew Domitius a
captain of Marius his side, and Hiarbas king of Mauritanie who aided
Domitius. After these things, Sylla triumphed over Mithridates Sylla
triumphed over Mithridates
with great glory. Cneus Pompeius also (which was neuererst granted to any
Romayn,) being but.xxiiii. years of age, triumphed over Affricke. Thus were
finyshed two most deadly battayles: the Italyan battayl: (which was also
called the war between confederates and allies,) and the ciuyl war. Both which,
endured by the space of x. years, which battayles consumed above an. C. and.l.
M. souldyoures, xxiiii. Consuls.vii. Pretors, xl. Ediles, and well nyghe. CCC.
Senators besides.

The syxthe book of the Breuiary of Eutropius.
WHen Marcus Emilius Lepidus, and Quintus Catulus were Consuls, and Sylla had
now appeased and set in order the weal public, battayles grew again a
fresh. One in Spain: An other in Pamphilia and Cilicia. The third in
Macedonie: The fourth in Sclauonia. For why Sertorius, who took part Four
battle in sundry places at one time against the romans.
with Marius, fearing what should become of him, for that he saw what had
betyded to others of the same factyon, styrred up the Spaniardes to battle
against the Romans.

Quintus Cecilius Metellus, son of that Metellus which subdued king Iugurth,
and Domitius the Praetor were sent forth captains against him. Domitius was
slain by Hyrtuleius captain of Sertorius his host. Domitius slain.
Metellus fought with Sertorius himself with great vncertaintye of fortune.
But at length when the Senate Pompeius sent to aid Metellus against
Sertorius.
saw rhat Metellus was ouermatched in battle by Sertorius, they sent Cneus
Pompeius also into Spain: and so Sertorius fought against both those
captains of his adversaries with great varietye of fortune. But at last, in
the eyghte year after that the battle was first begone, Sertorius was slain
by his Sertorius slain by his own souldyoures.
own souldioures, and so that battle was finished by Cneus Pompeius, (who was
as yet but a young man) and Quintus Metellus Pius. And well nigh all Spain
submitted them selves to the Romans at that time. Appius Claudius after that
his Co^sulship was expired, was sent into Macedonie. He fustained but easy
battles against diverse which inhabiied Thracia: and there falling sick,
dyed. There was sent to succeed Appius Claudius dyed.
him, Cncus Scribonius Eurio, so soon as he had likewise finyshed his
Consulship. He subdued the Dar danianc, and passed forward till be came to the
river Danubius, and merited a triumph: and within.iii. years he finished his
battles. Then was Publius Seruilius sent into Cilicia and Pamphylia. This
Seruilius (taking him for a Consul) was a passing stout and valiant man. He
subdued Cilicia. He assaulted and wan the worthiest cities of Licia: among
which, these were some, Phalilides, Olimpus, and Coritu^. And within a while
after, he gave the assault to Isauros an other city, and enforced it to yield,
and within.iii. years space, He finyshed those battle* He was the first
Romayne that made any viage to Taurus. When he returned P. Seruilius the
first Romain which made any viage to Taurus
thence, he tryumphed, and merited the name to be called Isauricus. About the
same time, was Caius Cosconius also sent into Illiria, in Seruilius tryumphed,
and was called I sanricus.
the Consuls stead. He brought in subiectyon a great part of Sclauonia. He
wanne Salone, and when he had finyshed this battle, he returned to Rome
after that he had been absent thence, by the space of two years. At the same
time, the Consul Marcus Emilius Lepidus, M. Emilius Lepidus Consul.
who was colleague to Catulus, would have commenced a ciuyl war. How Ciuyl war
pretended again.
be it that vproure was appeased again within one summers space. Thus
were.iiii. sondrye tryumphes had at Rome together at one time. The one by
Metellus over Spain, Four triumphs at Rome together.
the other by Pompeius, (and that was his second triumph) over Spain also.
The third by Curio, over Macedonie. The fourth and last, by Seruilius over the
Isaurians. In the six hundredth three skore and sixtene year after the building
of the city of Rome, Lucius Licinius Lucullus, L. Licinius Lucullus, and M.
Aurelius Cotta Consuls.
and Marcus Aurelius Cotta being Consuls, Nicomedes king of Bithinia died: and
appointed by his testament Romans to be his heirs. About this time
Mithridates (infringing the league before made,) would have again invaded Asia
and Bithinia, War renewed by Mithridates.
but the Consuls were forthwith sent against him, and of long time they
experime^ted uncertain fortune in battle. Mithridates ouercam Cotta in fight
Chalcedon, and forced him ye city, where Cotta the Co^sul dyscomfyted.
he besieged him. But when Mithridates removed his power from thence toward
Cizicus, (thinking that if he had ones gotten Cizicus he might easly invade
al Asia,) Lucullus the other Consul encou^tred with him. And whilst that
Mithridates stayed to lay siege to Cizicus, Lucullus had environed him behind:
and so keepynge him from coming by vyttails, vanquished him in sundry
skirmishes. At that time he eskaped and fled to Bizantiu^: (which is now called
Constantinople,) his captains Mithridates discomlyted.
were discomfited in battle upon the sea. Thus in one winter and a summer
space, Lucullus slew on the kings side, well nyghe an. C. M. meu. In the.
Dc.lxxviii. year after y^ buildinge of the city of Rome, Marcus Licinius
Lucullus, who was cosyn germayne to that Lucullus which warred against
Mithridates, was deputed to have the government of Macedonie. At this time
suddenly in Italye a fresh battle was begone. For why.lxxiiii. of those which
were accustomed to play at wepons, (called Battle a fresh in Italy
Gladiatores) brake forth of the schools at Capua, and made to them selves,
Spartachus, Chrisus and Denomannus. And as they roued through Italy, they
commenced battle there no less dangerous then was that other which before
Anniball waged there. For when they had discomfited diverse Romain captains,
and the two Co^suls also, they assembled an army well nigh of lx. M men well
appointed. How be it, they were overcome in Apulia, by Marcus Licinius Crassus
the Proconsull. And so after sondrye calamities sustained in Italye, this
battle was fiuyshed in the third year after that it was first begone. In the
year after that the city was built.vi. C.lxxxi. there were but only two great
battayles waged within the Romain Empire, (that is Two battles only waged
against the Romans through the world.
to say) the battle against Mithridates, and the battle against the
Macedians, both which battails the two Lucullies, (which is to wit) Lucius
Lucullus, and Marcus Lucullus fought. For Lucius Lucullus after he had finished
the battle at Cizicus, in which he overcame Mithridates: and after the other
battle upon the Sea, in which he vanquished the captains of Mithridates,
he pursued Mithridates himself. And when he had recovered Paphlagonia and
Bithinia, he invaded Mithridates own kingdom. He wan there Sinopes and
Anisus, two of the most noble cities of Pontus.

In the second battle which was waged at the city Cabira, Mithridates had
provided.xxx. M. men, Thyrty M. vanquyshed by.v. M. Romans.
whom he did choose and pick forth through all his kingdom, which when
they were vanquished by v. M. of the Romans, Mithridates fled Mithridates
fled.
and his tents were sacked. The less Armenia likewise, which he had Armenia
recovered.
gotten, was recovered again from him. But Mithridates after he was thus fled,
was received by Tigranes king of Armenia, who raygned at those days in great
renown. This Tigranes often times had subdued the Persians. He wanne
Mesopotamia, Mithridates succored by king Tigranes.
Siria, and a piece of Phenicia.

Sone after, Lucullus required him to deliver his ennemy, whom he had put to
slyght. Which request when he withstode and denied the deliuerye of
Mithridates, Lucullus forthewith invaded king Tigranes his realm, and wanne
there Tigra nocerta the chiefest city of Armenia, and having but.xviii. M.
soldiers to aid him, he gave king Tigranes a passinge great overthrow, which
Tigranes came against him with vi. M. men on barbed horses, and an huddreth
thousand Archers, besides other men of arms. He slew the A great overthrow
of king Tigranes.
greater part of the Armenians, and remouynge from thence to Nisibis, look
that City also, and the kings brother in it.

But they whom Lucullus had left behind in Pontus with part of his army, to
the end that they should keep under to the behoufe of the Romans such
people as he had all ready subdued there (demeanyng them selves very
rechlesly, and with great cruelty) gave opportunity to Mithridates Battle
renewed by Mithridates.
to invade Poneus again: and so battle was renewed there a fresh. There was
one sent to succeed Lucullusrwho after that he had won Nisibis, made
preparatyon for his viage against the Persians. The other Lucullus who had the
gouernmente of Macedonie, was the first Romain that waged battle against the
Bessians: whom he overcame in a great battle upon the hill Emus. Lucullus
the first Romain that waged battle against the Bessians Vscudama won.
He wa^ also Vscudama: a town which the Bessians did inhabit the self same
day, that he gave the assault to it. He took in like manner the city Cabiles,
and marched still forth til he came to the river Danubius. After that he
invaded diverse cities Cabiles take Both the Lucullies triumphed.
which were siiuate upon the Sea coast of Pontus. There he destroyed
Appollonia, and wan Calatis, Partenopolis, Tomos, Histrus, and all Buzia. And
when those battails were Battle in Creete.
finished, he returned to Rome where either of them triumphed. But yet ye
Lucullus who had waged battle against Mithridates, triumphed with greater
glory, for that he returned conqueror of such ample kingdoms. After the
battle was finyshed in Macedonie, the battle against Mithridates as yet
endured: which battle Mithridates renewed, assembling together all the power
and force of men he could make after that Lucullus was now departed back.
About this time began there also battle in Creete, Cecilius Metellus was
sent thither, who after that he had fought great battles there, with in the
space of.iii. years he wan the whole province, and for this fact was called
Creticus. He triumphed over Crete won by Metellus, and he called Creticus.
that Island. At this time also, Libia was by the bequest of Appio king there
of, annexed to the Empire of ye Libia anexed to the Romain empire by Appio.
Romans. In which province, these were the noblest Cities, Beronice,
Ptoloneais, and Cyrene. While these things were in hand, Pirates began to anoy
the passengers through those parties by sea. So that the Romans who had
subdued well nyghe all the whole world, wanted now nothing, saving that they
had not now safe course and recourse by the seas, where upon that vyage
against Battle against the pirates committed to Cneus Pompeius.
those pirates, was committed to Cneue Pompeius, who within a few months
space, finished it with great celerity, and no less derteritye of fortune.

Not long after, the same Pompeius was also designed to go against
Mithridates, and Tigranes which viage when he had taken in hand, he overcame
Mithridates in battayl by Mithridates overcome in battle by night.
night in Armenia the less, and sackte his tents. He slew there.xl. M. of
the kings army, and lost of his own host, but.xx. men, and two of his
captains. After this evil success, Mithridates fled being accompanied
Mithridates fled.
but with his wife and ii, other to wait upon them, and eftsoon in a tumult
which fell among his souldioures through the procurement of his son
Pharnaces, he was forsed to death, which he executed on him self by
Mithridates poisoned himself.
drinckinge of poison. This end had Mithridates: he died at ^osphorus, a man
very polliticke, and wittye with all. He raaigued.lx. years, he lived three
score and twelve years. He Mithridates hysage and time of his raygne.
warred against the Romans by the space of forty years. Then Pompeius
adressed his battle against Tigranes, who yielded him self. Tigranes pursued.
And so sone as he was entered within Pompeius his tents, which were
pitched.xvi. miles dystante from Artaxata, he fell prostrate at Pompeius his
fete, and delivered up his crown into the hands of Pompeius: but Tigranes
submytted himself.
Pompeius reposed it again upon his head, and entreated him very worthily.
Nevertheless, he deprived him of a portion of his kingdom, and assessed him to
pay a great sum of The worthiness of Pompeius.
money besides. There was taken from him Siria, Phenices, and Sophenes and he
was assessed to pay.vi. M. talents of silver, for that he warred against the
Romans without cause. Not long after, Pompeius also made war upon the
Albanes, and overcame War against the Albanes. Orodes king of th Albanes
overcome.
Orodes king of the Albanes, in three sundry battails. But at last, being
requested by letters and presents, he both pardoned him, and granted him
peace. He overcame Arthaces king of Iberia vanquished
in like manner Arthaces king of Iberia in fight, and at last, received him
under allegeaunce. He gave Armenia the less, to Deiotarus king Armenia given
to Deiotarus.
of Galacia, for that he had aided him in battle against Mithridates. He
restored Paphlagonia to Attalus, and Attalus and Pilemenes restored to their
kingdoms.
Pilemenes. He deputed Aristarchus king over Colchos. Sone after, he overcame
the Iturians and Arabia^s. And when he came into Siria, he enfraunchised
Seleucia, a city situate Seleucia enfranchysed. A piece of
near to Antioche, for that they did not aid, ne succor king Tigranes. He
redeliuered to the Antiochians, their pledges which they gave to him. He gave
the Daphuenses a per cell of land, for the enlargemente of their groves or
copyes, for that he was delighted with the pleasant site of that place, and
the great plentye of waters which abounded ground given to the Daphuenses.
there.) From thence, he passed forth taking his way toward Judea. And in
the third month after his arriuinge there, he wan Jerusalem the chief city
of that country. He slew there.xii. M. Jews, the residue he received under
allegeaunce.

These things being thus finished, he went into Asia, and so ended he the war,
which had long continued. when M. Cullius C i. and Caius Antonius Consuls. This
Cicero was lireally descended from the kings of the Volsci^^, which were leng
before ye city of Rome. a man of singular wy^ and clemency, and of a passing
z^l^te his country he was called of the Father of his country for yt he hadso
study ^sly preserved it. He flouryshed about xi. years before the Incarnatyon
of Christ.
Marcus Tullius the Orator, and Caius Antonius were Consuls, in the.vi. C.
lxxxix year after the city was builte, Lucius Sergius Catiline, a man descended
of a noble stock, but yet of an evil disposityon, conspired with diverse other
noble men of like rashness and naughtiness as he was, Catiline was expulsed
forth of the city, by Cicero. His confederates were apprehended and thratled in
prison. Afterward Catiline himself was overcome in battle, and slain by
Antonius the other Consul.

In the six hundredth and ninetenth year after the buildinge of Rome. When
Decius Iunius Sillanus, and Lucius Murena were Cansuls, Metellus triumphed over
Crete, and Pompeius tryumphed for the battle D. Iunius Sillanus. and L.
Murena Consuls.
which he had over the Pirates on the sea, and for that other battle which
he waged with Mithridates. The pomp and pride of no tryumphe, was ever like to
that of Metellus and Pompeius trfumphed.
Pompeius. There were led before his charyot, the son of Mithridates, and the
son of king. Tigranes, and Aristobulus king of the Jews. There was carried
moreover before him great store of wine: and an infinite deal of gold and
silver besides. At this time, the Romans waged no great battayles through
all the whole world.

In the six hund, eth nineteth, and third year after the buildynge of Ca.
Julius Caesar, and L. Bibulus tryumphed.
the City, Caius Julius* Caesar, who afterward became Emperor, was created
Consul, and Lucius Bibulus with him.

France was committed to his gouerme^t, and the coast of Illiria (now called
Sclauonia,) together with.x. legions of souldioures First he subdued the
Heluetians which are also called the Sequanes or Burgonia^s. Then he passed
forth still conquering and subduing as he went, with grievous battayles, until
he came to the English Ocean sea. And with in the space of.ix. years, he
brought well nyghe all France in subiertyon, so much as is situate between
the Alps, the river of Roan, the flood of Rheyn and the Occean sea, which in
circuit extends to.ccccc. miles. Sone after, he warred upon the Britaynes
which before his aryuing Brytain which is now called England, invaded by
Julius Ccsar. The Britains tributaryes to the Romans.
there, had never any cognisaunce, nor at any time hard speaking of the
Romans. When he had subdued them, he made them tributary to the Romans, and
took hostages of them. But he did exact of France under name of Tribute,
cccc. Sestercios. Then he assaild the Germans, which inhabited on the farther
side of the river of Roan, and vanquished them in most sharp battayles. But
among all these so many successes and chances of fortune he fought thrice
vnluckelye. Ones against the Auernians in France, Three unlucky vattailes of
Julius Caesar.
at which battle he was present himself, and twice in Germany when he was
absent. For his two Legates Titurius and Aruneulus were slain there by a train.
About the same time* in the.cccccc. xcvii. year after the city was builte,
Marcus Licinius Crassus fellow in office with Cneus Pompeius the great, in the
second year after that he was made Consul, was sent on a viage against the
Parthians; and joining battle with them in an evil hour at Carras, he was
M. Licinius Caslus slam.
overcome by Surena captain to king Drodes: and at last, he was slain and
his Son also, a valyaunte and a worthy young man toward. The residue of
his army, was preserved by Caius Cassius Aciuii dissension sprung in Rome,
after which ensued a most sharp civil war between Pompeius and Julius Cesare,
where upon grew thalteration of the weal publyque of Rome, and an utter decay
in manner of ye same, the occasyon of the battayl was butlight For Caesar after
he was returned forth of France, requested to be made Co^sul, for so it
stood him in hand, for that certain had conspired soon after to haueprocured
his bannyshment through whose inueglyng Pompei us changed his former mind, and
revoked his former promise made to Caesar, and added besides cer^en
threatenings to Caesar wards, upon which the grudge grew. This battle began in
the. 3914. year after the creatyo^ of the world, and in the 706. year after the
city was builte, and in the 47. before the birth of Christ, it lasted v.
years in all, then was Rome fyrstea monarche.
lieuetenaunte of the hooste, who through his singular and passing great
manhood reduced to such good pass those matters so far endaungered,
(which were now well nyghe paste cure and hoope of recouerye,) that
conueyinge his army over Euphrates. He vanquyshedee the Persians in diverse
skyrmyshes.

When these things were thus finished, there ensued an horrible and lamentable
battle: By mean whereof, (besides diverse other calamityes which chanced in
the Romain weal public) the condition and wonted estate of that famous
Empire was aultered. For when Caesar returned conqueror forth of France he
required to be created Consul again. Which thing when it was by diverse of
the Romans without contradictyon granted unto him, Marcellus (who was then
Consul,) Bibulus, Pompeius, and Cato, did openly wythstande it, and sent
commandment to Caesar that he should dismiss his army, and come home to the
city. Upon which answer Cesare conceyuinge dyspleasure from Ariminus
(where he had his army assembled) toward Rome to invade it.

Where hppon the Consul, the Senate, and all the Nobilytye of Rome together
with Pompeius, fled forth of the city, and passed over into Greece, and made
preparaunce for war against Caesar, at Epirus Macedonie and Achaia, and those
Pompeius to be their Captain. When Caesar was entered the vacaunte and forsaken
City, forthwith he made himself Dictator. From thence, he went into Spayn.
There he discomfited the most strong Iuli. Caesar made himself Dictator.
and valiaunte armies of Pompeius, and three of his capitaynes, (that is to
wit,) Lucius Afranius, Marcus Pompeius his captains discomfyted.
Petreius, and Marcus Varro. Returninge from thence, he passed over into Greece,
and pitched his field, and fought against Pompeius. In the Pompeius and Caesar
fought
first battle he had the overthrow, and was put to flight. How be it he
eskaped, Julius Caesar discomsyted.
for that (the night approaching so nere,) Pompeius would not pursue him. Where
upon, Caesar when he was thus eskaped, said: that neither Pompeius wist how to
co^quere him, and that that was the only day in which he might have had the
upper hand over him. After that, they both met again at Paleopharsalus in
Thessalye: whereas each of them led forth to fight, their passing great
armies, Pompeius had in his band, xl* M. fotemen in the forefront, vii. M. in
the left winge, and.ccccc. in the right wing.

He had succor besides, forth of all the Casto parties: and moreover
innumerable Senators and pretors, and others of the Consuls, and almost all the
nobilitye of Rome on his side, and such as ere that time had been conquerors
of very stout nations. Caesar had in his army not full out.xxx. M. footem
on, and a. M. horsemen. The force and strength of the Romans was never before
that day assembled either in greater number, or under more worthy captains, so
that now they could eastye have subdued all the whole world, if they should
have fought against the Barbarians. The battle was handled with great
prowess and manhood on both parties. And at length Pompeius was discomfited,
and his tents Pompeius discomfited.
were sackic. Himself fled to Alexandria: where he thought he should have
gotten aid of the king of Egypt, unto whom he was by the Pompeius (...) to
Alexandria.
Senate, sometime appointed to be a tutoure and governor during the time of his
minority. But the young king having more regard to the An example of great
unkindness and ingratytude.
time present, then respect or consideratyon to the passed frendshyppe which
he had found at Pompeius his hands, slew Pompeius. And when he had cut of
his head, he pluckte of his ringe from his hand, and sent them together to
Caesar. which when Caesar saw, he braste forth on weepinge to behold the
head of so worthy a man, which also was his son in law.

Not long after, Caesar came to Alexandria, where Ptolomeus also conspyred
against him: upon which occasyon, Caesar made war on the king, who when he
was overcome, drowned him self in the river of Ptolomeus drowned himself.
Nilus: in which place, both his body was found afterward, and his coat
of plate also, which was gilded and very rich.

When Caesar had on this sort obtained Alexandria, he gave that kingdom to
Cleopatra, sister to Alexandria given by Caesar to Cleopatra.
Ptolomeus, whom he after used as his peramoure, As Caesar returned from
thence, he overcame Pharnaces son of Mithridates the great, Pharnaces
discomfited and pursued to death.
who had succored Pompeius at Thessalie, and eftsoon rebelled himself in
Pontus, and had won sondrye provinces from the Romans, and pursued him to
death. Retournyng Caesar made himself Consul the third time.
from thence to Rome, he made him self Consul the third time, and Marcus
Emilius Lepidus with him, who was Magister Equitum in the year before, when
Caesar was Dictator.

From thence, he went into Afric, where as a great noumber of the nobility,
together with Iuba king of Mauritania renewed battle against War in Africa
by Iuba king of mauritania against Caesar.
him. The Roman captains in that battle, were Publius Cornelius Scipio,
(who was descended from the most aunciente stock of Scipio Africanus, which
Scipio was also father in law to Pompeius ye great:) Marcus Petreius, Quintus
Varus, Marcus Porcius Cato, and Lucius Cornelius Faustus (son to Sylla, which
was sometime Dictator.) Caesar disposed his battles in order against these
capitaynes, and after sondrye skirmishes, he obtained the victory. Cato,
Petreius, Scipio, and Iuba, slew them selves. Faustus who was son to Silla,
who sometime was Dictator, and son in law to Pompeius, was slain by Caesar.
The year after, Caesar returned to Caesar created himself Consul the 4. time.
Rome, and created himself Consul the fourth time, and went forthwith into
Spain, where as Cneus and Sextus, sons to Pompeius, renewed battle with
great force. There War in Spain against Caesar.
were many skirmishes between the^. The last battle was fought at the city
Munda, in which Caesar was so nygh overcome, that his men fled Caesar driven
to a near strayte.
from him: for which cause he determined to slay him self, rather then (after
that he had gotten such renown and fame in Martial feats), he would now
fall into the hands of young men and be vanquished by the^, when he had
lived.lvi. years with great honor. Nevertheless when he had recovered his men
again, he obtained the victori against them. The elder son of Pompeius, was
there slain. The younger son fled, and so eskaped.

Afterward, when as now civil wars The civil war against Pompeius and his
adhere^ts finyshed by Julius Caesar.
were clean appeased, Caesar returned to Rome where he began to demean himself
very disorderly and against the usage of the Roman liberty. Where upon,
when he bestowed the digniries and Offices in Rome upon such persons as
pleased himself, which offices were accustomed to have been granted by the
advise and consent of the commons of Rome, and moreover would not use any
familiaritye or salutatyon to the Senate, when they came to him, Cefar his
disorderly demenor in Rome.
and did sondrye other acts besides, which were used in the time of tyranny
by the kings, at what time they bare rule and authority as yet in the city
of Rome, by means of which factes he began very much to grow in hatred of
the commons A great conspiracy against him.
and Senate, there conspired against him.xl. or more, Senators and gentlemen of
Rome. Among whom, these were the chiefest: the two Bruti, (which were
descended from the stock of that Brutus, who was the first Consul that was
created at Rome, and had procured then the banishing of the kings from
thence, Caius Cassius, and Seruilius Casca. And when Caesar on a day, with the
rest of the Senate, were at their Sessyon in the council house, the Caesar
slain by the senate.
Senate rose against him there, and slew him, and smote him in with three and
twenty deadly wounds. () reversed

The seventh book of the Breuiary of Eutropius.
When Caesar was slain, which was in the.vii. C. and.ix. year after the
building of Rome, Tiuyl war^s renewed in Rome by Antonius.
civil wars were again renewed. For why, the Senate took part with them which
had slain Caesar. But Antonius the Consul who favored Caesar, endenored (what
in him lay), to oppress them by civil battle. Where upon when the weal
public was thus greatly disquieted, Antonius wrought at that time diverse
heinous acts: for the which, he was by the whole Senate counted as an open
ennemy Battle against Antonius.
of the commonwealth. Where upon there were sent to pursue him, Pansa and
Hircius the two Co^suls, and Octauianus a young man of the age Pansa and
Hircius Consuls.
of.xviii. years, neuew to Caesar, who^ Caesar had adopted, and by his last will
designed to be his heir, and to bear his name. This was that Caesar who was
afterward called Augustus, and became ruler over all the whole world. when
these three capytaines were gone forth against Antonius, they gave him
thouerthrow. Antonius dyscomfyted.
How be it it chanced so, that both ye Consuls died, as soon as they had
obtained this victory, so that all the.iii. armies were then attendaunte upon
The two Co^suls dyed.
Caesar alone. when Antonius was thus discomfited, and had lost his army, he
fled to Lepidus who had been Magister Equitum before under Caesar, and at that
present, had Antonius sue coured by Lepidus.
great bands of men ready assembled: if whom he was received. Sone after,
through the procuremente and earnest suit of Lepidus, Caesar made Legue made
with Antonius.
league with Antonius. Then Caesar returned to Rome with al his host, making
semblaunce as though he would have revenged the death of his father which
adopted him, and Caesar compelled the Romans to create him Co^sull, when he was
but.xx. years of age, about the 710. year after the city was built.
of fine force caused the Romans to create him Consul, being as yet but of
the age of.xx. years. Then by the advice and counsels of Antonius and
Lepidus, he banyshed diverse of the Senate, and began to detayne the weal
public, by force of arms. By their means, was Cicero The ontcagiousnesse of
Caesar, through evil counsel.
the Orator slain, and diverse other noble men.

In this mean while, Brutus and Cassius which were two of them that slew
Caesar, prepared a great battle, having assembled many armies through
Macedonie and the East parts. There went forth against them Caesar,
Octanianus, Augustus, and Marcus Antonius. Battle pretended against Caesar, by
Brutus and Cassius.
But Lepidus was left behind to defend Italye. They joined battle with
Brutus and Cassius at Philippos a city of Macedonie.

In the first battle Caesar and Antonius were discomfited. How be Caesar and
Antonius discomfyted. Cassius slain.
it Cassius captain of the nobilitye was then slain.

In the second battle, Brutus was slain also, and an infynyte noumber of
the Nobylytye, which Brutus slain.
took part with him against Caesar. Then did Caesar and Antonius depart the
Romayn Empire between The Romain Empire divided between Caesar and Antonius.
them on this sort. That Augustus should possess Spain, France, and
Italye. Antonius should have Asia, Pontus, and the East parts. At this time,
Lucius Antonius A ciuyl war by Lucius Antonius.
who was brother to that Antonius which took part with Caesar against Brutus
and Cassius began a civil war within Italy. He was ouercom at Perowse a city
of Thuscia, and was taken, but was not slain. In the mean space, by Sextus
Pompeius, who was son to Cneus Pompeius the great, there was another great
battle attempted in Another battle by Sextus Pompeius Peace concluded.
Sicilie: at which battle, all those were assembled, which as yet were left
a live, of them that aided Brutus and Cassius. The battle was fought by Caesar
Augustus Octauius against Sextus Pompeius. And at last, peace The Persians
vanquyshed.
was concluded between them. At y^ same time, Marcus Agrippa had good success
in his affairs in Guyon which is that part of France, that is now called
Aquitain. Lucius Ventidius Bassus overcame the Persians which invaded Siria,
in three sundry battles. He slew Pacorus king The first tryumphe over the
Persians
Orodes his son, the very same dai that Surena captain to Orodes, slew
Crassus. He was the first which merited a most condign tryumphe at Rome over
the Parthians. In this mean space, Pompeius infrynged the peace, and was
discomfited in batel Pompeius infrynged the peace, and was slain.
on the sea, and as he would have fled from thence to Asia ward, he was
slain. Antonius to whom Asia, and the East parts were allotted, being
deuorced from the fister of Augustus Caesar, espoused Cleopatra M. Antonius
espoused Cleopatra.
Queen of Egypt. He warred on the Persians, and overcame them in the first
battles. And as he returned homewardes, there fell great skarsity and penury
of victuals among his The Persians oyscomfyced by Antonius.
souldioures. But when the Persia^s pursued him hard as he returned, he got
the victory over them at that time also. This Antonius began a great civil
war through the procurement A cyuyl war by M. Antonius.
and egging for ward of his wife Cleopatra, affectyng to attain the government
of the city of Rome, that there by, he might satisfy the incessant requests of
his wife. He was vanquished by Augustus in battle upon the sea at Actiu in,
which town is situate in Epirus. From thence, Antonius va^quyshed by Augustus.
he fled into Egypt: and there being exempte from all hope of good chance,
and despairing that his affairs should ever take good success again, (so
that all men now took part with Caesar) he slew himself. Antonius and
Cleopatra slew themselves.
Cleopatra also his wife, procured to be stricken of an Adder, by mean of whose
poison she died. Then was Egypt also annexed to the Roman Empire, by Octauian
Augustus, Egypt adjoined to the Romain empire.
and Cneus Cornelius Gallus, was appointed lieuetenaunte there, who was the
first of the Romans which decided or determined matters Cneus Gallus
lieuetenaunte over Egypt.
in Egypt.

Thus when wars were pacified through the whole world, Octanian Augustus
returned to Rome in the twelfthe year after that he was first created
Consul, and from that time he governed the Roman Empire him self alone, by
the space of four and forty years. For during the other twelve years before,
he administered it ioyntlye together with Antonius and Lepidus. So from the The
time of Augustus his reign.
first commencement of his Empire unto the end there of, were.lvi. years. He
deceased in the four skore and six year of his age, by syckenesse Augustus
his age.
at Atella a town of Campania, and lies buried at Rome, in Campo-Martio.
Augustus Caesar died in the ii. year of the 198. Dlim^^* which was in the. 767.
year after the city was built, and in the year of our Lord god the.xv.
Augustus canonysed. Augustus his worthy demenor.
A man who in most things, and that right worthily, was deemed as a God,
For lightlye there was none either more fortunate in battayles then he was, or
in time if peace which ruled more discret^lye. Ourynge those.xliiii. years in
which he raygned alone, he lived very ciuillye, behauynge him self very
liberally toward all (...), and to his friends exceeding trustye and assured,
whom he advanced to so great honors, that almost he made them equal with
his own estate. The Romayne Empire at no syme before his reign, did more
florishe. For besides the suppressing of the civil wars in which he
always was inuincyble, he annexed also to the Romain Empire, Egypt, Biskay and
Dalmatia which is parcel of Sclauonia, (which country was by the Romans
before his raygne ofttymes over run, but by him it was fully conquered,) and
Hungary, The Romain Empire gretlye enlarged by Octauian Augustus.
Guyo^, Illiria, Rhetia, the Va^dales, and the Thalassians which inhabited
among th Alps, together with all those cities which were situate alonge the
sea costs of Pontus. Among which, these were the chiefest, Bosphorus and
Ponticapeos. He vanquished the Danes in battle, and slew great armies of
the Germains, and drove them over the floude Albis, which is in Barbary far
beyond the river of Rheyne. He fought this battle by Drusus, who was his
wives son by he^ first husband, like as he did that other battle against
the Hungarians, by Tiberius an other of his wives sons. After this battle, he
brought forth of Germany.cccc. M prisoners, and placed them in France, a long
France repl^ shed with inhabitants by Octanian.
upon ye banks of the river of Rhein. He recovered Armenia from yt Parthians,
and the Persians gave him hostages, which they never did to any Pledges taken
of the Persians.
before him. They restored more over such ensigns to the Romans, as they had
got from them, at what time they vanquished Crassus. The Scithians and Indians,
who before had not heard speakinge of the Romans, The Corinthians and
Indians sent legates to Augustus. Galacia made a prou^^^^.
sent both Legates and presents to Augustus. In his raygne, Galacia was also
made a prouynce, which was a kingdom before, and Marcus Lollius governed it
in the stead of the Praetor. Besides this, he was so well beloved of the
Barbarians, that such kings as had joined frendshippe with the Romans, (to
the end they might augment the honor of Augustus) builte diverse cities which
they called after his name, Cesaree. As king Iuba did in Mauritania, Towns
built and named after the name of Caesar.
and in Palestina (which is now a famous and fair city.) Moreover many kings
left their own kingdoms and came to Rome, to the end they might attend and
do their service to Caesar, and in such like apparel as the Romans used to
wear, (that is to say in gowns) they followed his chariot, or horse as he rode.
After his death he was called a God. He left a most fortunate common 3.
Claudius Tiberius, son to Liuia Augustus his wife, by her
wealth to Tiberius his successor who was his wives son by her former husband,
and became after that, to be son in law to Augustus by adoption, and the
espousing his daughter. first husband began his Empire in the. 3976. year after
the creation of the world. in the 768. year after the buylding of Rome and in
the year of our Lord God.xvi.
Tiberius governed the Empire by great cowardice, grievous crueltye,
unmeasurable avarice, and filthye lust. He waged battle no where him self,
but warred always by his Prouostes and substitutes. Diverse kings whom he
had procured through great flattery to come to him, he would never
permit to depart again. Among which, Archelaus king of Cappadocia was
one, whose kingdom he did also reduce into the form of a Province: and the
chiefest city thereof, he commanded should be called by his name, which at
this day is called Cesarea, where as before it was called Mazaca.

In the.xxiii. year of his reign, he deceased in Campania with ye great
Tiberlus his reign.
rejoicing of all the Romans, when he had lived.lxxx. and.iii. years.
Tiberius deceased.


After him succeaded Caius Caesar, 4. Caligula the 4. Emp^ror, son to
Germanicus, began his Empire. 3999. year after the beg^nnyng of the world, in
the. 701. year after Rome was b^il^e, in the year of our Lord. 39.
who was surnamed Caligula, neuew to Drusus and Tiberius, Augustus his wives
sons, a very naughty and cruel man, whose facts were so heinous, that if
they had been conferred with the doings of Tiberius, they might make those of
Tiherius, to seem tolerable. He warred against the Germans, and invaded
Sweuia. But he atcheued there no manly act. He had carnal copulation The
dishono^^bl^ reign of Caligula.
with his own systers, and his own daughter whom he begatte upon the one of
his sisters, he had in likewise carnal company with all. When he had thus used
great avarice, fleshly lust, and horrible cruelty toward all men, he was
slain in his palaice in the.xxxix. year of his Caligula ^layne. Caligula his
(...).
age, when he had reigned, iii. years x. months and.viii. days.

After him succeeded Claudius, uncle by the fathers side to Caligula, and son
to Drusus: (unto which Claudius, there was a most honorable 5. Claudius ^he
v. Emper^r of Rome. son to Drusus, which was brother to ^^berius, began his
Empire, in the. 4003. year after the creation of the world, in the 795. year
after the b^ylding of Rome and in the year of out Lord 41. he rai^^^ 13. years
and ix. months, he was poisoned, in the. 11. year of his reign.
tomb created at Mense in Germany), whose neuewe also Caligula was. He reigned
over Media, and did many things there very quietly. And yet some things did
he very cruelly, and without discretyon. He made war upon the Britaynes:
which country since the time of Julius Caesar, none of the Romans had ever
had any thing to do withal. And when they were overcome by Cneus Sentius, and
Aulus Plantius, two famous and worthy men, he had a great triumph over them at
Rome. Furthermore, he annexed also to the Empire of the Romans, certain
Islands situate in the Occean sea beyond Britain, called Orcades, and War
upon the Britain^, now called England.
surnamed his son ^ritannicus. He behaved himself very courteously toward
diverse of his friends, in so much that when Plautius, (a notable man), who in
his viage which he made into ^ritain, achieved diverse notable acts, and
should triumph for the same, the Emperor himself accompanied him, and (the
use being such that with his triumph he should goo up into the Capitol,)
Claudius gave him the preheininence, and went The term of Claudius his ^a^gne.
on his left hand. This Claudius lived. lxuii. years, and after his death was
canonised. Claudius canonysed.


After him, succeaded Nero, who 6. Nero who was son in law to Claudius, who
adopted him to be his successor in the Empire. began his reign in the. 40^7.
year after the creation of the world, the 809. year after Rome was builte, and
the 5. year after Christ, he had carnal copuia^ton with his own mother, and
eftsoon ^^ewe her, and his wife, and diverse other worcester thy mer. He was a great
persecutor of christian religien, and put diverse Saints to death.
did very much resemble his uncle Caligula. He did greatly dysgrace and
diminishe the Roman welthe and substance: A man given to unwonted riot,
strange lust, and great expenses and charges, so that after the manner of
Caius Caligula, he bayned him self with hot and cold Oyntmentes. He fyshed
with golden ne^tes, the ropes of which, where with they were drawn forth of
the water, were of Pnrple silk. He slew a great noumber of the Senate. He
became ennemy to all good men: and at last, did habondone himself whollye
over to so great disworship, that he would dance and singe o^penly in the
apparaile of common mynstrelles, and such as are accustomed to play in
enterludes. He committed diverse mu^thers upon his own kinsfolks.

And when he had slain his own brother, his wife, and his mother, he set the
city of Rome on fire, that he Rome set on fire by Nero and burned 6. dais
space.
might thereby (as by demonstratyon) see after what fashion Troy burued, when
it was taken and set on fire by the Gretians. In feats of arms he durst
do nothing at all. The cowardice of Nero.
He had almost lost Britain. For duringe his reign, there were taken
Britain nighe lost.
there and destroyed quite, two notable towns.

The Parthians did berefte him of Armenia, and brought the Romain armies under
subiectyon. How be it, there were two Provinces created during his reign,
Pontus Polemoniacus, Two provinces created.
by the assent of king Polemon, and Alps Cotie, king Cotius being now
deceassed. For those his acts, waxed he to be abhorred of the citizens of
Rome, and clean forsaken of all men, and of the Senate was adjudged as an
ennemy of that weal public. Where upon they sought him, to have been
revenged on him, whose punishment was appointed on this manner. That he
Punishment devised by the Romans for Nero.
should first be drawn naked through the city, then having a forke thruste
into his head, he should so hang, and be whipped till he were dead: after
that, he should be thrown down hedlong from the rock.) which which when he
understood,) he fled forth of his palaice, and in a farm er graunge of one,
who had been sometime his bondsman and was by him lately enfranceised, he slew
himself. This farm was situate between Nero slew^ him self.
the two ways Salaria and Numentana, (which were.iiii. miles distant from
Rome. He founded the bathes at Rome, which during his Bathes in Rome.
reign, were called Neroniane, and now are called Alexandrine. He deceased in
the.xxxi. year of his age, Nero his age and raygne.
when he had reigned.xiiii. years, and with him, almost all the progeny of
Augustus was put out of memory.

Afterward, Sergius Galba succeeded 7. Sergius Galba the. 7. Emperor.
in the Empire. A Senator of ancient nobleness, who was chosen Emperor by
the Spanyardes and Frenchmen, when he was.lxxiii. ye^es of age, and eftsoon
was gladlye ^eceiued of the whole army. For whilst he was yet but a private
man, ^e demeaned his life worthily both ^n Martial acts, and also in ciuyll
policy. He had been often Proconsul, exercising the office of Consul, for
others. At sundry times had he been a captain in most perilous battayles.
His Empire was but of very short continuance, proceeding of marvelous good
beginninges, saving that he seemed somewhat ouermuche given to seueritye. He
was slain thoroughe the treason of Otho, in the Galba slain.
seuenthe monthe of his reign. His throat was cut in the market place at
Rome, and lies buried in his gardain^s which are situate along the way
called Aurelia, not far dystante from the city of Rome.

When Otho had thus slain Galba, he invaded the Empire, and detained ^. Otho
the. 8. Emperor.
it him self. His stock was more noble by his mothers side, then by his
fathers, and yet was it by neither of them both, very base. When he was yet a
private manne, he behaved him self very gentlye and tractablye.

In his Empire he could not show any great experimente of his doings, for
that at the same time that he slew Galba, Vitellius was made Emperor by
tharmyes of the Germaynes, (who attempted battle against him. And Otho was
discomfited in a very light skirmish at Bebriacus, (notwythstandinge that he
had with him a great band of men,) where he slew him self, whom when his
Souldyoures requested, that he would not so lyghtlye despair Otho slew him
self.
of the success of the battle, he answered that he was not wo^rthye, ne so
much to be esteamed, that for his cause any ciuyl battayl should be waged,
and there with al, smote himself in with his dagger in the.xxxviii. year of his
age, when he The reign of Ottho.
had reigned four skore and fiftene days.

Then Vitellius obtained the Empire, 9. Vitellius the ix. Emperor.
descended of a familye which was become worshipful through aduauncementes and
promotions, rather then by nobleness of birth. For his father which came
neither of any notable line, was created Cousul thrice a row. This Viteliius
reigned with great disworship, being merueileusly noted for his great
cruelty, The disord^rly ra^gne of Vitellius.
but especially for his excessyue glotony, and unmeasurable eating. In which
he did so exceed, that (as report went,) he feasted.iiii. or v times in one
day. But among all the Vitellius his excessive glotony.
residue of his ba^kets, this one is had in memory, which his brother
Vitellius prepared for him: in which, besides other charges and expenses, (as
it was said,) there were set before An example of vnineasurable gluttony.
him at one time, two thousand fishes, and vii. thousand birds. This Vitellius
affecting very much to resemble Nero his doings, did so expreslye show this
his said purpose and intent, that he labored (what in him lay,) to honor
the exequies and funeralles of Nero, who at that time, lay but very meanly
buried. He was slain by the captains of Vitellius slain.
Vespasian. But first he slew Sabinus, Vespasian his brother, whom he burned
in the Capitol, which he se^te on fire. When Vitellius was thus slain, he
was with great reproach and ignominy drawn naked openly along the city of
Rome, The reproach full death of Vitellius.
with his bearde and hear of his head staring, and a naked sword set under his
chin. And as he passed through the streates on this sort, every one which
met him, threw dong in his face and bosom. This done his throat was cut, and
he thrown into the river of Tiber, that he might want the worship of burial,
which In what estimation burial was among the Romans.
is granted to every man, yea even to the simplest. He was slain in the
lvii. year of his age, when he hadd^ reigned.viii. months and one day.
Vitellius his age and raygne.


After him succeaded Vespasiane, who was created Emperor at Palestina: 10.
Vespasianus the tenthe Emperor began his reign in the. 4032. year after the
creation of the world, in the 824. year after come was built, and in the. 71.
year after th^ncarnatio^ of christ A Princeendued with most excellent
virtues, a maintainer of civil order, and learning in Rome, so that he
assignd certain standing stipends to Physicians and professors of other
sciences at Rome.
one in very deed base born, how be it worthy to be compared with the best
and chefest Emperors. A man who for his private life was worthy to be had in
memory. For in that time, he was sent by Claudius into Germanye, and from
thence into Brytaine, he pytched field and fought five times with his
enemies. He annexed to the Roman Empire two mighty nations, twentye
towns, and the I Will of Wighte nighe adjoining to Britayne. He behaved himself
in the Roman Empire very moderately, but he was somewhat to much desirous of
monye. Neuerthclesse he got the same in such sort, that he wron ged no man
for it.

And like as he did with earnest means and diligence, study to gather it
together, so did he very cyrcumspectlye distribute the same abroad,
espetiallye to such as had great need there of. So that uneath any man
can find either greater liberalitye, or more justly employed of any Prince
that ever was before his time. He was very pacyent and gentle: In so much
that he would not lightlye punyshe any such as The great lenity of
Vespasiane.
were accused and openly conuycted to have conspired treason against him,
with any greuouser penaltye, then by banishment only.

In the time of his Empire, Judea and Jerusalem, the most famous and notable
Cities of Palestina, were annexed to the Roman Empire.

Moreover he reduced Achasa, Licia, Rhodus, Bizantium, (which is now called
Constantinople,) and Samos, which before were free cities,) and likewise
Trachea, Cilicia, Thracia and Comagenes which were under the dominion of
sondrye kings, such as were friends to the Romans, into the form of
Provinces. He would quickly forget displeasures and grudges of mind. He would
patiently suffer and hear the rebukes and tauntes of Philosophers, and of
those which pleaded men's causes tofore him. But he was an earnest reformer
of Martial policy. He and his son Titus triumphed Vespafian triumphed over
Jerusalem with his son Titus.
over Jerusalem. Thus when he was by these means beloved and well lyked of the
Senate, and other the commons of Rome, and in fine of all men, he was stricken
with a flixe, and so died at a Manor of his own, which was among the
Sabines, Vespasian died of a flyxe.
in the.lxix. year of his age, when he had reigned.ix. years and vii. days,
and was canonised. Vespasian his age, and time of (...)


He had with such observation di^gentlye marked the naituityes and byrthes of
his sons, that when son dry conspiratyes were pretended against him and
were deseried, he Credit to the casting of natiuities.
would always dissimule and neglect them: affirminge to the Senate, that
either his sons should succeed him in his Empire, or elsse no man. After his
decease, Titus his son succeaded him: who was also called 11. Titus
Vespas^an^^e.xi. Emperor began his reign in the. 4041. year after the creation
of the world, the 833. year after Rome was ballte, ^ the ^o* yereafter Christ
his incarnation. Titus Vespasian a good archer.
Vespasianes a man worthy of great^ admiration, for all kind of virtues. In so
much that he was called she love and delices of mankind. He was very
eloquent, and an ^^tedyng stout warrior, and one of passynge^ great
sobrietye. He pleabed causes himself in Latin. He made diverse Poetical
inventions and tragedies in Greek. At the assaulting of Jerusalem (where he
so^loed under his father,) he shot of.xii. arowes which he bestowed in such
sort, that with each of them he slew a man, of them which stood on the
walls, in the defense of the City. He used such lenity in his Empire at
Rome, The great lenity of Titus
that he never punyshed any one man at all. Such as were convict to have
conspired against him, be dismyste and pardoned in such sort, that forth
with he would again use and accept them in like familiaritye, as he did
before. He was so easy to ve entreated, and there with also liberal, The
liberality of Titus.
that he never denied request to any manne. For which cause when his friends
rebuked him, for that his largess and liberality: he made them this goodly
answer. From an Emperor An example of a right princely heart.
quod he, none ought to depart sorrowful, for not obtaining their requests.
And for this cause ones, as he sat at Supper, and bethoughte him that he
had that day given nothing to any manne, he said: O my friends I have
lost this day, (accounting that for no day, in which The Theater built, a
place made half round, where the people assembled to be hold plays.
he gave not some thing away.) He builded the Theater at Rome, a place made
round, very good to behold plays and enterludes. And at the first erectinge
thereof, he slew sieve thousand wild beasts.

When he was through this demeaninge him self passyngly well beloved of all
men, he fell sick and died at the same Manor place where his father did, after
that he had Titus died.
reigned two years, eight months, and twentye days, and in the fortye year
of his age. There was no less Titus his age and reign.
moan and lamentation made for him after his death, then if every manne had
bewailed his own private loss and alonenesse. The Senate hearing of his
decease, forthwith in have went that same night in the eueninge tide into the
counsel house, and there rendered unto him (being now at this time dead) so
great praise and thanks as they did never the like to him at any time. While
he yet lived, and was conuersaunt among them. He was Titus canonised.
also canonised. After his decease, Domitianus 12. Domitianus the.xii. Emperor
brother to Titus began his reign in the. 4043. year after the creation of the
world, in the 835. year after the buylding of Rome and in the year of our
Lord 83 he expulsed the Philosophers and studiers of the mathematical sciences
forth of Rome he was the ii. emperor that persecuted ye christians, who^ he put
to death like as Nero did. The crueltye and pride of Domitianus
obtained the Empire, being younger brother to Titus: but he resembled more
Nero or Caligula, or Tiberius, then he did either his father or his brother. In
the first beginning of his Empire, he behaved himself with great temperance
and modesty: But soon after, being enfected with the vices of fleshly lust,
anger, cruelty, and avarice, he so kyndled the hatred of all me^ against him,
that he did in manner quite abolishe and blot out of memory, the good deserts
of his father and brother. He slew the most worthy of the Senate. He was the
first which commanded him self to be called a God: He would not permyt the
Romans to set up any pictures of him, unless they were of gold or silver.
He slew his own cosen German. He was moreover of an horrible pride. He made
in his time.iiii. viages only. One against the Sarmatians, an other against
the Cattianes, and two into Dacia, (which is now called Denmark.) He
tryumphed twice over the Dacianes and the Cattianes. When he had subdued the
Sarmatianes, he ware but a garla^d of baies only. He sustained sondrye damages
in those battles: for in Sarmatia his Legiones and captain were slain. And by
the Danes, Appius Sabinus one of the Consuls, and Cornelius Fiscus, captayn of
the Emperors guard were also slain, and great garysons of men with them
besides. He finyshed sundry pieces of work at Rome: among which, was the
Capitol, the place for Musicians and singing me^, the two gallaries called
Isium and Serapium, and the Tilt, (a place for men to run in.)

At length, being abhorred and detested of all men for diverse his wicked
doings, he was slain in Domitianus slain.
his palaice by his own men, in the xiv. year of his age, and the.xv. year
Domitianus his age and reign.
of his reign. His corpse was carried forth to burial by such only, as
usually carry the bodies of other mean men in Rome to buryinge, and so he was
buried very dysworshipfullye.

The eyghte book of the Breuiary of Eutropius.
IN the eight hundredth and fifty year after the building Vetus and Valens
Co^suls.
of ye city of Rome, at what time Vetus and Valens, were Consulles, the weal
public When common welthes flourish.
of Rome aspyred to a meruaylous prosperous estate again. For that now with
great good hap, the 13. Nerua the 13 Emperors began his Empire in the.
4058. year after the creation, of the world, in the 850. year after the
buylding of Rome and in the year of our Lord God. 98.
administrynge there of, was committed and betaken to the guidaunce of good
rulers.

For after the death of Domitianus that deadlye tiraunt, Nerua succeaded: a man which in his private life, behaved him self very soberlye, and yet was
he both stout and manfull.

He was descended but of a mean line of nobilitye. ^y the procur eme^t of
Petronius Secundus, who was captain of the guard, and Parthenius which was he
that slew Domitianus, he was chosen Emperor, being then berye aged. He
demeaned him self very vprightlye and curtuously. He provided very ^ire
unispectlye for the weal public, by adopting Traianus to his son. Nerua
Nerua deceased. Nerua his age and raygn.
died at Rome, after that he had reigned 14 Vlpius Traianus the. iiii Emperor
began his reign in the. 4060 year after the creation of the world, in the 8^1.
year after come was built, and in the. 100. year after thincarnatio^ of christ
he was then. foreyner that was created Emperor, he was a Spaniard borne and no
Italian. adopted to the succession of the Empire by Nerua. he was the third
emperor that persecuted ye christians. But in his time it was decreed yt they
should not be called to examinatyon, except they had been first accused.
Armenia renewed.
one year, iiii. months, and.viii. days, in the.lxxvi. year of his age.
After his death, he was canonised.

After him succeeded Vlpius Traianus Crinitus, who was born at Italica in
Spain, whose parentage was more ancient of time then noble of birthe. His
father was first Consul: the^ after he became to have government of the other
Agripina a city in France. He governed ye weal public in such sort, that
he might worthelye be preferred above all other Princes. He was one of passing
great ciuility and stoutnesse wythal. He enlarged both in length and
bredthe, the borders and marches of the Roman Empire, which sith the time
of Augustus, was rather but defended and only conserved, then worthily
augmented. He repaired those cities which were ruinous and fallen in decay on
the farther side of Rheine in Germany. He subdued Dacia, and vanquished
Decibalus. He created a Province on the farther side of Danubius, in those
parties where as now ye Taiphalianes inhabit. That Province extended to a
thousand miles in cixcuit. He recovered Armenia, which the Parthia^s had won,
and slew Pharnaces the Sirian who detained it. He appointed one to be king
over the Albanes. He received under obeysaunce, the kings of the Spaniardes,
the Moscouites, the Bosphoranes, the Arabiaues, the Dsdroenes, and of the
inhabitaunts of Cholchos. He conquered the Adiabenes and Marchomedes. He
subdued Antemusiu^ a great region of Persia. He wanne Seleucia, Ctesiphontes,
Babilone, and Edissios, and brought that country in subjection unto the
borders of India, and marched still forward, until he came to the red sea,
where he founded three Provinces, Armenia, Assiria, and Mesopotamia: together
Three provinces made.
with those people which border upon Macedonie. After that, he reduced Arabia
also into the form of a Province. He prepared a nauye for the red Sea, minding
there with A vlage prepared ok the red sea.
to spoil the coasts and borders of India. But his curtesye and sobriety
excelled far all those his Martial The passing same of Traianus.
feats. He behaved himself at Rome and elsse where through all his Provinces,
fellow like to all men.

He went oftentimes to his friends houses to salute the^ and visit them if they
were sick and diseased.

If they feasted one an other, he would also banquet among them, without
putting any difference between them and him self.

Often would he ride with them in their chariottes. He would Meuer harm any
Senator, nor commit any thing contrary to justice, for the augmenting of his
treasoure. He used great liberalitye toward all men. Both openly and
secreatlye enryched he all persons, and advanced to honors diverse such
as he had but very small acquayntaunce and familiaritye wythall. He buylte in
manner a whole world him self. He enfraunchised many cities. In fine, he did
nothing, but it was very quietly done, and void of all trouble.

For during all his whole reign, there was but only one Senator condemned,
whom the residue (...) the Senate adjudged to death, vnwittynge to Traianus.
For which cause, he was through all the whole world reputed of all men most
like to a God. So that both whilst he ye^ Traianus reputed for a God.
lived, and after his death also, he demerited immortal honor. Among the
residue of al his worthy sayings, this one of his, deserves eternal memory.
When his friends happened once to reprehend him, for that he behaved him self so
gently toward all men, he made this answer: that when he was now Emperor,
he showed him self to be such toward A worthy saying of an Emperor.
his subjects and populer people, as he (when he was as yet a subject) wished
the Emperor to have been to him wards. When he had thus purchased great
glory and renown both for civil and also Martial policy, as he returned
from Persides, he sickned and died by the way, at Seleucia Traianus deceased.
a town of Isauria of the flixe: when he had lived.lxii. years, ix. months
and.iiii. days, in the.xix. year Traianus his age and raygne.
vi. month, and.xv. day of his reign. He was canonised, and of all other,
Traiane the first Emperor which was buried within the city.
he alone was buried within the city. His bones were put in a golden cup, and
set under a pillar, in a streate which he builte himself, which pillar
amounted in heighte to an C. and.xliiii. foot. The factes of Traianus are so
rife in memory, that even in these our days in the Senate or Council house,
the fortunate acclamations and well wishynges to the Prince by his commons, at
his elections, are used to be these. That hes might prove in his affairs more
fortunate then Angustus, and in behauioure and demeanor of himself, to excel
Traianus. So much prevailed in him the fame of perfect goodness, that whether
men flatter him, or do in deed commend him, he gave undoubtedly just occasion
to be accounted a most worthy example to others.

When Traianus was deceassed, Elius Adrianus was created Emperor, 15. Elius
Adrianus the.xv. Emperor, begenne his reign in the. 4079. year after the
creation of the world, the 871. year after Rome was builte, and the 119.
year atfer Christ, he gave himself wholly to purchase peace and quietness,
there was no one Emperor sense Augustus time, which aduantaged ye common well
so much as he did, he was very expert in Astrenomy he made prog nosticatyons,
yearly for his own self. He persecuted the christians at the first, but after
he had red diverse b^kes which certain Christians that were learned men, wrate to
him, he wild that none should be apprehended for religyons sake.
not for that Traianus willed it should be so, but through the only
procuremente of Plotina wife to Traianus. For so long as Traianus was yet
living, he would never adopte him, nor make him his heir: although he was
his own sisters daughters son, and cosen to him. He was also borne at
Italica in Spain.

This Adrianus enuyinge at the glory of Traianus, yielded up the keepinge of
those three Prouynces which Traianvs had annexed to the city of Rome, and
removing his armye^ from Assiria, Mesopotamia, and Armenia, he mineded that
his Empire should not have extended any further that way, the^ to the river
Euphrates. But when he purposed to give over Dacia also, which then ye
Romans kept, his friends dissuaded him from that (fearinge least by that
means, many Romain citizens should have been endangered to fall in to the hands
of the Barbarians.) For Traianus after that he had subdued Dacia,) removed
thither great plenty of people, whom he assembled together through all the
Romayne Empire and dominion, to inhabyte there, and manure that land. For that
Dacia was through the continual wars of Decibalus, become now void of
inhabitauntes, and clean without strength, He had peace during the whole time
of his Empire. Only one battle waged he and that One bettayle only during the
reign of Adriands.
by his Provost. He went over all the Romain Empire himself, and built many
places there. He was very eloquent in the Latin tongue, and exceeding well seen
in the Greek tongue. He was not greatly commended for any cleme^cy which he used.
He was exceeding circumspect about the treasory, and Martial policye. He
deceased in Campania, being above the Adrianus deceased, hieage and raygne.
age of.lx. years, when he had reigned.xxi. years.x. months and.xix. days.
The Senate would not canonise him. Nevertheless his successor Ditus Aurelius
Fuluius required very earnestly that he might be canonised: which thing all the Senate did openly withstand. How be it at length, he obtained it. Than
after, Adrianus there succeeded Antonius Fuluius Boionius who was called 16.
Antonius Fulnius Boionius the. 16. Emperor, whom Adrianus adopted, began his
raygne in the. 140. year after the Incarnatyon of Christ.
also Pias: he was descended of a noble familye, but yet of no long antiquity.
He was a notable man, and such one as might worthelye be compared with Numa
Pompilius, like as ^^aianus might be conferred with Romulus. When he was as
yet a private man, he behaved himself very well, and in his Empire far
better. He showed cruelty to no man. He exhibited great curtesye to all men.
In Martial feats he obtained mean glory, endeuoringe evermore rather to
defend, then to amplify and enlarge his provinces: assigning the iustest men
that he could find, to hear office in the common wealth. He advanced
always to promotyons such as were good men, and detested such as were lewd
and naughty persons, without vsinge (for all that,) any rigor or cruelty to
any of them. Among such kings as had joined frendshippe and amitye with the
Romans, he was not only reverenced, but feared also. In so much that diverse
nations of the Barbarianes A notable argument of instice and indifferency.
(setting wars and force aside) would bring their controversies and matters
in debate, to be decided before him: yelding them selves wholly to abide his
determinate sentence there in. And where as before thaccep taunce of thempire,
he was exceeding rich, and of passing great wealth, yet during his said reign,
he did wonderfullye diminishe and abate his said substance, and greatly
impoueryshe himself by augmentynge the wages of his souldioures, and vsinge so
great liberalitye toward his friends. How be it he left the common
treasoure well stored and welthy. He was called Pius, for the great pity and
gentleness which he used. He deceased at Lorium a Manor Antonius deceased of
a fever.
place of his own, which was situate.xii. miles distant from Rome, when he
had lived.lxxiii. years, and reigned.xxiii. years. He was worthily canonised.

Next after him, Marcus Antonius 17. M. Antonius Verus the 17. Emperor began
his reign in the year of our Lord 163 he was passig wellearnd, he adminystred
the Empire jointly with his brother L. Antoninus. In his time a piece of England
received the faith.
Verus attained the Empire: A man which doubtless was come of a very noble
house. He conveyed his descent by the fathers side, from Numa Pompilius, and by
his mothers side from king Salentinus. There reigned with him also as Emperor,
Lucius Annius Antoninus Verus. At that time first began the weal publyque of
Rome to be administered by two Emperors at one time, who with like and
indifferent authority governed the same, whereas before that time, it was
governed by one alone.

These two were both of one kindred and aliaunce. For why, Verus Annius
Antoninus espoused the daughter of Marcus Antoninus, and Marcus Antoninus, was
son in law to Antoninus Pius, by mean of his wife Galeria Faustina the
younger, which was his sisters daughter, and cosen german to him.

They waged battle against the Parthianes, which never erste Battle
against the par thians.
rebelled, since the victory that Traianus had over them.

Verus Antonius took on him that viage, and staying for a time in Antioche,
and in the borders of Armenia, he atcheued sondrye and those worthy feats
there, by mean of his captains. He wan Seleucia a very Seleucia wan.
famous City of Assiria, and took prisoners v. C. M. men in it. He brought a
triumph with him forth of Parthia and solempnised it with his brother, who
was also his Father in law. But as he departed from the city Concordia,
minedinge to go toward Altium, (which is now called Torrine,) he died. For as
he rode in chariot with his brother, he was sodainlye stricken with an issue
of blood, by mean of a disease, which the Gretians call (...). (The Antonius
Verus deceassed
force of the disease is such, that those whom it takes, it depriueth of their
senses,) he was ve rye witty. Of him self, he was disp osed and enclyned to
no great ciuility e. But yet for the rence which he stood in of his brother,
he durst never attempt any cruel fact. When he was deceased, which Antoninus
Verus his age and reign.
was in the.xi. year of his reign, he was canonised. After his death, Marcus
Antoninus alone governed The roman Empire reduced to yt form of a Monarch
again.
the Empire, being such one as men might rather marvel at, then but praise
only. For from the beginning of his reign, he was very sober and grave. In so
much that in his childhode, he would never aultare his countenance, either
for mirth or for sorrow. He was whollye addicted to the Philosophy or doctrine
of the Stoikes, professing him self not only in outward demeanor and kind of
lyuinge, but by his learning also, to be a right Philosopher. When he was as
yet but a very young man, he was had in such admiration, that Adrianus
purposed then with himself, to leave him as his successor in his Empire. How
be it he adopted Antoninus Pius minding so to co^triue the matter that Marcus
should be son in law to Antoninus Pius who^ he adopted, and that so, by order
of succession, he might at last aspyre to the Empire. In Philosophye he was
instructed by Apollonius the Chalcedonian. He was traded up in the Greek tongue
by Sextus Cheronesus, who was neuew to Plutarch. He was taught the Latin
tongue, by Frontus a notable Orator. He dealt withal men up rightlye at Rome. He
was nothing Worthy commendatyon of a prince.
the higher minded for all the pomp of his Empire. He was exceading liberal.
He entreated the Prouynces which were under his gouernmente with great
gentleness and moderation. Matters took very good success in Germany, during
the reign of this Prince. He waged one battle himself against the
Marcomanes: (who are supposed to be the people of Bohemia.) A battle by the
Bohemians.
This battle was so great and cruel, that almost no man can ever remember ye
like, so that it might well be compared with those which were waged against ye
Carthaginiens. It was so much the more ctuel and grievous, for in that battle
all his army died. For during his reign, there fell so great a Pestilence,
that after the victory which he got over A great Pestilence in Italy.
the Persians, the greatest part of the inhabitauntes of Rome and Italye, and
other the Provinces, and well nigh all the souldioures died.

Where upon when by the space of three years continuallye without
intermissyon, he had continued his battle at Carnuntum, he finyshed at
length his battayl against The battle which the Bohemians finished.
the Marcomannes, which the Quadianes, the Vaudales, the Sarmatianes, the
Swyssers, and all Barbarye had maintained against the Romans.

He slew there many thousands of men: and when he had delivered the
Hungarians forth of bondage, he triumphed again at Rome with his M. Antoninus
triu^phed at Rome.
sone Commodus Antoninus, whom he created Caesar. And when through the charges
and expenses of the said battle, he had exceadingly wasted and nighe spent
all his treasure, and had now nothing left which he might give abroad as
he had accustomed, he would not yet for all that, exact any thing among the
Senators or others about the Provinces, but did choose rather to sell all his
wardrobe by piece meal, in that streate which Traianus made. There made
The Emperor sold all his substance rather then he would charge his subjects
with exactio^s
he also open sale of all his plate of gold, cups of Cristal, and Murrhine
stone: He sold moreover, the apparel which belonged to him self and his wife,
and diverse other Jewels and ornaments of precious stones. The foresaid sale
lasted by the space of.ii. whole months. By this mean, he got again much
gold into his treasury. But so sone as he had obtained the victory, he
repaired to such as had bought any part of his said substance, their money
again, to such of them as would depart with the things which they had all
ready bought. And those which desired rather to deteine still that which they
had bought, then to take their money again, he never molested or disquieted for
it. He llcensed such as were noble men to feast with like sumptuousness and
furniture, and to be served with like seruitors as he was himself. When he had
gotten the victory, he was so liberal in dealinge gifts, that in one day (as
the report went,) he gave away an C. Lions to gether. Thus when he had
reduced The great largess of Antoninus.
the weal public, to a most fortunate estate, both for manhood and
curtesy, he deceased in the.xviii. year of his reign, when he had lived.lx.
years and one, and was canonysed, (all the people earnestly laboring to have
it so,) After him succeeded Lucius Antoninus Co^modus his son, who L.
Antoninus Co^modus, ye 18. emperor began his reign in the year of our Lord.
181.
in one thing rese^bled his father, but only that he had also good success in
battle against the Germans. He would have changed the name of the month of
September, and called it Co^modus after his own name. He defamed himself with
riot and ribaudry. He played oftentimes in thope^ schools of fence, and
sometimes also upon the theater or stage, with ths masters of defense them
selves. He died suddenly Antoninus Commodus died suddenly.
so y^ men did judge that he was either thrailed or poisoned, when he had
reigned.xii. years and.viii. months after the decease of his father, he was so
abhorred of all men, that even after Commodus Antoninus his reign.
his decease, he was demed as an enemy of mankind. After him succeeded 19.
Pertinax the 19 Emperor began his reign the 194 year of our Lord.
ded Pertinax, who was then very aged, for why he was lxx. years of age and at
that time called Prefecturoo: And when he had reigned.lxxx. dais, he was slain
in an vproure which fell among the guard, through the Pertinax slain.
treason of Iulianus.

Next after him Saluius Iulianus got the Empire, a noble manne Saluius
Iulianus the 26. emperor began his reign in the year of our Lord. 194.
and one which was very expert in the laws: neuew to that Iulianus, who
during the reign of Adrianus the Emperor, (whom the Romans worshypped for
a GOD,) made always the Proclamatyons and other thedictes and ordinances of
the Emperor. This Iulianus was discomfited by Seuerus, at ye bridge Iulianus
discomfyted.
called Miluius bridge, and being pursued, was sone after slain in his
palaice. He lived.vii. months after Iulianus slain.
the time that he first began to Iulianus his reign.
raygne. From that time, Septunius Seuerus took the rule and gouernmente of
the Romayne Empire: Who was born at a town called Lepus, which was in
Tripolinata, a province in Afric. He was the only Emperor, (after as any man
can remember,) The only Emperor created forth of Affricke.
either before that time, or since, which was create Emperor forth of
Affricke. He had first the ordering and oversight of the treasor, sone after
he was made Tribunus Militum. From thence, passing through diverse offices and
preferments: At last he became to have the admynistration of the whole weal
public. He willed that men should call him Pertinax, for the great zeal and
good will which he seemed to owe to that Pertinax which was flaine by Iulianus:
He was very sparyng and nere him self, and by nature cruel. He waged sundry
battails, and those with great dexterity and good success. Seuerus his
valiauntnes.
He slew Percenius Niger at Cizicus, who rebelled in Egipte and Siria. He
oueacame the Parthians. He subdued the Arabians so nyghe, that he made a
province there. By mean whereof, he demerited to have the names Sextinus
Seuerus called Parthicus and Arabicus
to be called Parthicus and Arabicus. He repaired many things through out
the Romain Empire. In this time also Clodius Albinus, who had associated
himself with Iulianus Clodius Albinus created himself Cesarium France.
to help him to ^lea Pertinax, created himself Caesar in France, and was
vanquished at Louane, and slain there. But Seuerus besides yt he did excel in
glory, purchased by feats of arms, he was also reuere^ced for his civil
policy. He was hothe Worthy praise in a prince.
learned, and had attained besides the perfection of the knowledge of
Philosophy. The last battle which he waged, was in Britain. And to the
Seuerus subdued Brytaine.
end that he might make sure with defense al such provinces as he had won
there, he caused a trenche to be cast from sea to sea a long, the length
of.xxii. miles. He deceased at York, being very aged in the xviii. year and
Seuerushys age and raygne.
iiii. month of his reign, and was canonised. He left his son Bassianus and
Geta to succeed him in his Empire. But he willed the Senate that they should
call his son Bassianus, Antoninus. Whereupon he was named Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus Bassiainus, 22. Antoninus Bassianus the 22. Emperor, after his
fathers death, began his Empire in the 213. year after Christ's Incarnation,
he slew his brother in law at his mothers breasts.
and succeeded his father alone. For Geta who was counted as open enemy to ye
weal public, dyed forthwith. Thus was Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Bassianus,
who was also called Caracalla, created Emperor. He was well nigh like of
conditions unto his father, but somewhat sharp and more full of threatninges.
He founded the bathes at Rome which were called Antonians, a notable piece of
work. Besides that, he did nothing worthy Autoniane bathes founded at Rome.
of memory. He was out of mesure given to sensuality, and carnal
concupiscence: in so much that he espoused his mother in law Iuba. He dyed in
Osdroenes at Edessa, as he made preparacion for his viage against the
Parthians, in the.vi. year and second month of his reign, when he had lived
skant.xliii. years. He was buried very simply, after the common sort of people.
There were Opilius Macrinus, and his son Diadumenus created Emperors. This
Macrinus was sometime captain of the guard. They did nothing that was worthy of
memory, for ye short time of their reign, which endured but by the space of
one year and two months. They were slain both together in a sedityon which
fell among the souldioures. Next after them was Marcus Aurelius Antoninus
created Emperor, whom men supposed to be the son of Antoninus Garacalla. He
was one of the priests of the Temple of Heliogalus. When he was come to Rome
being long looked for, both by the Senate and souldioures.

He diffamed and prostituted himself to all kind of shame and reproach. He
lived very unchastly and filthily. And about two years and.viii. months
afterward. He was slain in Aurelius Antonius slain.
an vproure which the Souldioures made, and his mother Semia Sira with him.

After him, Aurelius Alexander be 2. Aurelius Alexander the xxv. Emperor, was
chosen Emperor when he was but.xii. years of age. He was a very virtuous
prince and one that favored all good men, he was the first Emperor that
favored Christians, he began his reign, the 225. year after Christ's
incarnatyon. Magister Scriuii.
came Emperor, whom the sonldiors named Caesar, and the Senate created
Augustus, being as yet but a very young manne. In the battle which he
attempted against the Persians, he vanquished with great glory their king
Xerxes, with great dilige^s he gave himself to martial policy. Certain
legions of soldiers which made vproures and were unquiet, he dismiste and put
forth of wages. He associated with him to assiste him in judgment and giving
of sentence, Vlpianus who made the laws, who also supplied an O ffyce in Rome,
which was called magister Scriuii, an office (much like that) whithe we call
here the master of the Rolls.) This Emperor demeaned himself very gently at
Rome. He was slain Aurelius Alexander slain
in France in a tumult that grew among the soldiers, iv the.xiii. year
and.viii. day of his reign. Who showed during his whole life time very great
godliness toward all men: especially toward his mother Mamea.

The ninthe book of the Breuiary of Eutropius.
AFter that Aurelius 26. Maximinus ye 26. emperor began his reign in the
year of our Lord. 237. he was first a shepherd in Thracia, and became after
to be a souldioures.
was dead Maximinus obtained the Empire, being descended of a mean parentage:
for why, his father was a souldioure. He was the first that aspired to the
Empire, by mean of the soldiers only, not being authorized by the Senate, and
one who had been never him self Senator before: when he had with good success
fought against the Germans, and was by the souldioures nominated Emperor, he
was slain by Pupienus at Aquileia, (and his son Maximinus slain.
with him, who was as then but a very child.) when he had reigned by the
space of three years, and a few Maximinus his reign.
deed days, at which time his own soldiers forsook him, and fled from him,
then were there three which at one time in Rome bare the name of Augustus,
which were Pupienus Three Emperors together at Rome.
Balbinus, and Gordianus: of which the.ii. first were descended of a very base
line, but Gordianus was come of a noble progeny: for why, his father should
have been chosen Prince by the souldioures, at what time he supplied the
office of Consul in Afric: duringe the reign of Maximinus. So soon as they
were come to Rome, Balbinus and Pupienus were Balbinus and Pupienus slain.
slain in the palaice: and the Empire was reserved for Gordianus alone. Who
being as yet but very young, 27. Gordianus the 27 Emperor began his reign
the 241 year of our Lord.
espowsed Tranquilliua at Rome, and warred in two places together at ones.

And took his viage from thence into these parts, he waged battle against ye He
raygued vi. years.
Parthians who were now ready to issue forth of their city against him.
This battle in short space took very good success. And he in sundry great
skirmyshes did sore afflyct the Persia^s. But as he returned, he was Gordianus
slain.
slain, not far from the borders of the Romans, through the treason of
Philip, who succeaded him in the Empire. After his death one of his souldioures
erected a monum ent for a memorial of him, about.xx. miles distant from
Circesshus (which is now a castle of the Romans): near adioyninge to
Euphrates His funerals Gordianus canonised.
were solemnized at Rome, and he was canonised. Then the two Philips, the
father and the son took 28. Philip the 28 Emperor, began his reign with
his son, the year of our lord. 247. the year of their reign was the 1000.
year after Rome was built.
on them the government of the Empire, after that Gordianus was thus slain,
and returned into Italye, leading back with them the army forth of Siria. It
was accounted the M. year after the building of the city of Rome, at what time
they began first their reign: which year was celebrated with great solempnity
and preparation of games and shows. Not long after they were both slain by
tharmy. The ii. Phillips slain.
The elder Philip at Verona the younger was slaiue at Rome. They reigned by the
space of v. years, and were canonized both. After their decease, 29. Decius the
29. Emperer bega^his reign in the year of our Lord. 252 he was the. 8.
Emperor which persecuted the chry stia^s, he made an act that all that
worshipped Christ, should be slain. Some judged he was swalowed up in an
earthouake.
Decius (who was born at Bubalia in Hungary) obtained thempire. He repressed
a eiuill battle which was commenced in France. He creaied his son Caesar.
He founded a bathe in Rome. But both he and his sonue were slain in
Barbary: after that they had reigned by the space of two years and were
canonised. There were then created Emperoures, Gallus Hostiliauus: and
Volusianus his son.

During the time of their Empire, 10. Gallus Hosti Itanus the. 30 Empiror,
began his reign in the year of our lord. 254. together with his son
Volusianus. He was also a persecutor of the christians they raygned skant ii.
years
Emilianus attempted new conspiracies in Moesia, and when they both went to
subdewe him, they were slain at Iteramna, and so raygned not full out two
years. They committed no fact worthy of memory. Their Empire was for this
cause only remembered, for that during the time there of, there fell great
plagues and sondrye other diseases and mala dies with in the Roman Empire.
Emilianus like as he was of base Great plages in the romain Empire.
stock descended, right so was the time of his Empire very obscure, and
without fame: when be had Emilianus emperors.
reigned.iii. months he was slain.

After him Lucinius Valerianus, who had the government of Rhoetia and Norseus,
and was lieuetenaunt 31. Lucius Valerius the 31. Emperor, began his Empire in
the 256 yereafter Christ's Incarnation, he was a persecutor of the christians,
and used them so extremely that many of the^ forsook the faith for fear of
death.
there, was by the army created Emperor, and eftsoon made Augustus. At that
time, was Galienus also made Caesar at Rome by the assent of the Senate. The
raygne of these two was very pernityous and hurtful, and in manner an utter
decoy to the fame and renown of the Romans, what for the misfortune and
evil luck which they had in their affairs, and what for the cowardnesse of the
said princes. The Germaynes were entered within Italy, and aproched unto the
city Rauenna. Valerianus waginge battall in Mesopotamia, Valerianus discomsyted
and taken prisoner by Sapor^s. and used very vily, for when Sapores would take
his horse, he made Valerianus to lie on the ground that he might tread on him
while he got upon his horseback in stead of a blok or sotestole.
was discomslted there, by Sapores king of the Persians, and sone after was
taken prisonner: and ended his life among the Persians in most seruil boudage,
Galienus (who was made Augustus) being as yet but a very young man. At ye first
he did with great derterity govern ye weal public: Sone after, indifferently
well, and at the last, marvelous naughtily. For when he was but young, he at
cheued and brought to pass sondrye things in Frasice and Illiria ^ery stoutly.
He slew Iugenuus at Mursia, (one of ye peers of y^ country) and Treballinnus.
Long time after that, he behaved himself marvelous still and quiet.

Afterward giving himself wholly over to wantonness and riot from thence forth
he governed y^ weal public, with exceadinge great cowardice, so that things
fell into passing great desperation. The Almaines when they had despoiled
France, The Romans annoyed the Roman empire.
they invaded Italy. And Dacia, which was situate on the farther side of the
river Danubius, and by Traianus was annexed to the Roman Empire, was then
lost. Grees, Macedonie, Pontns, and Asia were over run by the Goths. Hungary
was despoiled by the Sarmatians, and the Bohemians. A great part of the Romain
empire won by foreyners.
The Germans proceeded still forward until they came to Spain, where they
conquered the worthy city Tarracon. When the Parthia^s had no we gotten
Mesopotomia, they began also to pretend atytle and of claim to Syria. Thus
when things were welnigh past all hope of reconerye, and the Roman Empire
almost wholly extinguished, Posthumous a French man borne, being Posthumous
usurped the estate imperial
come of a very base stock, intruded into thempire, and governed ye same by
the space of.x. years, in such sort, that through his great p^owesse and
manhood, he recovered those provinces, which were then almost quite lost.
But within a while after, he was slain in a tumult, in which the Posthumous
slain.
soldiers rose against him, for that he would not license and permit the^ to
rifle and sack the city Moguncia, which rebelled against him: at which place,
Lollianus also began new conspiracies. After him, Marius a handicraftes Marius
usurped the imperial estate.
man, of a very vile and reject occupation, got the Empire, and the next day
after he was slain. Then Victorinus governed France.
Victorinus took on him the government of France: he was a meruaylous stout
man of courage, but ouermuche given to carnal concupisce^s. And when he fell to
deflour and forse other men's wives, he was slain at Victorinus slain.
the city Agrippina in the second year of his reign, through the treason of
one Acturius. After him succeeded Tetricus the Senator, who being lieuetenaunt
Tetricus chosen emperor
over y^ part of France, which is called Aquitany or Guion, was in his absence
by the whole consent of his soldiors chosen Emperor, and at Burdeux he took
estate upon him. He ouerstode sundry tumultes of the souldioures. But whilst
that those things took this success in France, the Persians were vanquishte
in the East parts by Odenatus. Syria was The Persians va^quisht
defended against such as invaded it, and Mesopotamia was again recovered.
Odenatus proceeded forward, until he came to Ctesipho^tes a town in Parthia.
Then when Galienus had resigned and given up the gouernemente of the weal
public, the Roman Empire was adminystred by two at ones. The East parts by
Odenatus, and the West parts The romayn Empire governed by.ii. at ones.
by Posthumous.

In this mean space, Galienus and Valerianus were slain at Millaine, in the
ninthe year of their reign, and Claudius succeaded after them, who was chosen
by the soldiers, and by 32. Claudius the 23. Emperor, began his reign in the
year of our Lord. 271 a very worthi man, he recovered again things which were
gone to decay during the raygnes of Valeriauus and Galienus
the Senate created Augustus. He overcame in sharp wars ye Goths, he wan
Illiria, and discomfited and put to flight such as despoiled Macedonie. He was
a very sparing man, and a sober. A maintainer of justice, and such one, as was
fyt to gouernea weal public. Within.ii. years after that he began first his
reign, he sickned and died, and was canonised. The Senate attributed great
honors unto him. For why, they caused to be hanged up, a golden Target or
shield in the Council house: and in the Capitol, a golden Image to be created
for a perpetual memory of him.

Next after Quintilius brother to that same Claudius, was by the whole consent
of the soldiers nominated Quintilius nominated emperor.
Emperor, a man of singular sobriety and gentleness, worthy to be compared with
his brother, or rather to be preferred before him. By the assent of the Senate,
he was made Augustus, and Quintilius slain.
was slain within.xvii. dais after that he began his reign. Then Aurelianus
accepted the government of the Empire. 33. Aurelianus the. 33. emperor
preferred to that dignity by Claudius, began his reign in the year of our
Lord. 213, he was the tenth emperor that deltexttemely with Christians.
He was borne at Dacia Ripensis, (which is now called Denmark.) He was a stout
man in war, how be it his mind was inclined to unmeasurable crueltye. He
subdued also manfully the Goths. He restored ye Romain Empire to the wonted
and ancient precinctes, after long and uncertain fortune of battle. He
vanquished Tetricus at Catalaunos in France, where Tetricus betrayed Tetricus
vanquished and deposed.l.
his own army unto him, for that he could not endure the daily sedytions and
discensions which spronge among his souldioures. Whereupon he requested
Aurelius by letters seacreatly, that he would rid him from those calamities.
In his said letters he used this vearse of Virgil. eripe me his muicte malis
(which is). Deliver me forth of these miseries thou victoryous, and invincible
conqueroure. He took Zenobia prisnoner in an exceading great battle, almost
fast by Antioche, when he had first slain her husband Odenatus: who had now
got all the East parts under his dominion. Odenatus slain.
And when he came to Rome, he triumphed worthilye, as he, who had again
recovered both the East and West parts of the Empire. Aurelianus triumphed at
Rome.
There went before his charyot in y^ triumph, Tetricus, and Zenobia. But
Tetricus was afterward deputed to have the refourminge and redressyng of
Lucania, and lived as a private person there, of long time. And Zenobia atter
her decease, lef^ her posteritye at Rome, which deo as yet to this day
remain there. Duringe the reign of Aurelianus, the coyners of money rebelled
with Coyners rebelled in Rome.
in the city of Rome. They depraved the coin, and slew one Foelicissinnus
Rationalis. But Aurelianus when he had ones subdued them, he kept them under
with great extremity of punishment. Diverse of their Principals, he put to
death. He demeaned himself with great cruelty, and as a blood thyrster. Many
reverenced him more for the dignitye and room which he supplied, then for
any zeal or love that they bare to him. He practiced always horrible
rigor. In so much that he^ slew his own sisters sons. How be it he
endeavored by all means to refourme martial policy, and to reduce and frame to
good order the dissolute and corrupted conditions of the people. He environed
the City of Rome Rome walls new made.
with stronger walls. He founded a temple there, which he dedicated to the
Sun. Upon which he bestowed The temple of the Sun founded at Rome.
an infinite deal of gold and pretyous stones. He surrendered and gave up the
keeping of the province of Dacia: Dacia yielded up.
which Traianus founded upon the farther side of the river Danubius, and
despoyled al Illiria, and Moesta for that he stood in doubt how he should be
able to defend the same any longer.

And conueying all the Romans ^^et^ of the Cities and Countries of Dacia, he
planted them in the myddest of Moesia, which is new situate lying on the right
side of Danubius, where the lea has his course, which before lay more on the
left side. He was slain through the treason of his Aurelianus slain.
own servants, who falsely and traitorously counterfaiting themperors hand, made
in a roll y^ names of so^dry men, (which in deed were such as themperdure
fansied, and was very much affectioned unto) affirminge to them that the
Emperor had decreed their deaths. Whereupon they thinking to prevent that
pretense of the Emperor, slew him in the myddest of his journey upon the
causye way, which was between Constantinople and Heraciea. The place was
called Cenophrurium. How be it, his death was not unrevenged. He was
canonized, he reigned by the space of v. years and.vi. months. Aurelianus his
raygne.


Next after him, Tacitus obtained thempire, a man of exceeding good 34. Tacitus
the 34. emperor began his reign in the year of our Lord. 279.
conditions, and such one as was mete to govern o weal publyque.
Nevertheless he could not show any document of his worthiness, for that
within vi. months after the commencement of his Empire, hes T^acitus deceased.
was preusnted by death.

Then Florianus, who succeaded 35.
Tacitus, administered the Empire by 35. Florianus the 35. Emperor, began his
Empire in the 279 year after Christ's Incarnation.
the space of two months and.xx. dais: who in like manner did nothing which
was worthy of memory. After him, Probus a man singulerlye expert in warfare,
became Emperor. He recovered France, which the Barbarians had won before. He
vanquished 36. Probus the 36. Emperor, began his reign in the year of our
Lord. 279
in sundry skirmishes, diverse which attempted to vsurp the estate imperial: as
Saturninus in the East parts, and Proculus, and Bonosus at Agrippina. He
licensed the french France reconered.
men and the Hungarians to have vineyardes. He caused the hill Almus adjoining
to the city Sirmium, and the hill Aureus in Mesia the higher, Uineyardes
permiited in France and Hungary.
to be planted with vines by the hands of his souldioures, and after gave them
to men of the same Provinces, to be tilled and husbanded. After that he had
waged innumerable battles, and had at the last purchased peace: and that all
the countress round about were now quiet, he said that within short space,
souldioures should not be requisite ne nedeful. He was a very ernest, stout,
and a just manne, and such one as was hable to match Aurelianus his
predecessor for renown atcheued by cheualrye, and as for ciuility and
courteous behauioure, he excelled him far. He was slain at Sirmium Probus slain
in an vproure (which grew among the souldioures) in an Iron tower, when he
had reigned.vi. years and Probus his raygne.
iii. months.

After him Carus was created Augustus, who was borne at Narbona 37. Carus the.
37. Emperor began his reign the 286. year of our Lord.
in France. He immediatlye upon his said creation made Carinus and
Numerianus his sons, Cesares: and with them he reigned by the space of two
years. But when he took battle in hand against the Carinus and
Numerianus Cesars.
Sarmatians (having understanding of the insurrection of the Persians,) he
changed his vyage into the East The Persia^s subdued.
parts, where he atcheued things manfully against the Persians, and subdued
them in battle. He wan Seleucia Seleucia and Ctesiphontes won.
the chiefest city of Siria, and Ctesiphontes a town in Persia, and being in
his tents which were pitched fast upon Tigris, he was strycken Carus slain
with lightni^g
with lightnyng from heaven, and so died: Numerianus also his Son, (whom he
took to that battle with him, which he waged against the Persians,) being a
young man of a wonderful towardness, for that he was payned with a grief in
his eyes so that he could not ride, was carried in an horse liter thronghe the
persuasion of Aper his Father in Numerianus slain.
law, by whose treason he was there slain: and his death concelde until that
Aper might have oportunitye to get the Empire. But through the stenche of
his carcass, his death was bewrayed.

For why, the souldioures which followed the horse liter wherein he was carried,
being anoyed with the smell, plucking of the coueringes from the bed, found him
dead, and within short while after understood how he was slain. In this mean
while, Carinus who^ Carus his father (when he made his expedition against ye
Persia^s) had deputed Caesar over Illiria, France and Italy, gave him self
over to all kind of mischief. He put diverse innocents to death for very small
crimes. He forsed and defloured diverse noble men's wives, and harmed often times
such his schole fellows as reproved him gently, and with fair words for
certain misdemenures which he used in thauditory or place where they hard their
lectures, through which occasious, he grew to be hated of all men, and not
long after, suffered condign punishments for those his factes. For when the
army was returned forth of Persia, after these discomfitures (that is to
say,) when they had lost Carus Augustus by lightning, and Numerianus Caesar by
treason, they created Dioclesianus 38. Dioclesianus the. 38. Emperor began
his reign the 288. year of our Lord, a man for policy and civil government,
he was an exceeding sore persecutor of christians, in his reign there were
slain within.xxx. days space to the number of 17000. christians.
Emperor, Who was borne at Dalmatia. He was descended of a very base stock:
for diverse adjudged that he was a scriueners son: Others there were that
thought him to be bondsman to Anulinus the Senator, and by him made free: he
took an oath in the open assemblye of the souldioures, that Numerianus was not
slain by any his treason: and there with all, in the presence of all the
soldiers, drawing forth his sword he ran Aper through, who stood fast by him,
which was father in law to Numerianus, and had slain him. After that, he
overcame Carinus, who yet lived, being hated and despited of all men, whom his
own army, which was of great power and strength, betrayed, forsakynge him
between the two hills Viminatius and Aureus, when Carinus had on this sort
obtained the Romalne Empire, the peisauntes of France began a commotion, and
called that their conspiracye Bagande. They chose Amandus, and one other called
Elianus to A commotion of the pesants of France.
be their captains. Against them, was sent Maximianus Herculius, then
Caesar: who in easy battles vanquished the said peysaunts, and repressed and
quieted again that part of France. After this, Carausius also (who though
he was descended France pacified.
of a very base parentage, and yet had attained unto great renoum, for that he
demeaned him self manfullye in wars,) took upon him at Bononia to bring in
quiet and to appaise the sea alonge the coaste of Britain, and that part of
France, called Gallia Belgica, which as the^ the Frenchmen and Saxones did
anoye. This Carausius when he had often times apprehended sondrye Barbarians, of
whom he neither reserved the spoil whole, nor yet was accoumptable for it, to
those which had the over sight of the provinces, ne to the Emperoures them
selves for that time being: it grew to be suspected, that of set purpose, he
permitted the Barbarians to have recourse that way,) to the end that as they
passed by fraighted, he might board and rifell them, and by that means
enriche him self. For which cause, Maximtanus commanded that he should be
put to death. But he having understanding there of, fled Britayne detayned
by Carausius.
into Britain and kept it by fo^rce. Thus when as through the world al
places were in an vprour, Carausius The romayn Empire throughout disturbed.
rebeld in Britain, Achilleus in Egypt, ye Quinque gentia^s molested Africa,
and Narseus waged battle against thEast parts, Dioclesianus made Maximianus
Hercuculius Augustus also, who before was but Caesar. And Co^stantius, and one
other Maximinus, he created Cesars. Maximianus Herculius made Augustus, and
associated fellow to Dioclesian in thempyre.
This Constantius was thought to be Claudius his daughters son. And
Maximianus Galerius was born in Dacia not far from Sardica. To the end
therefore that he might knyt those two in alliance, he caused Co^stantius to
espouse Theodora daughter in law to Herculius: upon whom he begat.vi. children
which were brothers to Constantinus. Galerins took to wife Valeria daughter
to Dioclesianus. They were enforced both, to deuorse their wives which they
had before. Battle was then attempted against Carausius. A man Battle
against Carausius.
of singular experience in matters of warfare, but they took no good effect.
Where upon peace was concluded between them. And the^ in Peace concluded with
Carausius.
the.vii. year after, Carausius was slain by Alectus his companion, Carausius
slain.
Who then kept Brittayne himself Alectus detained Bretain.
by the space of three years, and was subdued afterward by Asclepiodoius
captain of the guard. Thus was Britain recovered within.x. years after
Britain recovered.
that Carausius u^rst took it. About the same time, a battle was fought by
Constantius Caesar in France, War in France.
near about the Langrecians: and that time he experimented both adverse and
prosperous fortune. For when the Barbarians assailed him very hastelye, he
was enforced to retire back again to the City, where he was so hardly
bestead, that (ye gates of the city being shut) he was feign to be drawn up
the wall with ropes. And within less then.v. hours space A great over throw of
the Almaynes.
after when he had assembled his army together, he issued forth against the^,
and slew almost.lx. M. Almaines. By this time, had Maximinus Augustus in like
manner finished his wars in Affricke, where he subdewed the Quinquegentianes,
and made peac^ Peace concluded with the Quinquegentians.
with them. About.viii. months after, Dioclesianus overcame Achilleus of
Alexandria and slew him, and demeaned the victory which he had go^ Achilleus
siayne.
very cruelly. For why, he poluted all Egypt with great slaughter of men, and
banished a great number besides. Nevertheless he established diverse things
very circumspectlye there: which continue yet to these our dais. Valerius
Maximianus experime^ted at the first unlucky fortune, and sone after, he had
very good success: For when he joined battle, and fought rather unadvisedly
then cowardlye at Callinicum and the city Carre geuinge the onset with a very
few upon an exceadyng populous army of his ennemies, he was discomfited
there, and enforced to retire. Where upon he returned back forthwyth to
Dioclesianus for aid, whom he met by chance in the mid way as he came. And
Dioclesiane (as it was said) welcomed him after such wanton and effeminate
fation, that (being then clad in his magistrates robes,) he a lighted and ran
on foot by Maximianus his chariot, as he rode. But so sone as Maximianus had
assembled an army forth of Illiria and Moesia, he pitched a field and fought
again with Narseus, grau^dfather to Ormisda and Sapores in Armenia ye greater
with passing good fortune: and no less circumspectnes and valiant courage
for taking with him two horsemen forth of his garryson, he kept the skoute
watch him self. When he had vanquished Narseus, and put him to flight, he
sacked his tents. He took his wives, his systers, and his children prisonners.
And a great part of the Nobilitye Thr Persia^ put to a great foil.
of the Persians, took he prisonners there.

He get moreover great plenty of the Persians treasoure, and forced ye king to
flee to the uttermost desert places of his Empire. Thus returning with great
joy he was again received very honorably by Dioclesiane, who tarried him in
Mesopotamia with aid there, ready if need had been. After that they both
together, and each of them alone, waged sondrye battles. They subdued the
Carpianes and the Basternes, and conquered ye Sarmatians. From among which
nations, they brought a great noumber of such as they had taken prisonners, and
placed them in the borders of the Roman Empire. Dioclesianus ordered his
doings very cyrcumspectly, as one that was of a very sharp wit, and such
one as could The close workynge of Dioclesiane.
make other men instruments to wreke his seueritye and rigor by. He was a
very diligent^ and a wise Prince. He induced into the Romain Empire some vsages
which were acustomed and put in practice, rather duringe the bondage of the
kings, then agreeable with the liberty of the Romans. He commanded men to
worship him, where as before his time, the usage was only to salute ye
Emperor. He garnished his apparel and shoes, with precious stones,
Dioclesianus given somewhat to pride
where before his reign, the habit imperial consisted but in a purple cloak.
The residue of the Emperors apparaile, was better then the other peoples of
Rome. But Herculius did outwardly demean himself with great cruelty,
declaringe the same al so openly, by the terror of his countenance, he applied
him self wholly to follow the appetite of Dioclesianus, whose mind he
accomplyshed in all crueltye. But when Dioclesianus apperceiued that he waxed
vnweldye to govern the Empire, for that he now grew in age, he began to
persuade with Herculius that they Dioclesianus pers^ ad^d with Herculius to
resign the state imperyall.
both should become private persons again, and resign the government of the
weal public, to such as were both younger and lustier men, to which advise of
his, with much a do Herculius would assent. But yet nevertheless at length,
either of them both upon one day changed their estate imperial, and resumed
again Herculius and Dioclesianus became private men again.
the apparel of private persons, Dioclesiane at Nicomedia, and Herculius at
Millaine, so sone as they had sinished the noble triumphs which they kept at
Rome with great pomp and solemnity of pageants: In which the concubines, the
sisters, and the children of Narseus were led before their chariots. When this
tryumphe was finished, the one of them went to the city of Salona: and the other
into Lucania. Dioclesian passed forth his life worthelye in quiet, as a
pryuate man in a town not far distante from Salona, demeaning him self
vertuouslye there. He was the only first which fithe the foundatyon of the
Roman Empire, was willing to reuerte again from so high degree, to a
private estate and condityon of life. For which cause, there was granted to
him, that which never sith any man could ever remember did chance to any
other: which was, that though he deceased Dioclesianus canonised after his
decese. though he was apriuate man.
a private person, yet he was canonised, that notwythstanding.

The tenthe book of the Breuiary of Eutropius.
WHen they hadd 39. Constantius the 39. emperor, began his reign with
Galerius in the year of our Lord 308.
thus finishedde their bearing rule, there were chosen Emperors, Constantius
and Galerius: and to them was committed the gouermente of the weal public,
and the Roman Empire was divided between them: So that Consta^tius should
possess France, Italy and Affricke. Galerius should have Illiria, Asia, and
the East parts. which done, they substituted under them.ii. Cesars. But
Constantius holding him self content with the dignitye of Augustus, refused
to sustain the trouble which he should have endured through the
administration of the affairs of Italye and Affricke, wherein he declared his
worthiness and passing great modesty. He sought by all means how he might
enrich Worthy studies of a Prince.
the popular people of thempyre, and such as inhabited the Provinces. He did
not much affect the augmentyng or incresing of the common treasour, supposinge
it far better and more profitable, that the wealth of ye whole Empire should
be possessed and remain among private persons, rather then the wealth of
private men to be included and shut up, in one place together. He was
himself so sklenderly stored of things necessary for household, that if it
chanced him to feast any number of his friends, he was enforced to borow plate
abroad here and there, to furnish his tables wythall. He was not only beloved,
but had in great reverence also among the frenchmen, for yt through his said
accepting of the empire, they had now eshaped the suspected wittines of
Dioclesiane, and the bloudye hastiness and cruelty of Maximianus. He deceased
at York in Britain, in the.xiii. year of his reign, and was canonised.
Constantius deceased at York in England.
Galerius who was endued with very good qualities, and was of great prowess
in martial pollicye besides, (when he understood that through the permission
of Constantius, Italye was also annered to his Empire,) he created two Cesars:
but when Constantius was deceased, his Two Cesers created under Galerius.
son Constantius being base born, was created Emperor in Britain, and 40.
Constantinus the. 40. Emperor began his reign in the yereof our Lord 310. He
was the first Emperor that professed the name of christ he established the
gospel in his Empire. Maxentius, Herculius his son nominted Augustaus
became governor of that country in his fathers room, (which thing al ye
people labored earnestly to have it so.) In this mean space, the guard began a
commotion at Rome, where they nominated Maxentius son to Herculius Augustus,
which Herculius dwelt not far from the city of Rome, nigh to the high way as
men goo to Rome wards. At which tidinges, Maximianus Herculius conceived a
good hope that he might again recover ye estate which to fore by persuasion
Herculius came again to Rome.
of Dioclesian, and far against his own will he had forgon and resigned.
Whereupon, with great speed he hasted to Rome wards, forth of Lucania. Which
place he had before chose^ (being a most pleasant soil to remain in,) where he
had also spent a great Herculius persuaded Dioclesian to resume the state
unperial
part of his time, after yt he had resigned first his Empire. The^ Maximianus
so sone as he was come to Rome, he began to persuade with Dioclesian by
letters, yt he should likewise resume his former estate: which thing he
neglected to do. The^ was Seuerus Caesar sent to Rome with an army to repress
Seuerus sent against the guard.
and assuage the commotion which the guard had made. But as he laid siege to
the city, his own soldiers forsook him, by mean whereof strength and power
accrued and grew to Maxentius. Seuerus slain.
Seuerus (as he would have fled the^s) was slain at Rauenna. After that,
Herculius Maximianus in an assemble of the soldiers, made semblance as if he
would have deposed his son Maxentius: for which his said enterprise, he
sustained reproach and rebuke of the soldiers. From thence he departed to
France, fayning that he was expulsed by his son, and A cruel pretens of
Herculius.
forced to fly: (thinking by this means) he should get to be received of his
son in law Constantinus: who^ he minded to slaye, if he might find time and
oportunitye conueniente: which Constantinus at that present, reigned in France
with great favor and love, both of his souldyours and other the
inhabitauntes of those provinces. And when he had slain the French men and
Almains, and taken their kings prisonners, (assembling a great company to
behold A cruel fact of Herculius.
the sight) he set them forth to be devoured of wild beasts. But his daughter
disclosed to her husband Constantinus, the wicked enterpryces of her father
and reveled unto him, what treason her father had pretended against him.
Which thing so sone as Maximianus understood, he fled to Massilia,
(thinckinge to have passed over from thence, to his son Maxentius again,)
and was there Herculius slain.
slain: suffering condign punishment for those his demerits: one who was
evermore prone to all rigor and cruelty. A man without faith, very pernicious
and hurtful to all men, and void of all ciuility and courtesy.

About the same time, Licinius was created Emperor by Galerius. Licinius
created Emperor.
He was borne at Dacia, and passinge well known of Galerius, for yt he had of
long time been of familyer acquaintance with him. He esteemed him greatly for
the earnest travail and payns which he sustained in the battle yt he waged
against Narceus, and for other serviceableness and good endeavor, which he
apperceiued to be in him. This don, shortly after, Galerius deceassed. Then was
the Empire administered Galerius deceased.
by.iiii. at ones. By Consta^tinus and Marentius, whose fathers Four Emperors
at once in Rome.
had been Emperors before, and Licinius and Maximinus which were newly created
Emperors. But Constantinus in the.v. year of his reign, attempted a civil
battle against Marentius. He discomfited his armies in sundry skirmishes. A
civil battle by Constantinus.
And at last, vanquished him at Miluius bridge, and so got al Italy under his
obeisaunce. Maxentius vanquished.


At this time, Maxentius exercised great tyranny upon diverse the peers of his
Empire. Not long after that, Maximinus attempted warresin the War pretended by
Maximinus against Licinius.
East parts also against Licinius.

But when he apperceiued yt he was like to be disco^sited, he prevented the
mischiefs imminent, by dying suddenly Maximianus deceassed.
at Tarsus. The^ Co^stantius being one of a hauty stomak and courage, affecting
to accomplish and bring to pass such things as he had once conceived in his
fa^tasy, coveting to become Emperor over ye whole world, made war upon This
war was against Licinius by Constantius for religions sake chefelye.
Licinius, although he was his fre^d. For this Licinius had espoused his sister
Constantia. He vanquished him first in Hungary: the second time he overcame him
at Cybale: whereas Licinius In the time os Consta^tius Scotland received the
says.
began to renew battle with great preparation. when he had thus got all
Dardania, Mesia and Macedonie, he wa^diuers other provinces besides. After
that, there were sundry battles waged between them, and peace concluded, and
broken again. At last, Lycinius was conquered at Nicomedia Licinius conquered.
a famous city of Bithinia, in battle both by Sea and land. He yielded
himself: and yet contrary to ye integritye of the oath and promise made between
them, he was slain. Licinius slain.
At that time, (which never erst happened) was the Roman Empire subject One
Emperor and.iii. Cesars at Rome.
to one Emperor and.iii. Cesars. At this time, Constantinus his children had
the government of France, the East parts, and of Italye. But this
vnkethenesse of passinge great good fortune and success in his affairs, did
somewhat change and aultare Constantinus from that his wonted gentle and
flexible mind. In so much that he persecuted his own blood, and those
which were of his allyaunce. He slew his own sisters son, a notable young man
and very towardly. Eftsoon he put his wife to death and after that, sundry of
his friends also. In the first beginning of his reign, he was worthy to have
been compared with the best and chiefest princes of the Romans that ever
were: and at the end thereof, to be resembled to such as were of the meaner
sort. He was endewed with sundry and those excellent virtues. He was very
much given to purchase praise and fame by feats of cheualry. He had exceeding
good chance in battle, and yet not so good chance but that his industry and
endeavor excelled it far. He vanquished and put to flight at sundry times
the Goths. After that he had repressed the civil wars, he vanquished the
Goths in diverse places, and granted them peace at last: and wan great
memory of praise and worship among the Barbarians. He was passing desirous to
attain learning, and applied him self wholly to the study of the liberal
arts. He endeavored to gain the love of the people, through his well
deseruinges, seking ye same by his great liberality, and facillity. Who like as
he seemed to some of his friends unsteadfast and suspected, so was he to the
residue of them passing friendly and assured: suffering no way ne mean eskape, by
which he could imagine how to enrich and aduau^ce the^. He enacted and
established so^dry laws. Some grounded upon equity and justice: diverse
superfluous and to no purpose, and many replenished with severity and rigor.
The city which he built, he ertolled to so great port and estate, that he made
it able to compare (i^ manner) with the city of Rome it self. And as he made
preparation for battle against the Parthians, he died at Nicomedia Constantius
^eceassed.
in thopen town there, in the.xxxi. year of his reign, when he had lived.lxvi.
years. His death was prognosticated by a Comet or blasing star, which was
seen by a certain space being of Constantius his death prognosiicate*
a great bigness, (which star the Grecians call (...). After his death he
was canonised. He left behind him.iii. sons of his own, that is to wit
Constantinus, Constans and Co^stantius to succeed him in his Empire, and one
other which was his brothers son. But Dalmatius Caesar which was his brothers
son, a young man of a marvelous towardnes was slain Dalmatius Caesar slain.
in an vprour which fell among the souldioures, (his cosen Constantius 41.
Constantinus the. 41. Emperor began his reign in the year of our Lord 340,
and with him his father Constantinus Magnus had appointed by his last will, that
his two brothers Constans and Constantinus should perticipate and have their
portyon of thempyre.
permittig only, rather the^ procuring his death.) Not long after, when
Constantinus attempted war against his brother at Aquileia, and demened him
self unadvisedly there in, he was slain. Then was the Empire of the Romans
reduced under the gouernemente of two only. The reign of Consta^s endured for
a time valiant, which he administered with great justice. Sone after, when he
began to fail of his health, he associated unto him instead of friends evil
disposed persons to assist him about th Empire, through whose evil counsels,
Constantinus slain.
he declined into horrible vices. By mean whereof, waring skante tolerable of
thinhabita^ts of ye provinces and nothing regarded of his soldiers, he was
slain at Magnensium in a Constans slain.
commotion there, in a castle called Helena castle not far from Spain, in
the.xvii. year of his reign, when he had lived.xxx. years. In his life time,
he had achieved diverse things very prosperouslye, and duringe his whole
reign, he used no great cruelty toward his souldioures. But Constantius
experimented very uncertain and variable fortune in his battayles. For why, he
sustained diverse, and those great damages by the Persians. They often times wan
his towns, besieged his Cities, and slew his armies: to be brief, he never
waged any battle against Sapores, in which he had good success but only one
which he fought at Singara, where he lost that victory also, which undoubtedly
he might have gotten, had it not been for the outrageous fierceness and over
hasty courage of his souldioures: which unadvisedly without any regard,
contrary to all order of warfare, would needs join the battle, when as now
the day was clean spente. After the death of Constans, when as now Magnentius
possessed Italy, Affricke, and France, new matters began to grow in Illiria,
where the soldiers by the whole consent, chose Veteranio to govern the
Empire, being now very Veteranio chosen prince by the souldioures.
aged, but yet well be loved of all men, for the good success which he had
of long time experimented in martial affairs. There was assygned unto him,
the government of Illiria. This Veteranio was both witty, and a very good man.
In condityons, much refembling toe ancient Emperors of Rome, and one which
was greatly inclined to the ancient usage of the Emperors, and passing
tractable him self. How be it he was nothing at all learued. In so much, that
he knew not the Alphabete or croscow, but as he learned it in his extreme age
after ye he was created emperor. This Veteranio was deposed Veteranio deposed.
from thempire, by Constantius, who to revenge ye death of his brother, began a
civil battle, and Veteranio after an vnkethe and strange sort (was by the
consent and agreement of ye soldiors, enforced to relinquishe and resign his
estate imperial. At the same time was there a commotion at Rome: at Nepotianus
got thempire.
which time Nepotianus, Constantinus his sisters son, invaded thempire, being
aided by a band of them which use to play at the weapons (called
gladiatores.) But according to his cruel beginninges, so had he an end
correspondente. For in the xxviii. day after his said enterprise, he was slain
by the captains of Magnensius: Nepotianus slain.
and so suffered punishment fit for his demerites. His head was smitten of, and
set on theud of a tauelin, and so carried about the city. There were great
banishments, and merueylous great slaughters of noble men the^ committed.
Within a while after, Magnensius was also disco^fited in battle at Mursa: and
was well nighe taken. A great number of ye Romans were slain Magnensius slain.
in y^ battall, which were men able to have withstode all forain inuasio^s of
enemies, and such, as the Romans, (through their prowes,) might have gained
many tryumphes, and been in safetye and security against their adversaries.
Shortly after, Constantius deputed Gallus his fathers brothers Gallus made
Caesar.
son, Ceaser over the East parts. Magnensius after that he had been
discomfited in so many battles, slew him self at Louane, when he Magnensius
sieve himself.
had raygned three years and seven months. In like manner delte his brother
Senonis also, whom he had made Caesar, and sent to defend Gallus Caesar slain.
France. About this time, was Gallus Caesar slain by Constantius after that
they had waged diverse civil wars together: a man of cruel disposition, and
very prone to tira^ny, (if he might have ruled according as himself had
listed.) Siluanus also who attempted other new matters Siluanus slain.
in France, was within.xxx. dais after slain. Then Constantius himself alone,
enjoyed the Romain Empire. Constantius Emperor alone.
Soon after, he appointed Iulianus his uncles son, and brother to Gallus,
Caesar over France, and sent him thither, espousing first his own Iulianus
made Caesar.
sister unto him. Now when the Barbarians had won diverse towns, and besieged
other some, and that every where there was a pitiful spoil made by them, so
that the Romain Empire consisted in no small hasard and danger, Iulianus slew
great armies of the Almaines at Argentine a city of An overthrow of the
Almaynes.
France. Their mighty and worthy king, was there taken prisonner, France was
again recovered. Iulianus was by the consent of the Iulianus Augustus.
soldiers made Augustus: who with in a year after, made a viage toward
Illiria: Constantius who was busied in battle against the Parthians, when he
hard of this, returned home wards to pacify that commotion, and died by the
way between Cilicia, Constantius deceassed, his age and reign.
and Cappadocia: in the.xxxviii. year of his reign, when he had lived.xlv.
years, and was adjudged worthy to be canonised. He was a very peasible and
quiet man: but such one, as gave over much creadit and affiaunce to his
friends, and those which were his familiers. And followed to much his wives
council. Yet in the first commenceme^t of his Empire, he demeaned himself
with great sobriety, endeavoring by all means to enrich such as were of his
acquaintance, and would not see them vnpreferred to honors and promotions,
whose painful diligence and endeavor be had ones experimented. How be it
with great seueritye and crueltye, he punished such as he ones appertained to
affect soueraintye in such sort, that he would secke to deprive him of his
Empire. Otherwise he was very quiet and gentle: whose fortune and good chance,
was more to be commended in civil wars, then in those which he waged forth
of his Empire.

After that Iulianus was Emperor, who with great preparation 42. Iulianus
the 42. Emperor began his reign in the year of our Lord 362. one seen passing
well in the liberal sciences, but an earnest adversary of christian religyon.
made war upon the Parthianes, at which viage I my self was present, diverse
towns and holds were peasibly yielded up, and other some won by him. And when
he had despoyled Assiria, he pytched his tents, and entrenched them, and
soiourned there for a season. And retournynge from thence a conqueroure, he
was slain by his ennemies, as he pressed some what unadvisedly into the
battles, in the.vi. of the kalends of July, in ye.vii. year of his reign,
when he had lived.xxxi. years, and was canonised. He was a notable man, and
such one as would passinglye well have governed the weal public, if desteny
would have permitted him to have lived. He was exceadinglye well seen in all the
liberal sciences. He did excel in the Greek tongue, in so much that his
knowledge in the Latin tongue was nothing to be compared with that which he had
in the Greek tongue. He was very eloquent, and of a very ready and prompt memory.
In many things, he resembled much a Philosopher. He was lyberall to his
friends, but not all together so hedefull about his affairs, as it was
sittinge and fit for so mighty a Prince: which fault diverse objected to
him, whereby his fame and glory was somedele stained in that behalf.

He dealt very uprightly with thinhabitauntes of the Provinces, which were
under the Romans. He charged his subjects to pay as few tares and tributes
as might be. He was very civil and curtuous to all men. He sought little to
augment his own tresure. He was very desirous to attain glory and renoum: In
so much that he did affect it sometimes with out measure. He was an exceadinge
Iulianus a persecutor of Christians.
great persecutor of Christian religion, but yet in such sort, that he
abstained from sheding their blood. He was not much unlike to Marcus Antonius,
whom he did also earnestly endeavor him self to immitate and follow. Next after
him, Iouinianus who as yet had never ben trained up 43. Iouinianus the. 4^z.
Emperor (...) hy^ r^^gne in the. 367 y^re of our Lord he was a very good
prince, a favorer of ye gospel, and co^fessors thereof he instytuted that
tithes should be paid to churches.
in warfare abroad, was by the consent of the army, chosen to have the
administration and the rule ofth Empire: of whom the souldioures had better
notyce through the commendatyon and good report of his father, then for any
trial and knowledge they had of him self. Thus when the weal publyque of
the Romans was disturbed, and the souldioures brought to extreme pouertye, so
that they were destitute of al things necessary, Iouinianus was vanquished in
a battle or ii. by the Persians, and Iouinianus sustained a shameful
overthrow.
forced to make a very reprochful peace for granting wheref, he was forced to
them, with a great portion of his Empire: which thing sense the first
foundation of the city of Rome, (which was well nighe a M. C. and. xviit.
year,) never erste happened. In like manner also, the Romayne Regions were
discomfited and sustained an overthrow by Pontius The lesinus at Eaudium a
town of the Samuites, The Romans put to great foyles.
and in Spain at Numantia, and at Numidia and sent under yoke. But at that
time they departed with no part of the Empire to their adversaries. Nor yet
that former concluding of peace on that condition, had been greatly to be
misliked wythal, if that afterward, so soon as he had been able, he had
infringed that league again, which before of necessity and force, he was
constrained to make: like as the Romans did in all those battles which I
have before recited. For after any such peace made, they renewed battle
again forth with against the Samnites, the Numantines, and the Numidians, so
soon as the peace was concluded.

But Iouinianus (dreadynge that he should have been supplanted in the
Empire,) held him self still in the East parts, giving in the mean time
small head or regard to his r^nowme.

After that, as he took his iourne^ from thence to ward Illiria, he dye
suddenly in the borders of Galacia one who in no other his affairs was either
slothful or neglygente, or wanted any wit. Of ye his so sodayn death, diverse
coniectured diversely. Some thought that he took it by eating raw meat, for
in deed he had surfited over night.

Other some supposed that it proceaded through the unwholesome air of the
chamber, which for that that it was newlye pargeted with lyme, was very
noisome to him lyinge there in.

And other some adjudged that it ^ame by reason of the unmeasurable burning of
charcoles in his chamber, of which, for ye it was extreme cold weather, he
wylled there should be burned great plenty. He de^eased in the.vii. year of his
reign, ^he.xxiiii. of ye Kalends of March, in ye ^xxiii. year of his age: and
through the (...) neuolens of them which succeeded ^im in the Empire, was
canonised. He was given very much to ciuility, and was by nature very
liberal. Such was the state of the Roman Empire, at what time the said
Iouinianus, and Verouianus governed it (which was) in the M. C. and.xix. year
after the first building of the city of Rome. ()

Thus ends the Breuiary of Eutropius.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, near to Saint Dunstons Church, by Thomas
Marshe.


